the 2011 national security space strategy declared , "space is vital to u.s. national security and our ability to understand emerging threats , project power globally , conduct operations , support diplomatic efforts , and enable global economic viability. .

maintaining the benefits afforded by space is central to a wide range of u.s. national interests .

these include significant government ( military , intelligence , and civil ) and commercial interests .

in recent years , recognition has been growing among space - faring nations and the international scientific community that the mass of man - made debris in low - earth orbit ( leo ) has reached a critical density that will lead to a slow but unstoppable growth of space debris that could have profound implications for those interests .

significant debris - generating events in the past decade have heightened the issue , and a number of national and international studies confirm that the amount of current leo debris is both unstable and increasing .

this instability in the space environment presents a threat to u.s. national interests in space .

u.s. deputy secretary of defense william j. lynn , iii , summarized the national security implications of interference with our satellites and space capabilities: "space systems enable our modern way of war .

they allow our warfighters to strike with precision , to navigate with accuracy , to communicate with certainty , and to see the battlefield with clarity .

without them , many of our most important military advantages evaporate. .

although space debris is not the sole threat to u.s. space assets , this report focuses on the threat posed by orbital debris , the steps that have been taken thus far to mitigate it , and what might be done to ensure the long - term sustainability of the space environment .

although congress may not need to make key decisions immediately , congress may want to begin to focus on measures the united states may take to mitigate the threat associated with orbital debris .

"remediation" of the space environment denotes taking action with respect to inactive objects in space .

remediation is complex and would likely require significant resources , technological advances , and international cooperation .

the 2013 iadc comparison study recommended that the international community "initiate an effort to investigate the benefits of environment remediation , explore various options , and support the development of the most cost - effective technologies in preparation for actions to better preserve the near - earth environment for future generations. .

congress briefly addressed space debris issues in the 1990 nasa authorization act and more recently in the 2010 nasa authorization act .

in the 2010 act , congress acknowledged that "national and international effort is needed to develop a coordinated approach towards the prevention , negation , and removal of orbital debris. .

a few hearings in recent years have touched on orbital debris issues , but congress might consider additional hearings from major stakeholders in the military , intelligence , civil , and commercial sector on whether proposed mitigation measures are in the national interests of the united states .

possible questions could focus on the perceived severity of the problem , whether mitigation efforts to date are adequate , and whether there should be any commitment to pursue remediation in earnest .

congress might also consider requiring dod and nasa to develop a roadmap outlining a range of possible remediation programs to consider .

regarding possible appropriations considerations , the 2011 national research council study found that new resources would be required if nasa is to pursue the 2010 national space policy goals of research and development of technologies and techniques to mitigate and remove on - orbit debris .

if the technologies to remove on - orbit debris are developed and implemented , the management requirements on nasa may become as significant as those associated with any major nasa program .

congress might find it useful to begin investigating those potential budgetary costs , and whether funding should borne wholly by nasa or by dod or some combination .

some observers have noted that the danger posed by orbital debris should be thought of fundamentally as a long - term environmental problem .

others perceive the danger as potentially affecting u.s. security interests , especially in its ability to interfere with consistent satellite support to u.s. military and intelligence organizations .

however the issue is characterized , the space debris population , particularly in leo , may have reached a tipping point .

catastrophic collisions are likely to continue to drive its growth , and the threat posed by orbital debris may be exacerbated by accidental or intentional debris - generating events .

international compliance with mitigation measures is widely seen as critically important , but many experts believe that mitigation efforts alone are insufficient .

for this reason , more aggressive measures , such as active debris removal , could be considered to protect u.s. national security interests in space and the long - term sustainability of the space environment .

