the u.s. - eu trade and investment relationship , what many call the "transatlantic economy," is a mut ually beneficial and globally significant relationship .

it is not only the largest in the world , but also arguably the most important because of its sheer size ( see figure 1 ) .

at the same time , certain challenges remain in the relationship , and many stakeholders assert that it has not reached its full economic potential .

to enhance trade disciplines and market access by addressing remaining transatlantic barriers to trade and investment , the united states and the european union ( eu ) presently are negotiating a "mega - regional" free trade agreement ( fta ) .

the potential agreement officially is referred to as the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) .

on march 20 , 2013 , the obama administration notified congress of its intent to enter into t - tip negotiations .

the united states and eu , led respectively by the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) and european commission , commenced negotiations in july 2013 .

both sides initially aimed to conclude the negotiations in two years , but have extended that goal a number of times .

the timing is now uncertain given the complexity of the negotiations and the current u.s. focus on the proposed trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , among other factors .

twelve rounds of t - tip negotiations have occurred to date .

according to a u.s. statement at the conclusion of the 12 th round , based on "intensified engagement over the past few months," the united states and the eu "now have proposed text in the vast majority of the negotiating areas .

and in many cases , we are already removing brackets and agreeing on wording. .

congress has a direct interest in the t - tip negotiations because it establishes overall u.s. trade negotiating objectives , which it updated in 2015 in trade promotion authority ( tpa ) legislation ( p.l .

114-26 ) , and would approve future implementing legislation for a final t - tip to enter into force .

t - tip could be eligible to receive expedited legislative consideration under tpa if congress determines that it advances u.s. trade negotiating objectives established in tpa and meets other statutory requirements .

t - tip also presents congress with a range of possible issues that could be of oversight interest .

this report provides: ( 1 ) context for the t - tip negotiations ; ( 2 ) analysis of possible trade and investment issues in the negotiations ; and ( 3 ) discussion of issues for congress .

the u.s. - eu negotiations on t - tip are not public .

the information and analysis in this report on issues in the negotiations are based on publicly available information .

efforts to deepen the transatlantic relationship through trade and investment liberalization date back many years .

for instance , in 1995 , there was high - level interest on both sides in negotiating a "transatlantic free trade agreement" ( tafta ) .

certain groups recommended the tafta as a complement to the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and the uruguay round agreements , which had led to the formation of the world trade organization ( wto ) .

others supported the idea , in part , to prevent europe and the united states from drifting apart because they no longer faced a mutual cold war enemy .

others expressed concern that tafta negotiations could signal a lack of u.s. and eu confidence in the newly - formed wto multilateral trading system .

critics also questioned the feasibility of addressing politically difficult transatlantic issues , such as agricultural subsidies and regulatory practices .

although the two sides did not take up tafta negotiations at that time , the proposal has continued to re - emerge periodically .

the eurozone crisis , slowdown in the european economy , and slow u.s. economic recovery following the global economic crisis that began in 2008 , along with increased competition from emerging markets , have renewed the interest of some members of congress , the administration , private stakeholders , and others in reducing remaining u.s. - eu barriers to trade and investment as a way to boost transatlantic economic growth and jobs , a view supported by various studies .

the negotiation of an fta is particularly compelling for some policymakers as a possible "low - cost" or "deficit - free" tool for supporting economic goals .

while broadly supportive , some also underscore the importance and difficulties of reaching agreement on long - standing areas of difference in transatlantic trade and investment relations ( see discussion in subsequent sections ) .

others are skeptical of u.s. trade negotiations and express specific concerns about the impact of a potential t - tip , for example , on certain sectors of the u.s. economy that are import - sensitive or on governments' ability to protect health , environmental , and labor interests .

while trade liberalization can lead to economy - wide gains , the costs can be highly concentrated on particular groups or economic sectors , including those in "import - sensitive" sectors of the u.s. economy .

the t - tip negotiations present congress with the issue of whether the united states and the eu will be able to conclude a final agreement that is "comprehensive and high standard. .

such an outcome depends on a number of factors .

the united states and the eu , like all economies , have offensive and defensive interests .

these include recognition that some sectors are import - sensitive , which may constrain the level of ambition in the t - tip negotiations .

both sides also have identified certain issues that they prefer not to address through trade agreement negotiations , such as financial services regulations on the u.s. side and audiovisual cultural exceptions on the eu side .

the ability to negotiate a "comprehensive and high standard" t - tip also depends on the political momentum for the negotiations .

some stakeholders have expressed concern that the negotiations have not advanced as quickly as hoped and that political momentum and public support for t - tip has waned .

others argue the 2015 grant of tpa and the conclusion of the tpp negotiations inject new momentum into the t - tip negotiations .

still others contend that u.s. policymakers' focus on t - tip may lessen , at least temporarily , as congress considers tpp and its potential implementing legislation .

members of congress have a direct interest in the implications of t - tip for the u.s. economy as a whole , as well as their specific states and / or districts .

the economic challenges in both the united states and eu are a major incentive for the t - tip negotiation .

many policymakers view the t - tip as a low - cost economic stimulus for supporting u.s. exports , employment , and economic growth .

however , there is debate about how the economic effects of the t - tip may be borne by various stakeholders .

with any fta , the benefits of trade liberalization tend to be diffuse , extending to a wide range of businesses , consumers , and other stakeholders .

in contrast , the costs of ftas tend to be concentrated — for example , with increased foreign competition resulting from an fta adversely affecting certain firms and workers .

an issue confronting policymakers is the difficulties in estimating the effects of a potential t - tip .

while estimates on the potential benefits and costs of trade agreements may help to inform trade policy debates , it can be highly complex and challenging to estimate such economic effects .

economic analyses can be constrained by a lack of data and other theoretical and practical issues associated with econometric analyses .

in addition , estimates of economic effects of ftas are often imprecise and highly sensitive to the assumptions that are used .

moreover , a range of factors beyond trade policy can affect u.s. economic performance , including global economic growth and exchange rates .

the t - tip negotiations raise a number of questions about u.s. trade policy .

among the more prominent questions that congress could examine as part of oversight include the following .

how may t - tip address u.s. trade negotiating objectives ? .

a potential t - tip agreement could be eligible to receive expedited legislative consideration under the june 2015 grant of trade promotion authority ( tpa , p.l .

114-26 ) if it is concluded while tpa is in effect and if congress determines that the administration has advanced the tpa negotiating objectives and met various notification and consultation requirements .

of likely interest to congress is to what extent t - tip may address u.s. trade negotiating objectives .

these may include newer "21 st century" objectives added to tpa , such as on cyber theft , localization barriers to trade , and soes .

what is t - tip's relationship to other u.s. and eu trade agreements and negotiations ? .

congress may examine how u.s. and eu trade agreements and negotiations with other countries affect t - tip .

areas of inquiry may include how the proposed tpp , the eu - canada comprehensive economic and trade agreement ( ceta ) , and plurilateral negotiations such as on the potential trade in services agreement ( tisa ) affect t - tip , including in terms of negotiating positions and dynamics .

what is t - tip's potential impact on the multilateral trading system ? .

analysts debate how t - tip may affect the multilateral trading system .

supporters assert that u.s. - eu consensus in t - tip could provide momentum for resolving long - standing issues in the wto and advancing new trade rules and disciplines that could be incorporated multilaterally .

they also assert that t - tip's competitive pressures on countries not a part of the negotiations may provide further impetus for trade liberalization .

critics say that t - tip may undermine multilateral trade liberalization by shifting focus and resources away from multilateral efforts in favor of regional and bilateral negotiations , and weakening the legitimacy of the wto .

t - tip's impact may evolve as the united states and other wto members consider the future role of the wto .

congress may consider the balance between , on one hand , ensuring confidentiality to engage effectively on issues in t - tip and , on the other hand , allowing for sufficient transparency for meaningful stakeholder input .

as is its practice , the u.s. government has not released publicly any proposed or consolidated texts in the t - tip negotiations .

in general , the administration tends to use existing ftas as the starting point for future negotiations .

thus , korus and tpp could offer general insight into u.s. initial positions and approaches in t - tip negotiations .

with respect to the specific proposals in negotiations , the ustr's position has been that that confidentiality enables negotiators to communicate with each other more effectively .

at the same time , congressional consultation and public engagement are a part of the u.s. trade policy process .

among other things , the ustr shares negotiating texts with members of congress and cleared advisors , meets with the public during negotiating rounds , holds public hearings and posts t - tip resources such as issue - by - issue discussions on its website , among other things .

nevertheless , some observers express distrust of t - tip negotiations because they say that trade officials have released general statements without any real detail with regard to specific negotiating positions .

debate over transparency has grown in light of the european commission's initiative to publish some initial eu proposals for the t - tip , noting that the "actual text in the final agreement will be a result of negotiations" between both sides .

while some have welcomed this initiative , calls continue from some stakeholders for increased transparency , such as through the publication of consolidated negotiating texts as available .

congress may consider whether the potential t - tip should be expanded to include other countries .

currently , the u.s. position is that the t - tip negotiations are already complex , and including additional trading partners may further complicate the negotiations and prospects for concluding it at the envisioned level of ambition .

congress could examine the implications of other countries joining ( or not joining ) the t - tip , including the impact on t - tip's economic and broader strategic value .

countries may pursue t - tip membership for a variety of reasons , including to: gain preferential access to u.s. and eu large market , reduce competitive pressures on their economies due to any trade diversion caused by t - tip , pursue market - oriented reforms , enhance their leverage in other trade negotiations , and take advantage of t - tip's broader strategic value .

to date , certain countries have shown interest in joining t - tip .

for example , turkey ( an official candidate for eu membership ) , has expressed in interest in participating in the t - tip discussions .

under the current rules of the customs union that turkey has with the eu , countries with which the eu has signed ftas have access to turkey's market without having to reciprocate ( eg , the united states , if t - tip is concluded ) .

in order to gain market access to those countries , turkey must negotiate its own ftas with them .

turkey also has raised the possibility of parallel fta negotiations with the united states .

other countries that may wish to join the t - tip negotiations include canada and mexico .

mexican officials , in particular , have shown interest in joining t - tip .

both canada and mexico may be well - positioned to join in any potential t - tip expansion ; canada and mexico are a part of nafta and the proposed tpp , and the eu has a bilateral fta in force with mexico and eu - canada comprehensive economic and trade agreement ( ceta ) is pending entry into force .

congress may examine t - tip's potential strategic implications for the transatlantic relationship and how to weigh these implications against other considerations .

many in congress have long supported close u.s. - european political and economic ties , and view cooperation with the eu as supporting and advancing u.s. interests .

both sides of the atlantic share common values , and face a broad set of common economic and strategic challenges .

despite concerns from some stakeholders that the transatlantic relationship is less important to the united states than it was during the cold war , the united states and eu cooperate closely on an increasingly wide range of foreign policy , international security , and economic issues .

a t - tip agreement could provide a framework to potentially enhance the largest trading and investment relationship in the world .

on the other hand , setbacks to the negotiations could raise questions about the strength of the transatlantic relationship .

the t - tip negotiations continue to evolve .

policy debates surrounding the more politically sensitive issues in t - tip , as well as the economic and broader strategic implications of t - tip , will likely continue to intensify .

congressional oversight of the t - tip negotiations may be shaped by the broader u.s. trade agenda , which includes possible consideration of implementing legislation for tpp and oversight of other ongoing u.s. international trade agreements and negotiations .

