most spending on surface transportation infrastructure is done on a pay - as - you - go funding basis , meaning today's expenditures are derived from today's revenue sources such as taxes , tolls , and fares .

only a relatively small proportion is financed through public or private borrowing or private ( equity ) investment .

because government budgets at all levels are strained , however , there is great interest in financing highway and public transportation capital improvements .

this is particularly true for very large and costly "mega - projects," such as major interstate highway bridges , which are difficult to construct on a pay - as - you - go basis .

new york's $5 billion tappan zee bridge replacement , for example , dwarfs the state's federal highway funding of about $1.7 billion a year , and approaches the state's typical annual highway capital spending of about $6.0 billion .

the toll bridge will be largely financed using municipal bonds and a federal loan .

the federal government supports surface transportation infrastructure financing mainly by providing a tax preference for bonds issued by state and local governments .

other mechanisms include federal loan programs , such as the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) program , which can help leverage private investment via public - private partnerships ( p3s ) , and federally authorized state infrastructure banks ( sibs ) .

all have costs for the federal government , but , as this report explains , some have greater costs than others .

nevertheless , none are as costly as federal grant funding .

this is because project financing relies more heavily on revenue streams created at the state or local level in order to repay loans or provide a return to private investors .

in many cases , revenue to finance a project has been provided by a highway or bridge toll , but it could be , among other possibilities , a pledge of future sales tax or real estate tax revenues .

this report outlines current federal programs that support the financing of surface transportation infrastructure investment and the relative impact these have on the federal budget .

it goes on to discuss legislative options for modifying the federal role , including provisions related to tax credit bonds , dedicated federal funding for sibs , and the creation of a national infrastructure bank .

surface transportation infrastructure , the focus of this report , includes the 4-million - mile highway system , as well as more than 80 rail transit systems and 1,200 public bus systems .

public - sector spending on this infrastructure totaled about $256 billion in 2014 , the latest year for which data are available ( table 1 ) , in addition to an unknown amount of private investment .

about 75% of the $256 billion was spent on highways and 25% on public transportation .

the public - sector spending was almost evenly divided between capital investment and operations and maintenance ( o&m ) .

capital investment involves activities such as land acquisition , construction , resurfacing of highways , and purchase of transit vehicles .

o&m includes such items as highway maintenance and law enforcement , transit vehicle operation , and administration .

capital costs were more than half of total highway expenditures and about one - third of public transportation expenditures .

about half of all receipts for highway and street expenditures are generated by state governments , about $121 billion in 2014 , with local governments generating 30% .

the remainder comes from federal aid .

most highway spending is done on a pay - as - you - go basis , with a large majority of the revenue coming either from user fees , such as fuel taxes and tolls , or from general funds ( table 2 ) .

bond issuance , excluding short - term notes and refundings , raised only about 12% of the total revenue collected for highway purposes in 2014 .

these bonds were issued mainly by state agencies , with local governments accounting for 24% of issuance .

like spending on highways , spending on public transportation is mostly done on a pay - as - you - go basis .

the major sources of funds are passenger fares , dedicated taxes ( particularly sales and fuel taxes ) , and general funds .

although there is little information on bond issuance or private investment in public transportation , data published by the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) indicate that bond issuance for public transportation amounted to about $4 billion in 2010 , about 7% of funds generated in that year .

local government provided the most support , followed by passenger fares and other operating income , state government , and the federal government ( table 3 ) .

although less than one - fifth of surface transportation infrastructure expenditures are financed rather than being paid from current revenues , financing mechanisms are extremely important for large projects and , in some cases , are routinely part of state and local transportation budgets .

financing is normally not arranged at the federal level , as the federal government builds few transportation projects directly .

most state and local government budget rules require that debt financing only be for capital investment , not o&m .

these general principles , however , have numerous exceptions not only across states but also across all government entities tasked with providing infrastructure .

the budget impact of federal assistance for debt finance depends on several factors specific to the type of bond .

in addition , the perspective of evaluation is important .

for the federal government , if the intent of assistance is to encourage more investment in the selected activity , then the assistance must reduce the cost to the issuer ( i.e. , the borrower , typically a state or local government ) below the next best alternative .

federal assistance for debt finance is typically of two varieties , a tax preference or credit assistance .

a federal tax preference for debt finance is generally limited to the following tactics: ( 1 ) excluding interest paid from investor income and ( 2 ) providing a tax credit to investors or issuers .

federal credit assistance may consist of ( 1 ) federal guarantee of debt instrument and ( 2 ) direct loans from the federal government .

the budget impact of these four mechanisms can be viewed in general terms along a continuum .

direct loans could confer a fairly significant incentive for borrowers , though the potential budget impact would depend on the level of risk of the selected projects .

loan guarantees would offer similar benefits to issuers , though the structure of the guarantee could limit the risk exposure of the federal government .

for example , the federal guarantee could be limited to a portion of the principal borrowed , thereby reducing the federal financial responsibility in the event of default .

the nature of credit assistance for capital projects , however , would be most attractive for projects that face the highest alternative financing costs .

generally , this means the riskiest projects would be the most likely applicants for federal credit assistance , in which case , a credit assistance program could be relatively expensive from a budget perspective .

use of tax preferences reduces federal government risk relative to credit assistance , but there can still be a significant revenue impact .

tax credit bonds , particularly those with a high credit rate and a long term to maturity , offer the largest subsidy for the issuer .

accordingly , these bonds would generate potentially the largest revenue loss .

tax - exempt bonds offer a significantly smaller subsidy to issuers , but unlike tax credit bonds , they also provide a tax preference for investors .

when both the issuer and investor subsidies are taken together , the revenue loss from tax - exempt bonds can exceed the revenue loss associated with a tax credit bond with a low rate and limited term .

the impact on the budget of the four debt finance alternatives presented here depends critically on the details of the specific proposal .

generally speaking , for a given amount of potential new capital investment , the largest potential impact would accompany direct loans .

with direct loans , the federal government could potentially lose all proceeds loaned to the project .

the potential budget impact of a tax - exempt bond subsidy , in contrast , is limited to the taxes that would have been collected on the interest payments on the debt .

tax credit bonds and tax - exempt bonds have often been used to encourage additional investment in selected sectors .

as described earlier , public - sector debt finance is afforded unlimited access to tax - exempt bond financing for infrastructure projects under current law where generally applicable taxes ( eg , income taxes , sales taxes , and property taxes ) are used to repay the debt .

these are often called "revenue bonds. .

governments have also acted as conduits for private - sector investment for a variety of projects delineated in the internal revenue code .

nongovernmental issuers , such as nonprofit hospitals and other nonhospital , nonprofit entities , can also issue tax - exempt bonds .

the obama administration's fy2017 budget includes a number of proposals offering preferential tax treatment for bond - financed infrastructure projects .

the proposed america fast forward ( aff ) bond would be similar to the now expired bab , but would offer a 28% direct payment to issuers , significantly less than the bab program .

in contrast to babs , affs would also allow issuance by section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) nonprofit entities and for all private activities subject to the state - by - state volume cap .

the reduced credit amount of 28% might limit interest in the bonds by issuers , particularly in light of possible budget sequester in future fiscal years .

bab payments , as well as all other direct payments for tax credit bonds , were reduced by 6.8% in fy2016 .

the introduction of aff bonds is estimated to reduce budget deficits by $3 million over the 2017-2026 budget window .

the administration's fy2017 budget proposal includes two provisions that would allow for an increase in the issuance of tax - exempt , qualified private activity bonds for transportation projects .

under current law , the use of tax - exempt , qualified private activity bonds for transportation projects is limited to a fixed $15 billion for the life of the program .

the $15 billion is allocated to specific projects by the secretary of transportation .

the administration's fy2017 budget proposal includes a provision to increase this amount to $19 billion .

under current law , these bonds can be issued for " ( 1 ) any surface transportation project , ( 2 ) any project for an international bridge or tunnel for which an international entity authorized under federal or state law is responsible , or ( 3 ) any facility for the transfer of freight from truck to rail or rail to truck. .

the administration's fy2017 budget includes several other provisions that would likely expand the issuance of private activity bonds .

among them was a proposal to create a new category of private activity bonds referred to as qualified public infrastructure bonds ( qpibs ) .

the proposed bonds could be used for certain privately owned infrastructure , including airports , docks and wharves , and mass commuting facilities .

these provisions are projected to generate a revenue loss of $4.54 billion over the 2017 to 2026 budget window .

another option for congress is to increase direct funding for or otherwise adjust the tifia and rrif programs .

the fast act cut direct funding to the tifia program , while allowing states to trade formula grant funding for a larger loan .

at the moment states do not have to make that trade because the tifia program is not in danger of running out of budget authority .

if the tifia program does exhaust its direct funding in the future , an unanswered question is whether states will voluntarily choose to use grant funding to pay the subsidy and administrative costs of a loan .

the fast act made several changes to the tifia program to broaden the types of projects eligible for support .

this included allowing support for transit oriented development ( tod ) projects , and lowering the cost threshold for rural and local projects .

to encourage smaller projects , the fast act also provided funding to pay the application fees of projects costing $75 million or less .

whether or not these changes will lead to more loans , an overall increase in credit assistance , and thus greater infrastructure investment , is a question that might determine the call for more changes in the future .

the rrif program has been little used over the years , most likely because borrowers have to pay the subsidy cost of credit assistance .

this has changed recently due to major borrowing for publicly funded projects by mta and amtrak .

another project involving amtrak , the hudson river tunnels , has been mentioned as a possible recipient of a large loan .

however , private freight railroads , the original focus of the rrif program , have not borrowed to any great extent .

possibly the most effective way of increasing the use of the rrif program by private as well as public borrowers would be to provide an appropriation to cover the subsidy cost .

another suggestion is to simplify the application process , particularly for smaller loans .

tifia and pabs remain important supports for p3s in surface transportation .

while the tifia program appears to have enough budget authority to make loans for the foreseeable future , there is concern that the $15 billion pab cap might be reached in the near future , inhibiting p3s .

monitoring , and increasing if necessary , the availability of assistance from these programs is probably the most important task for supporters of p3s at the federal level .

congress also may want to monitor whether language in map - 21 and the fast act to support p3s is achieving its goal of increasing private investment in infrastructure .

p3 skeptics might seek to limit the use of federal financing to encourage the development of p3s or seek to build on the transparency requirements contained in the fast act .

an idea suggested in the past is for an office of public benefit in fhwa to "provide for the protection of the public interest in relation to highway toll projects and public - private partnership agreements on federal - aid highways. .

many different formulations of a national infrastructure bank have been proposed in congress over the past few years .

proponents typically see such a bank as a way to provide low - cost , long - term loans , loan guarantees , and lines of credit on flexible terms to support infrastructure projects .

policy choices include the following: infrastructure type .

some proposals focus on one type , such as transportation or energy , but most would support a wider spectrum of sectors .

institutional form and governance .

most current proposals would create a wholly owned government corporation governed by political appointees .

but other models exist , including placing the bank inside an existing government department and creating a government - sponsored enterprise with an independent board .

funding source .

under the federal credit reform act of 1990 , credit assistance by the bank would be supported by an appropriation that pays the subsidy and administrative costs .

assuming a 10% subsidy cost , every $1 appropriated beyond the amount of administrative costs would enable the bank to lend $10 to projects .

alternatively , a bank could operate as a revolving fund , such that credit assistance and administrative costs are limited to the size of the appropriation , but funds from repaid loans could be used to make new loans .

in some formulations an infrastructure bank would raise its own capital through bond issuance .

most proposals would allow the bank to offset some of its costs by charging fees .

five infrastructure bank proposals have been introduced in the 114 th congress .

each proposes a national infrastructure bank created as a wholly government - owned corporation , but with somewhat different governance , eligibility rules , and funding mechanisms ( table 7 ) .

the green bank act is not discussed here , as it limits support to energy projects .

the partnership to build america act of 2015 ( h.r .

413 ) would create the american infrastructure fund ( aif ) with $50 billion of repatriated foreign earnings .

the companies repatriating the earnings would receive tax benefits in return for investing a certain share of the earnings in 50-year bonds paying 1% interest .

infrastructure sectors eligible for loans and loan guarantees from the aif would include transportation , energy , water , communications , and education .

in addition , h.r .

413 would permit the aif to make equity investments ( i.e. , an ownership stake ) up to a maximum of 20% of project costs .

the national infrastructure development bank act ( h.r .

3337 ) proposes to create the national infrastructure development bank ( nidb ) as a wholly owned government corporation .

the nidb would be authorized to aid transportation , energy , environmental , and telecommunications infrastructure projects .

in addition to providing loans and loan guarantees , the nidb would be permitted to subsidize the interest on a new type of taxable bond called an american infrastructure bond ( aib ) .

aibs could be issued by eligible infrastructure project sponsors .

an amount equivalent to the federal taxes paid by aib holders would be credited to the ndib for assistance to other eligible infrastructure projects .

the nidb also would be capitalized with $25 billion from the general fund .

the building and renewing infrastructure for development and growth in employment ( bridge ) act ( s. 1589 ) proposes to create the infrastructure financing authority ( ifa ) as a wholly owned government corporation .

the ifa would be authorized to provide loans and loan guarantees to sponsors of projects in transportation , energy , and water .

modifications to the list of eligible project types would be possible by a vote of five or more of the seven - member board of directors .

the act authorizes an appropriation of $10 billion to capitalize the authority .

the act also authorizes the collection of fees from applicants and for recipients of assistance to pay all or part of the federal government's subsidy cost .

the act would create an office of technical and rural assistance within the ifa to identify and develop projects for financing in cooperation with project sponsors .

at least 5% of the budget authority made available by the bridge act would have to be used to assist rural projects .

the build usa act ( s. 1296 ) would establish the american infrastructure bank as a wholly owned government corporation .

the bank would be authorized to make loans and loan guarantees to state and local governments for highway projects .

the bank would be capitalized with taxes on repatriated foreign earnings , the issuance of its own bonds , and 10% of federal highway formula funds remitted voluntarily by states .

the bank would be authorized to return the other 90% of the funds remitted by a state with different and possibly more flexible federal requirements than came with the original formula funds .

potential advantages of an infrastructure bank include the leveraging of state , local , and private - sector investment and data - driven project selection .

another potential advantage might be its ability to develop a staff specialized in infrastructure finance , although this might be possible in more traditional settings , as the build america bureau illustrates .

potential drawbacks of a national infrastructure bank include the limited number of suitable projects for support , politically driven project selection , and the duplication of existing programs , such as the tifia program .

a bank may also not be the lowest - cost means of increasing infrastructure spending .

the congressional b udget office notes that a special entity issuing its own debt would not be able to offer the low interest and issuance costs of the u.s. treasury .

one alternative to creating a national infrastructure bank could be enhancing the state infrastructure banks that already exist in many states .

one of the biggest stumbling blocks to federally authorized sibs has been capitalization .

this is because federal grant funds that could be used to capitalize a sib have typically been committed elsewhere .

it is too soon to know if a fast act provision that provides authority for a tifia loan to a sib will help in this regard .

other ideas that have been proposed but not enacted include dedicating federal funds to sibs ( h.r .

7 , 112 th congress ) and authorizing sibs to issue a type of tax credit bond ( s. 1250 , 113 th congress ) .

