t he digital currency called bitcoin has been in existence since 2009 and for most of that time it remained little more than a technological curiosity of interest to a small segment of the population .

however , over the last year and a half , bitcoin use has grown substantially ; attention by the press has surged , and recently bitcoin caught the attention of congress , being the subject of two senate hearings .

this report has three major sections .

the first section answers some basic questions about bitcoin and the operation of the bitcoin network and its interaction with the current dollar - based monetary system .

the second section summarizes likely reasons for and against widespread bitcoin adoption .

the third section discusses legal and regulatory matters that have been raised by bitcoin and other digital currencies .

the united states is not the only nation taking an interest in the potential impact of increased use of bitcoin .

because digital currency knows no national boundaries , it may require an international solution and , thus , has drawn the attention of international regulators .

traditional payment systems are based on statutory - based monetary systems , overseen by central banks that process transactions of depository banks and other authorized or chartered financial institutions .

with virtual currencies , however , no laws and regulations define the duties and obligations of parties or provide for finality of settlement , resolution of disputes , or supervision of services provided .

an october 2012 study of digital currencies by the european central bank is premised on the possibility that growth of digital currencies will carry with it a need for international cooperation in developing a regulatory framework .

according to the study , the current level of virtual currencies poses little risk to price stability ; there are , however , risks to users and a potential for criminal schemes .

the study also notes that neither the european monetary directive nor the european payment services directive clearly applies to virtual currencies such as bitcoin .

the financial action task force , an inter - governmental organization of which the united states is a member , released a report assessing the risks that virtual currencies present to global efforts to combat money laundering and financing of terrorists in june 2014 and "guidance for a risk - based approach to virtual currencies" ( fatf guidance ) in june 2015 .

the 2014 report provides a glossary of key definitions , such as digital currency , virtual currency , convertible ( or open ) currency , and non - convertible ( or closed ) currency .

it includes sections on legitimate uses of virtual currency and potential risks of virtual currency .

it summarizes three law enforcement actions involving virtual currency , all spearheaded by the u.s. department of justice .

the 2015 fatf guidance is aimed at explaining how fatf's risk - based approach to standards for anti - money laundering and anti - terrorist financing apply to exchanges of virtual currencies that can be converted into fiat money .

the goal is to aid national authorities seeking to develop regulatory regimes .

the fatf guidance recommends specific standards for countries to take a risk - based approach to identify and mitigate money laundering and terrorist financing risks implicated in virtual currency activities .

it includes summaries of approaches taken in certain jurisdictions — canada , china , the european banking authority , france , germany , hong kong , italy , russia , singapore , south africa , switzerland , united kingdom , and the united states .

on july 4 , 2014 , the european banking authority ( eba ) , the european union authority charged with monitoring financial activities and making recommendations for regulating banking concerns for safety and soundness purposes , released recommendations for steps to address the problems associated with the rise of virtual currencies , "eba opinion on 'virtual currencies. .

in this document , the eba identified 70 risks associated with virtual currency , multiple difficulties of crafting a regulatory regime addressing those risks , and some interim measures for the member states of the european union to institute .

as interim measures , the eba recommended ( 1 ) subjecting virtual currency exchanges to the anti - money laundering and counter - terrorist financing requirements and ( 2 ) discouraging credit institutions , payment institutions , and e - money institutions from buying , holding , or selling virtual currencies .

one issue that has received some attention is the ability of the international monetary fund ( imf ) to defend a traditional currency of one of its member countries from a speculative attack involving a digital currency such as bitcoin because the imf's articles of agreement do not explicitly permit it to acquire a currency not issued by one of its members .

at least one commentary examines possible options for amending or reinterpreting the imf's authority .

