housing and mortgage markets in the united states have experienced significant turmoil in recent years .

after several years of increasing , house prices began to decrease around 2006 , contributing to increasing mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates that reached historic levels .

this turmoil had far - reaching implications for individual households and communities , as well as for the financial system and economy as a whole .

during the 113 th congress , which convened from january 3 , 2013 , through january 2 , 2015 , housing markets showed some signs of stabilizing , although concerns remained .

even though housing markets showed some signs of improvement , congress continued to grapple with multiple issues related to the aftermath of the recent turmoil in housing and mortgage markets .

these issues included considering large - scale reforms to the housing finance system and overseeing the implementation of new rules related to mortgage lending that were enacted in response to issues that were perceived to have contributed to the housing market collapse .

even as the economy recovers , lower - income households , who are more likely to be renters , may find it more difficult to find adequate , affordable housing .

furthermore , in response to concerns about the long - term budget outlook , congress has been providing less funding for many domestic discretionary programs , including housing programs primarily administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

in this light , the 113 th congress considered issues such as how to prioritize funding for housing assistance programs in an environment of fiscal austerity , as well as possible reforms to certain housing assistance programs .

this report begins by providing an overview of the state of housing markets ( both homeownership and rental ) and the mortgage market in order to provide context for the policy issues that were active during the 113 th congress .

it then provides a brief description of certain major housing issues that were considered during the 113 th congress .

these issues are broadly divided into two categories: issues related to homeownership and housing finance , and issues related to housing assistance for low - income households .

this report is meant to provide a broad overview of the issues and is not intended to provide detailed information or analysis .

however , this report does include references to other , more in - depth crs reports on the issues when possible .

a number of the housing issues that were on the agenda of the 113 th congress had to do with housing finance or homeownership .

one major issue that congress considered was the possible large - scale reform of the housing finance system .

other housing finance - related issues on congress's agenda included deliberation on specific programs or policies that could impact the availability or affordability of mortgages for certain households , including oversight of mortgage - related rulemakings and consideration of foreclosure prevention programs and policies .

the 113 th congress also deliberated on a number of issues related to housing assistance programs and policies .

in general , housing assistance programs are targeted to lower - income households or special populations who have difficulty finding affordable housing .

several issues that were considered by congress were related to funding for housing assistance programs and possible reforms to certain programs .

concern in congress about reducing federal budget deficits has led to increased interest in reducing the amount of discretionary funding provided each year through the annual appropriations process .

reflecting this interest , the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l .

112-25 ) , as amended , implemented discretionary spending caps for fy2012-fy2021 , which are designed to reduce growth in discretionary spending .

the desire to limit discretionary spending has implications for the department of housing and urban development's ( hud's ) budget , since it is made up almost entirely of discretionary appropriations .

more than three - quarters of hud's appropriations are devoted to three programs: section 8 housing choice voucher program rental assistance vouchers , section 8 project - based rental assistance subsidies , and the public housing program .

funding for section 8 vouchers makes up the largest share of hud's budget , accounting for nearly half .

the cost of the section 8 voucher program has been growing in recent years since congress has created more vouchers each year over the past several years ( largely to replace units lost to the affordable housing stock in other assisted housing programs ) , and since the cost of renewing individual vouchers has been growing as gaps between low - income tenants' incomes and rents in the market have been growing .

the cost of the project - based section 8 program has also been growing in recent years as more and more long - term rental assistance contracts on older properties expire and are renewed , requiring new appropriations .

public housing , the third - largest expense in hud's budget , has , arguably , been underfunded ( based on studies undertaken by hud of what it should cost to operate and maintain public housing ) for many years , which means there is regular pressure from low - income housing advocates and others to increase funding for public housing .

in a budget environment featuring limits on discretionary spending , the pressure to provide more funding for hud's largest programs must be balanced against the pressure from states , localities , and advocates to maintain or increase funding for other hud programs , such as the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program , grants for homelessness assistance , and funding for native american housing .

further , hud's funding needs must be considered in the context of those for the department of transportation .

funding levels for hud , along with those of the department of transportation ( dot ) , are determined by the transportation , hud , and related agencies ( t - hud ) appropriations subcommittee , generally in a bill by the same name .

while the dot's overall budget is generally larger than hud's , because the majority of dot's budget is made up of mandatory funding , hud's budget makes up the largest share of the discretionary t - hud appropriations bill each year .

all of these considerations influenced the 113 th congress's consideration of hud appropriations .

for more information about hud appropriations , see the crs issue before congress website , "transportation , hud , and relate d agencies' appropriations. .

for more information about the budget control act , see crs report r41965 , the budget control act of 2011 , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] , and for more information about trends in funding for hud , see crs report r42542 , department of housing and urban development ( hud ) : funding trends since fy2002 , by [author name scrubbed] .

over most of the past decade , congress has considered reforms to the nation's two largest direct housing assistance programs: the section 8 housing choice voucher and public housing programs .

the majority of these reforms are aimed at streamlining the programs' administration , although some have been farther reaching than others .

recent reform proposals , including those considered in the 111 th and 112 th congresses , have included a number of fairly uncontroversial administrative provisions , along with others that have proved more controversial .

the section 8 housing choice voucher program is hud's largest direct housing assistance program for low - income families , both in terms of the number of families it serves ( over 2 million ) and the amount of money it costs ( over $18 billion in fy2013 , about half of hud's total appropriation ) .

the program is administered at the local level , by public housing authorities ( phas ) , and provides vouchers — portable rental subsidies — to very low - income families , which they can use to reduce their rents in the private market units of their choice ( subject to certain cost limits ) .

the program has been criticized for , among other issues , its administrative complexity and growing cost .

the public housing program has existed longer than the section 8 voucher program and is now smaller in size , with over 1 million units of low - rent public housing available to eligible low - income tenants .

public housing is owned by the same local phas that administer the section 8 voucher program and those phas receive annual operating and capital funding from congress through hud .

much of the public housing stock is old and in need of capital repairs .

according to the most recent study conducted by hud , addressing the outstanding physical needs of the public housing stock would cost nearly $26 billion .

the amount congress typically provides in annual appropriations for capital needs has not been sufficient to address that backlog .

in response , phas have increasingly relied on other sources of financing , particularly private market loans , to meet the capital needs of their housing stock .

however , there are limits on the extent to which phas can borrow funds ; most notably , they are generally restricted by federal rules from mortgaging their public housing properties .

further , the public housing program has , like the voucher program , been criticized for being overly complex and burdensome to administer , especially in light of recent funding reductions .

recent reform proposals have included changes to the income eligibility and rent determination process for both programs , designed to make it less complicated , and changes to the physical inspection process in the voucher program to give phas more options for reducing the frequency of inspections and increasing sanctions for failed inspections .

proposed legislation has also included changes to the formula by which voucher funding is allocated to phas .

in recent years , annual appropriations laws have specified different formulas for allocating voucher funding ; voucher reform legislation has sought to codify a permanent formula ( although , even if enacted it could still be overridden in the appropriations acts ) .

finally , recent reform proposals have included modifications to and expansions of the moving to work ( mtw ) demonstration , which permits a selected group of phas to seek waivers of most federal rules and regulations governing the section 8 voucher program and the public housing program .

no reform legislation was considered in the 113 th congress .

however , the president requested in several budget submissions that congress enact several of the less controversial administrative reforms ( for example , those related to income calculation and verification ) as a part of the annual appropriations acts .

the fy2014 omnibus funding measure ( p.l .

113-76 ) included several of the requested administrative reforms .

for more information , see crs report rl34002 , section 8 housing choice voucher program: issues and reform proposals , by [author name scrubbed] .

the native american housing assistance and self - determination act of 1996 ( nahasda ) reorganized the system of federal housing assistance for native americans living in tribal areas .

nahasda terminated the ability of tribes to receive assistance under several existing hud programs , and consolidated most housing funding for tribes into a single block grant program , the native american housing block grant ( nahbg ) .

federally recognized tribes and alaska native villages are eligible to receive formula funding under the nahbg to use for a variety of housing activities that benefit low - income households living in the tribe's formula area .

in addition to the block grant program , nahasda also authorized a loan guarantee program under which hud provides a guarantee on certain eligible loans made to tribes for housing - related purposes ( the title vi loan guarantee program ) , as well as funding for training and technical assistance .

a block grant program similar to the nahbg , the native hawaiian housing block grant ( nhhbg ) , provides funds for affordable housing for low - income native hawaiians who are eligible to live on the hawaiian home lands and is also authorized under nahasda , as amended .

nahasda's authorization expired at the end of fy2013 .

no reauthorization bill was enacted before the end of the 113 th congress .

two reauthorization bills were introduced in the house ( h.r .

4277 and h.r .

4329 ) , and h.r .

4329 was passed by the house in december 2014 .

a different reauthorization bill in the senate ( s. 1352 ) was reported out of the senate committee on indian affairs in january 2014 , but was never considered by the full senate .

for more information on nahasda , see crs report r43307 , the native american housing assistance and self - determination act of 1996 ( nahasda ) : background and funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) administers a number of housing assistance programs for low and moderate income residents of rural areas .

they include rental housing development and rent subsidy programs , as well as single - family direct loan and mortgage insurance programs .

these programs are only available in "rural" areas , as defined by the authorizing statute for the programs .

that definition is complicated , and involves maximum population thresholds , and in some cases a determination by usda that the area is "rural in character" and lacks access to mortgage credit .

further , in past years , congress has modified the definition to allow certain areas to continue to be considered rural , despite exceeding population thresholds based on updated decennial census data .

with the release of census 2010 population figures , the usda updated the list of areas to be designated as rural , reflecting the new census data .

according to preliminary estimates released by usda in 2012 , over 900 communities that were identified as "rural" would have no longer met the criteria and would thus have lost eligibility to participate in rural housing programs .

usda was initially planning to begin using the updated list of eligible communities at the start of fy2013 .

however , congress included in the fy2013 appropriations law language maintaining eligibility for rural housing programs in any communities that were considered eligible for participation at the end of fy2012 .

this "grandfathering" of existing eligible communities was extended through the end of fy2014 under the terms of the final fy2014 omnibus appropriations law ( p.l .

113-76 ) .

following enactment of p.l .

113-76 , the agricultural act of 2014 , also known as the 2014 "farm bill" ( p.l .

113-79 ) , amended the statutory definition of rural .

the amendment ( 1 ) extended the existing provisions disregarding 1990 and 2000 decennial census data in determining certain communities' rural status to also disregard 2010 decennial census data ; and ( 2 ) expanded the population threshold for the purposes of retaining eligibility for certain communities from 25,000 to 35,000 .

for more information about usda rural housing programs , see crs report rl31837 , an overview of usda rural development programs , by [author name scrubbed] .

the low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) program is one of the federal government's primary policy tools for encouraging the development and rehabilitation of affordable rental housing .

these non - refundable federal housing tax credits are awarded to developers of qualified rental projects via a competitive application process administered by state housing finance agencies .

developers typically sell their tax credits to outside investors in exchange for equity .

selling the tax credits reduces the debt developers would otherwise have to incur and the equity they would otherwise have to contribute .

with lower financing costs , tax credit properties can potentially offer lower , more affordable rents .

two temporary changes to the lihtc program that were made during the financial crisis were extended in the 113 th congress .

the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) temporarily changed the formula used to determine how many lihtcs new rental construction is awarded .

the act increased the potential number of credits a lihtc property could receive by ensuring that new construction receives lihtcs of no less than 9% multiplied by a property's eligible basis ( eligible costs ) .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) extended the 9% floor for credit allocations made before january 1 , 2014 .

the 113 th congress acted to extend the floor through the end of 2014 in p.l .

113-295 , which was passed by congress on december 16 , 2014 .

the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) also temporarily excluded military housing allowances from the lihtc income calculations for properties near rapidly growing military bases .

in general , lihtc tenants must have an income below a particular threshold to live in a lihtc unit .

specifically , a tenant must have an income of either 50% or less of the area's median income , or 60% or less of the area's median income .

which threshold applies depends on an election made by the developer that determines the targeted low - income population .

civilians as well as servicemembers are potentially eligible to live in lihtc units .

however , when calculating a servicemember's income for purposes of determining their eligibility , their annual pay and basic allowance for housing ( bah ) must be included .

the bah is a tax - exempt form of compensation that is based on a servicemember's pay grade , location , and number of dependents .

the temporary exclusion provided by hera likely allowed more servicemembers to qualify to live in lihtc housing .

the exclusion applied to lihtc properties in a county with a military base that experienced military personnel growth of 20% or more between december 31 , 2005 , and june 1 , 2008 , or that are located in an adjacent county .

the hera change was originally set to expire on december 31 , 2011 , but was extended through the end of 2013 by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) .

it was most recently extended through the end of 2014 by p.l .

113-295 on december 16 , 2014 .

for many years , affordable housing advocates , led by the national low - income housing coalition ( nlihc ) , had argued for the creation of a national housing trust fund to provide a dedicated source of funding outside of the annual appropriations process that could be used for the production of rental housing for the lowest - income households .

in 2008 , congress established the housing trust fund and another new affordable housing fund , the capital magnet fund , in the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) .

through the housing trust fund , hud would provide formula - based grants to states to use primarily for rental housing for very low - and extremely low - income households .

the dedicated funding source for the housing trust fund was to be contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac , which would be shared with the capital magnet fund .

however , before the housing trust fund had ever received any funding , the contributions were suspended by the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) after fannie mae and freddie mac were placed into conservatorship .

affordable housing advocates have continued to seek a source of funding for the housing trust fund and have suggested a number of possible funding sources .

most recently , as fannie mae and freddie mac have once again become profitable , advocates argued that their contributions to the housing trust fund should be reinstated and initiated legal action to attempt to require fannie mae and freddie mac to begin making contributions .

that lawsuit was dismissed due to lack of standing in september 2014 .

furthermore , the common sense housing investment act of 2013 ( h.r .

1213 ) would have made changes to the mortgage interest deduction and diverted some of the revenue generated by the changes to the housing trust fund .

some policymakers , however , have opposed the housing trust fund since its creation , arguing that it is duplicative of other housing programs or that its funds could be misused .

there were legislative proposals in the 113 th congress , as well as in previous congresses , to eliminate the housing trust fund entirely or to limit the circumstances under which it could receive funding .

for example , the path act , discussed earlier in this report , would have repealed the housing trust fund , while the pay back the taxpayers act of 2014 ( h.r .

3901 ) would have prohibited fannie mae or freddie mac from making any contributions to the housing funds while in conservatorship or receivership .

as of the end of the 113 th congress , the housing trust fund had never received any funding .

however , in december 2014 , fhfa director mel watt directed fannie mae and freddie mac to begin setting aside contributions for the housing trust fund and the capital magnet fund during 2015 , with the first contributions scheduled to be transferred to the housing funds in early 2016 .

affordable housing advocates and some lawmakers praised the decision , citing a need for affordable housing in many communities .

other lawmakers , however , criticized the decision on the basis of fannie mae's and freddie mac's ongoing conservatorship and concerns about the housing trust fund itself .

for more information on the housing trust fund , see crs report r40781 , the housing trust fund: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

