the gulf of mexico coastal region ( gulf coast ) stretches over the shoreline areas of five u.s. states: texas , louisiana , mississippi , alabama , and florida .

the coastal environment has been altered over time due to changes in hydrology , loss of barrier islands and coastal wetland habitat , issues associated with low water quality , human development , and natural processes , among other things .

the federal government has addressed these changes through ecosystem restoration activities in the region over the past few decades .

major restoration projects led by the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) , the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) have been implemented .

significant state and local efforts to restore the gulf coast have also been undertaken , in some cases in consultation with the federal government .

the gulf coast has also been affected by large - scale natural and manmade disasters that have significantly affected the environment and economy of the region .

indeed , these disasters have led to changes in restoration efforts , sometimes in a significant fashion .

for example , in 2005 , hurricanes katrina and rita caused widespread damage to wetland and coastal areas along the gulf , and altered the plans for restoring some parts of the coast .

in 2010 , a manmade disaster , the deepwater horizon oil spill , resulted in an unprecedented discharge of oil in u.s. waters and oiling of over 1,100 miles of u.s. shoreline .

the gulf coast region is home to more than 22 million people and 15,000 species over five southern states: texas , louisiana , mississippi , alabama , and florida .

animal , plant , and microbial populations depend on the gulf's unique processes to survive .

overall , the gulf coast environment includes multiple interconnected ecosystems spanning 600,000 square miles of shoreline of the gulf of mexico .

these ecosystems provide services that encompass aesthetic , economic , and environmental values for their residents .

for instance , barrier islands and wetland complexes may provide some coastal storm damage protection benefits for coastal communities .

they provide habitat for a number of commercially and recreationally important species of fish , invertebrates , mammals , and birds , including many threatened and endangered species .

these ecosystems also filter water , remove and trap contaminants , and store carbon , among other functions .

the deepwater horizon spill is one of several events and ongoing processes that have altered the gulf coast ecosystems over time .

prior to the spill , the ecosystems were undergoing large changes due to human development and natural processes .

for example , large - scale sediment and habitat loss was occurring , in part , due to altered water flows from the mississippi river ; water pollution was being exacerbated by excess nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen ; and waterways were being altered due to dredging and levee construction ; among other things .

the spill did not change many of these processes but altered perspectives on how federal and state governments approach restoration .

after the oil spill , efforts were focused on addressing the immediate impacts of the oil spill and monitoring how the spill was spreading through the ecosystems .

although the oil pollution act ( opa ) liability provisions are meant to address natural resource damages related to the oil spill , many policymakers and stakeholders expressed an interest in also addressing prespill natural resource issues in the gulf .

thus , to some degree , gulf restoration activities may be divided into short - term efforts that address natural resource impacts related to the 2010 oil spill and long - term recovery efforts that address restoration issues in place well before the 2010 spill .

many of the ongoing gulf coast restoration efforts discussed above have yet to be finalized , and the planning processes and funds available for deposit into the gulf coast restoration trust fund have yet to be fully determined .

further , project priority lists , state implementation plans , and other required restoration planning documents are still being developed .

nevertheless , a number of issues may be of interest to congress in its oversight role related to gulf coast restoration .

some of these issues include the coordination of restoration activities among implementing entities ; the development and implementation of a comprehensive plan for restoration ; governance of restoration activities ; and the balancing of the dual goals of ecological restoration and economic development in the gulf coast region .

although implementation has progressed on several fronts , several aspects of gulf coast restoration planning , implementation , and funding are uncertain or still being developed .

some funding under the restore act , nfwf , and nrda early restoration efforts has been released .

developments , such as the bp settlement , and the release of funding under nfwf , nrda , and restore act processes , have increased the attention on gulf coast restoration .

as the multiple processes governing these efforts move forward , congress might consider questions related to their coordination , planning , and implementation and may look to other comparable initiatives for lessons learned that could be incorporated into work on the gulf coast .

questions aimed at addressing adaptive management , governance , and striking a balance between restoration and the economy could be among the issues raised in congressional oversight of gulf coast restoration .

