one view of the financial crisis of 2007-2008 is that it was not centered in traditional banking .

the term shadow banking " ... refers to credit intermediation involving leverage and maturity transformation that is partly or wholly outside the traditional banking system. .

that is , shadow banking substitutes at least partially for simple banking in the creation and funding of debt .

several components of the shadow banking system contributed to the breadth of the financial turmoil that began in 2007 , and the magnitude of the financial panic in september 2008 , according to the financial crisis inquiry commission ( fcic ) .

in response , regulatory policymakers have been analyzing how the shadow banking system works , and considering options to promote greater financial stability in shadow banking .

congress is considering several shadow banking regulatory reform proposals ( e.g .

changing the status of repurchase agreements [repos] in bankruptcy proceedings ) , overseeing related agency rulemaking ( eg , regulations for money market funds [mmfs] ) , and overseeing the implementation of related financial reform legislation ( e.g .

applying the capital requirements in section 171 of the dodd - frank act to nonbanks ) .

this report develops a general framework for analyzing financial intermediation , and applies these concepts to several specific shadow banking sectors .

the report focuses on comparing and contrasting the fundamental economic problems of simple banking ( which will be referred to as luminated banking ) and associated policy responses to analogous problems and policy proposals in shadow banking .

shadow banking provides a similar general service ( financial intermediation ) as luminated banking , and is subject to similar fundamental economic problems .

furthermore , many of the proposed regulatory responses for shadow banking have policy trade - offs analogous to regulatory policies in banking , and some shadow banking sectors already have a financial regulatory regime ( such as securities regulations ) .

many of these economic problems and potential policy responses are illustrated by the experiences of five shadow banking sectors ( repos , nonbanks , asset backed commercial paper [abcp] , securitization , and mmfs ) during 2007-2008 , and by regulatory responses currently being considered .

similarities and differences between securities market regulation and banking regulation can influence the size and stability of the financial system .

in many cases ( but not all ) , the kind of regulation applied to securities market activities is fundamentally different from the regulation of chartered depository banks .

banking regulation is typically applied only to specific institutions , is risk - based , takes into account the linkages between banks through the payment system , and includes government emergency backstops , such as a lender of last resort and a deposit guarantor .

securities regulation , which several categories of shadow banking involves , generally requires disclosure of material risks , but typically does not limit the risk that sophisticated securities market participants may take .

on the other hand , the regulation of securities is often product and activity based , and therefore may adapt to financial innovations in which debt - related securities are offered by new kinds of business entities .

differences in these regulatory regimes can affect the degree to which debt is created through banking or shadow banking .

the diversity of shadow banking activities and institutions makes it difficult to generalize ; however , the degree to which debt financing in the financial system is covered by risk - based regulation , has access to emergency backstops , or can easily adapt to innovation in the provision of similar services may be influenced by regulatory choices for banking and shadow banking .

by extension , changes to the regulation of shadow banking can affect the relative stability of the overall financial system .

the organization of the report is as follows .

the report defines luminated banking and shadow banking , and identifies several common sources of financial instability from an economic perspective .

the report describes some of the standard economic tools ( including regulations and emergency support ) that are often applied to banking .

it then describes five major components of shadow banking , and for each one , recounts its experience during the financial turmoil of 2007-2008 and analyzes policy proposals to change the regulatory approach and emergency support for that sector .

the policy proposals are related back to analogous policy proposals in banking regulation .

defining "shadow banking" is difficult because defining banking is difficult .

some analysts might be tempted to define banking as whatever firms with bank charters do ; however , policy discussions of shadow banking include activities in which chartered banks participate , sometimes only with each other .

therefore , a definition that is based on functions may be more useful for policy analysis , but even the functional definitions offered by various researchers have varied significantly , with important implications for what gets included under the label "shadow banking. .

this report will follow a functional definition , seeking to provide a framework for analyzing several large sectors of the financial system that are usually included under the rubric "shadow banking," yet excludes insured deposits of chartered banks that hold their loans .

in broad terms , both banking and shadow banking provide the same service , which is financial intermediation .

financial intermediation includes gathering funds from savers , screening and qualifying applicants for funds , issuing and holding financial assets , and coordinating the payment of returns to savers .

shadow banking involves providing this financial intermediation with at least one difference from simple banking .

in many cases ( but not all ) , that difference involves reliance on securities markets to fund loans .

if shadow banking has at least one difference from simple banking , what is simple banking ? .

simple banking , or luminated banking , has each of the following four elements .

the first row of figure 1 illustrates the flow of funds connecting savers and borrowers in a luminated banking business model .

luminated banks 1. gather funds in the form of deposits ( time and transaction ) 2. have special business charters identifying them as depositories 3. offer loans ( and screen applicants ) 4. hold the loans they originate .

repayments of loans fund the interest for depositors .

the term shadow banking has been used to describe a variety of firms and activities that have little in common .

however , they each differ in an at least one respect from the simple conception of banking illustrated in the first row of figure 1 .

in this illustration , the term luminated banking is being used to describe a simple form of the "originate - to - hold" model of depository banking .

in figure 1 , each following row provides an illustrative example of an activity or firm that deviates from luminated banking in at least one respect , yet provides similar financial intermediation .

adjusting the focal point of intermediation from left to right , the first shadow banking example in figure 1 illustrates a substitute for deposits ( in this case repos ) , the second shadow banking example illustrates a substitute for firms with special bank charters ( non - bank intermediaries ) , and the third row illustrates a substitute for holding loans ( in this case selling loans through securitization ) .

the following five examples are a non - exhaustive list of shadow banking sectors .

this list is included because each of these sectors will be addressed more fully in the policy analysis section of the report .

they are presented here to see how each fits into the general concept of financial intermediation and how each differs from , or can be incorporated in , simple banking .

 ( a ) the repo market — rather than gathering funds from depositors , some chartered banks ( and nonbanks ) borrow through repurchase agreements ( repos , discussed more fully below ) .

in a repo , a firm sells a security today with a promise to repurchase the security at a later date for a specified price .

the time span and price differences are analogous to a loan and interest .

repos differ from simple banking in the way in which intermediaries gather funds from savers .

financial firms that fund themselves with repos may or may not have bank charters , may or may not extend credit or purchase debt , and may or may not hold the loans they originate .

however , the first row of figure 1 shows that if a chartered bank borrows through repo markets ( rather than deposits ) in order to fund its lending activity , the financial intermediation is very similar to luminated banking .

furthermore , firms without bank charters can also gather funds from savers through repos .

 ( b ) firms without bank charters — a firm does not have to be a chartered bank in order to borrow or lend , and luminated banking involves borrowing from depositors in order to offer and hold loans .

in a trivial , but highly illustrative example , there was an ice cream shop in pennsylvania that accepted deposits and offered loans .

trusts and non - depository investment banks are more common than ice cream shops that offer banking services .

the second row of figure 1 shows that if a firm without a bank charter funds itself with deposit - like loans while at the same time extending credit or purchasing debt , the resulting financial intermediation is very similar to luminated banking .

 ( c ) commercial paper — firms do not have to go to banks to in order to borrow .

debt can be issued and traded through securities markets .

rather than originate and hold individual loans , chartered banks ( and nonbanks ) have at times sponsored interests in commercial paper , which is an example of marketable debt .

one common form is to issue asset - backed commercial paper ( abcp ) , in which the commercial loans serve as collateral for shorter term debt issued in securities markets .

although not depicted in figure 1 , abcp represents relatively short term borrowing ( on the deposit side of financial intermediation ) that is used to acquire and fund generally longer - term commercial debt .

commercial paper is not funded by deposits , and can be sponsored by a non - bank , and can involve acquiring commercial loans rather than originating commercial loans , yet the organization of the financial flows are similar to luminated banking .

that is , savers extend short term loans to intermediaries , which hold commercial debt .

 ( d ) securitization — banks ( and nonbanks ) do not have to hold the loans that they originate .

they can sell the loans to other banks ( or nonbanks ) .

if the loans are then funded by issuing securities , typically passing through the loan repayments , it is said to be securitization .

the third row in figure 1 illustrates securitization by a bank .

securitization by banks differs from luminated banking primarily in the way that intermediaries interact with borrowers , rather than savers ( although the fact that intermediaries in securitization don't hold the loans can have important indirect effects on savers ) .

securitization can also facilitate lending by nonbanks .

 ( e ) money market mutual funds — mmfs gather funds from investors in order to buy relatively low risk short - term debt in securities markets .

mmfs are not depicted in figure 1 , and the description appears to differ from luminated banking in every respect .

the mmf has investors , not depositors .

the mmf does not have a bank charter .

the mmf generally buys debt in securities markets , rather than hold debts that it originated itself .

yet , mmfs perform financial intermediation services that are very similar to luminated banks .

on the lefthand side of financial intermediation , investor withdrawals from mmfs can be very similar to depositor withdrawals from banks .

on the righthand side of financial intermediation , the effect of loan defaults on an mmf has some similarities to the effect of loan defaults on a bank that holds its own loans .

there are several "banking" charters in the united states , and the definition of luminated banking used above includes these firms as well .

credit unions and thrifts also accept insured deposits , have special charters which subject them to bank - like regulation , screen applicants , offer loans , and hold loans .

the term insured depository institution ( idi ) , which can include banks , credit unions , and thrifts , is sometimes used in the same manner that the term banking is used in discussions about shadow banking .

idis can focus solely on simple banking , but they might also participate in some shadow banking activities , such as repurchase agreements or selling the loans they originate .

when this report uses the term simple banking , idis are considered to satisfy the requirement for a banking charter .

if luminated banking is limited to the four elements of simple banking described above , then the united states has always had a shadow banking sector .

in a large but perhaps analytically trivial example , the borrowing of the u.s. treasury is almost entirely conducted through shadow banking .

or , at least , treasury is not funded through luminated banking — chartered banks do not screen and qualify treasury for loans funded by deposits , and with the intention of being held by the originating institution .

rather , loans to treasury take the form of bonds originated through securities markets , with the intention of being marketable .

some treasury securities are ultimately held by chartered banks , but even those securities were not originated by that bank .

the exact size and growth of the shadow banking sector is sensitive to the definition of "simple banking. .

if shadow banking is being contrasted with deposit - funded banking , then shadow banking has historically been responsible for funding most of the debt outstanding in the united states .

however , the share of total debt funded by deposits at commercial banks fell from slightly over 30% in 1975 to just over 13% in 2005 , and then began rising after the financial crisis .

figure 2 shows that deposits at commercial banks are now more than 16% of total debt in the united states .

to the extent that shadow banking is being used to describe alternatives to debt funded by deposits , figure 2 is consistent with the view that the share of the luminated banking sector dropped by nearly half after 1975 , but began rising after the mortgage crisis .

shadow banking is a global phenomenon .

because the range of permissible activities of chartered banks varies considerably across countries , the relative size of shadow banking sectors also varies considerably across countries .

because many financial markets are global , potential instability of shadow banking sectors has drawn the attention of policymakers in many countries .

shadow banking in the united states is of particular importance to international institutions such as the international monetary fund ( imf ) , financial stability board ( fsb ) , and bank for international settlements ( bis ) , because the united states financial system holds the largest single share of global nonbank assets .

according to a study done by the fsb , the u.s. accounted for 44% of total world nonbank financial assets at the end of 2005 ( see figure 3 ) .

the relative decline in the u.s. shadow banking sector , partly due to the severity of financial crisis in the u.s. shadow banking system , can be seen in that the relative share of the u.s. shadow banking institutions had declined to 35% of world nonbank assets .

note , the definition of shadow banking in these pie charts is assets held by nonbanks , and thus excludes several shadow banking activities conducted in part by chartered banks .

the fsb study reinforces the observation that it is hard to generalize about the organizational structure of shadow banking , or its regulation .

the fsb study also attempted to provide a measure of the composition of global nonbank assets by institution type , rather than by country .

figure 4 shows that there is a wide variety of nonbank organizations that perform financial intermediation .

structured finance vehicles ( an element of many securitizations ) accounted for 10% of the assets held by nonbanks , while money market funds accounted for 7% .

other investment funds , including bond and equity funds , held a combined 35% of global financial assets .

the shadow banking sector may exist in the united states for historical or institutional reasons .

historically , the united states had impediments to the geographic reach of chartered banks , and the scope of services they could offer .

for example , during industrialization , it was not always easy for chartered banks to open branches in multiple states ( limited deposit taking ) , and during some periods of time u.s. banks had restrictions on the interest they could pay depositors .

perhaps in response to regulatory restrictions on banks , financial markets evolved in the united states to aggregate funds through securities markets to assist large industrial enterprises , such as railroads and factories .

similarly , savings associations in the eastern united states could and did buy whole loans originated by western financial institutions ; in addition to holding loans that they originated themselves .

furthermore , during the 19 th century , classes of marketable securities called debentures were issued by trusts and sold to eastern investors ( and others ) , with the proceeds used to buy and hold mortgages originated in the west .

in summary , the united states has a long tradition of funding debt ( including mortgage debt ) through securities markets ; in addition to luminated banking .

it is difficult to generalize about the policy problems of shadow banking because the same term is used to describe firms or activities that focus on different bank - like functions .

this section reviews several fundamental economic vulnerabilities in financial intermediation , and provides examples of how similar problems can exist in sectors of shadow banking .

this is not an exhaustive list .

because the term shadow banking is used to describe such a diversity of firms and practices , it would be incorrect to categorize luminated banking as regulated and shadow banking as unregulated .

however , in many cases ( but not all ) , the kind of regulation applied to shadow banking activities is fundamentally different than banking regulation .

banking regulation is typically risk based , and typically takes into account the linkages between banks through the payment system and the interbank lending market .

securities regulation , which several categories of shadow banking involves , generally requires disclosure of material risks , but typically does not limit the risk that sophisticated securities market participants may take .

this section will briefly summarize four fundamental elements ( not exhaustive ) of banking regulation , because several reform proposals for shadow banking can be thought of as attempting to apply the principles of banking regulation to nonbank financial intermediaries or activities .

earlier sections of this report described economic vulnerabilities of the simple banking approach .

most of these vulnerabilities also apply to shadow banking ; therefore , it may be useful to review general policy intended to stabilize luminated banking before discussing policy reform proposals intended to stabilize specific shadow banking sectors .

the report thus far has presented an economic framework to understand the disparate institutions and markets that are gathered under the term shadow banking .

some policymakers have proposed extending the principles of bank regulation to financial intermediation that is either conducted by nonbanks , or that might be conducted by banks but funded by nondeposits .

other options include regulating activities regardless of the type of firm engaging in it , or attempting to correct mispricing that may occur when financial intermediation occurs through shadow banking .

this section will focus on several specific elements of shadow banking that have been highlighted by the financial crisis inquiry commission ( fcic ) , the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) , the financial stability board ( fsb ) , the federal reserve board ( frb ) , or the international monetary fund ( imf ) .

in each case , the report briefly describes the institution or market , links it to the description of financial intermediation described above , briefly discusses its experience during the financial crisis , and describes related policy concerns .

these categories are neither exhaustive nor mutually exclusive .

in the context of shadow banking , a repurchase agreement is analogous to a banking deposit .

in a repurchase agreement , one party sells another party an asset ( perhaps a u.s. treasury bond ) for one price , with an agreement to repurchase the asset on a future date at another ( higher ) price .

the difference in the prices is functionally similar to interest on a loan .

the asset being traded is similar to collateral for a loan because failure of the first party to repurchase would result in the other party keeping the asset , just as if the first party had defaulted on a loan and the second party seized the asset as collateral .

sometimes a third party is hired to assist repo transactions , often providing clearing and settlement services ( tri - party repos ) .

intermediaries ( both banks and nonbanks ) can borrow funds through repos instead of through insured deposits .

like deposits , if repos are set for shorter time periods than the intermediary's assets , then the intermediary will be potentially exposed to interest rate risk , maturity mismatch , etc .

there are also differences between repos and deposits .

unlike deposits , repos are not eligible for deposit insurance .

because nonbanks can use repurchase agreements , there may be substantial financial intermediation processed by firms that are not eligible for assistance from the lender of last resort in the normal course of financial affairs .

unlike deposits , repurchase agreements use an asset as collateral .

doubts about the continued value of the asset generally used as collateral can reduce the volume of repurchase agreements available to fund intermediation ( analogous to depositor withdrawals ) .

furthermore , if there are unexpectedly high repo defaults , the asset used as collateral may be dumped on the market , causing fire sales .

the repo market experienced severe stress during the financial crisis .

economist gary gorton has documented the equivalent of a nonbank run on firms that had relied on the repo market for short - term financing .

staff at the federal reserve bank of new york ( frbny ) have been assessing the vulnerability of repos to the kinds of runs that gorton described .

these authors identify both a liquidity constraint ( which results in vulnerability to runs ) and a collateral constraint ( which results in vulnerabilities to fire sales ) .

it is difficult to isolate the contribution of the repo market to the general crisis because many other markets experienced declines in liquidity at the same time .

repo market policy concerns can be divided into three general categories .

first , some have suggested that nonbanks that rely on repo transactions to conduct financial intermediation similar to banks should be subject to safety and soundness regulations .

title i of the dodd - frank act ( dfa ) allows for this if the firm has more than $50 billion in assets and is designated as systemically important by the fsoc .

for firms so designated , the dfa requires that the standards set for systemic nonbanks be no weaker than similar standards for banks .

however , the dfa does not create a safety and soundness regime for nonbanks with less than $50 billion in assets .

second , some have called for reforming the way repos are handled when a firm fails .

for example , like other qualified financial contracts ( qfcs ) , repo contracts are exempted from the bankruptcy estate of failing nonbanks .

under bankruptcy , payments subject to the automatic stay are retrieved by the bankruptcy estate , reducing the incentive of a failing firm's creditors to race to its assets ( a form of run ) .

to the extent that the automatic stay in bankruptcy reduces the incentive of a firm's creditors to run to its assets , the exemption from the automatic stay may have contributed to the nonbank run in the repo market during 2008 .

under title ii of the dfa , the fdic would be able to avoid the bankruptcy process if there was a finding of systemic risk , and title ii gives the fdic a limited ability to address potential problems of qfcs , including repo agreements .

a firm does not have to have over $50 billion in assets or have prior designation of systemic risk for title ii to apply .

third , some have called for reform of the techniques of repo trades .

for example , the new york federal reserve , which participates in many repo transactions , has sought to improve certain technical features of the settlement system ( the "plumbing" or "back office" function ) .

similarly , some have expressed concern that delays in clearing and settlement expose the intermediaries in tri - party repos ( the 3 rd party ) to undue credit risk .

finally , because repos are similar to collateralized loans , some are concerned that repo defaults or settlement fails could lead to fire sales .

a nonbank intermediary is a firm without a bank charter that gathers funds from savers in order to fund loans to borrowers .

nonbank intermediaries come in many forms .

for example , a mortgage company such as emc mortgage and an investment firm ( nondepository ) such as bear stearns could partner to generate mortgages that are then packaged and sold to investors ( securitization through nonbanks ) .

similarly , a nonbank such as fannie mae can sell short term bonds that it uses to fund the acquisition of longer term mortgages that it keeps in portfolio .

or , in a non - securitization setting , a nonbank like mf global can fund itself through repo transactions to acquire and hold debt issued by sovereign governments .

the exact form of nonbank intermediation can vary a great deal , and the regulatory status of the firms participating can also vary a great deal .

in these examples , fannie mae was subject to safety and soundness regulation , capital requirements , and had access to some emergency liquidity , but mf global was not .

yet , mf global was subject to regulation for securities that it issued to potential investors , and the way it handled customer accounts .

during the mortgage crisis , many nonbank intermediaries experienced a liquidity crunch , and some failed outright .

in some cases , financial turmoil prevented evaluation of the true value of complex mortgage - related securities in a timely manner , perhaps exacerbating price declines , and contributing to further fire sales .

under the normal course of events , failing nonbanks would be resolved through the bankruptcy process , in which similarly situated creditors must be treated similarly .

perhaps believing that financial instability would be magnified if certain creditors suffered losses , some policymakers wanted to avoid the bankruptcy process .

policymakers responded in at least two ways .

the federal reserve set up special lending facilities ( such as talf ) to support the liquidity concerns of nonbanks that could pledge eligible collateral .

the federal reserve created special lending facilities to avoid the bankruptcy filing of bear stearns and aig ( but not of lehman brothers ) .

congress enacted the housing and economic recovery act ( hera ) .

under hera , the newly created federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) and treasury administered a conservatorship of the gses in which the returns on some gse senior securities were curtailed , but many other gse obligations were fully honored .

because there are many types of nonbanks , and nonbank business models , it is difficult to generalize about this category .

however , it may be useful to distinguish between policy proposals directed at activities in which banks and nonbanks both participate , and policy proposals about the eligibility of nonbanks for government efforts to address financial instability .

the dfa attempts to address the participation of nonbanks in loan originations for consumers .

title x of the dfa creates a consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) with authority to make rules for many consumer lending transactions that apply to both banks and nonbanks .

the dfa changes policy options regarding nonbanks before and after a future crisis .

before a crisis , nonbanks with more than $50 billion in assets can be subjected to safety and soundness regulation if there is a determination of systemic risk concerns under title i .

even smaller nonbanks can be resolved by the fdic if there is a determination that their failure could contribute to financial instability under title ii .

however , title xi of the dfa limits the ability of the federal reserve to provide emergency lending to a single nonbank ( as it did for bear stearns ) ; rather , future emergency lending facilities would have to have more general eligibility criteria .

commercial paper is a very old type of security in which commercial loans are funded through securities markets , even if sponsored by a chartered bank .

asset backed commercial paper ( abcp ) commonly refers to senior short - term debt securities that are backed by commercial loans .

both banks and nonbanks can sponsor vehicles to issue abcp ; for example , a bank could create abcp to sell its credit card loan collectibles , while an auto financing company could create abcp to sell its auto loan repayments .

typically , the sponsor of abcp receives a fee for administering the assets of the abcp facility and often promises to provide emergency loans ( liquidity ) to the abcp facility if other sources of funding are distressed .

part of the mortgage boom during the housing bubble was financed with abcp .

beginning in august 2007 , abcp for subprime mortgage loans found it difficult or impossible to get external financing to support continued activity .

as a result , many abcp facilities turned to their sponsors for liquidity .

as a result , many began absorbing subprime assets from sponsored abcp that had not previously been disclosed on their balance sheets .

furthermore , the value of these mortgage - related assets had to be written - down .

late 2007 and early 2008 has been referred to as a liquidity crunch , in which uncertainty about further mortgage security related write - downs created financial uncertainty and mistrust in the interbank lending market .

some of these problems led to fire sales of the mortgages and mortgage - related assets that backed abcp .

thus , credit losses on subprime mortgages contributed to liquidity problems for bank and nonbank intermediaries .

the federal reserve created the term asset backed loan facility ( talf ) during the financial crisis to alleviate further fire sales of abcp assets .

several policy changes have been implemented to attempt to address future problems in abcp .

the accounting profession has attempted to address some of the uncertainty issues by revising the way contingent liabilities ( such as abcp liquidity sponsorship ) are reported in accounting statements .

for example , fas 166 and 167 have amended fas 140 to address concerns about the recording of a true sale of assets from a sponsor to its abcp .

similarly , the banking regulators have also addressed abcp sponsorship by revising capital treatment for contingent liabilities , including promises to provide liquidity to sponsored abcp .

emergency lending facilities such as talf have expired , but the federal reserve's emergency lending authority for similar general access programs is preserved under title xi of the dfa .

securitization is similar to abcp in that loans are funded through securities markets .

under securitization , a trust or similar facility is created that acquires assets with a stream of payments , such as loans .

the trust issues new securities under its own name that pass through the asset payments to the holders of the securities .

for example , a trust could be formed that holds mortgages , with the payments by mortgage borrowers being passed through to the holders of the securities .

although this example used mortgages , any stream of payments from credit cards to toll booth collections can be securitized .

one feature of securitization is that the terms of the securities issued by the trust ( time of scheduled payments , relative seniority to other securities issued by the trust , etc. ) .

do not have to match the timing or interest of the assets held by the trust as long as all payments are accounted for ( complete pass through except for administrative expenses , and perhaps credit support ) .

chartered banks can participate in securitization by selling their loans , as can nonbank lenders .

typically , securitization conducted through private label firms did not include an issuer guarantee to cover credit risk .

in contrast , securitization by the government sponsored enterprises does include a guarantee for credit risk , but not for interest rate risk .

most observers , including all three opinions in the fcic report , consider aspects of securitization to have contributed to the magnitude of the financial crisis , although there are different views on how or why .

all three fcic opinions agree with the following description of events .

once credit losses escalated in the mortgage market , the demand for mortgage - backed securities disappeared .

many mortgage finance companies that originated and sold mortgages to private label securitizers failed .

some issuers of private label mbs suffered large losses because they retained some credit interest in the securities they sold ( in some cases by retaining junior tranches to improve the credit rating of other tranches and in other cases by offering other contingent liabilities ) .

banks and other firms owned private label mbs , and had overestimated the relative safety of mbs .

firms that provided insurance to mbs securitization , or securities with similar functions , failed ( this includes the monoline insurers and aig ) .

fannie mae and freddie mac , which had to cover the credit losses of the mortgages they securitized , were placed in government conservatorship , with contracts with treasury to assure their financial condition .

legal challenges to the servicing of securitized mortgages by defaulting homeowners delayed resolution of foreclosed homes , potentially extending the time period of surplus distressed homes in geographic areas with the highest concentration of mortgage defaults .

many changes have been made to private - label and gse securitization since the beginning of financial turmoil in august 2007 .

in july 2008 , hera created a new regulator for fannie mae and freddie mac .

in september , 2008 , these two gses were placed in conservatorship .

however , the final disposition of the mortgage gses has not yet been determined .

the volume of private label securitization is still extremely low compared to before the financial turmoil began .

the dodd - frank act created a new regulatory framework for the securitization process , especially for residential mortgage securitization .

under title ix of the act , a new office was created within the sec to regulate nationally recognized credit rating organizations ( nrcro ) , which are the firms that provide a label for the relative risk of marketable securities .

under title vii , financial derivatives that were used to help construct complex securitized products must be standardized and cleared on an organized exchange regulated by the cftc ( or sec ) , if possible .

under title ix , firms that sponsor securitizations must retain a portion of the risk of the securities issued .

financial regulators issue rules for retained risk for each asset class , including for mortgages ( qrm rule ) .

under title xiv , mortgages must meet certain standards to be assured certain legal protections in the case of default ( qm rule ) , including securitized mortgages .

under title x , most consumer financial products that are securitized , including credit cards , mortgages , and student loans , will be regulated for consumer protection by a single agency , the cfpb .

some policies have yet to be fully specified and implemented .

some industry participants believe that the volume of securitization , especially for mortgages , will remain low until regulatory uncertainty is addressed .

for example , mortgage securitizers would like to see the standards for the qm rule and the qrm rule be consistent , but differing legal contexts for the primary market ( mortgage origination ) and some secondary markets ( securities regulation ) may make such consistency problematic even if regulators use identical language in the two rules .

another potential concern is the creation and maintenance of a national mortgage database , which some analysts believe could address some of the uncertainty about the contents of mbs during the period of financial turmoil , and the legal challenges to the securitization process that escalated when the foreclosure volume increased .

the sec describes money market funds ( mmfs ) as "a type of mutual fund that is required by law to invest in low - risk securities. .

mmfs raise their funds by selling shares , which are technically not deposits and are not insured .

mmfs hold short - term debt in the form of government securities , certificates of deposit , commercial paper of highly rated companies , or other low - risk and highly liquid securities .

mmfs can be structured to allow investors to redeem their shares ( open ended mmf ) , or not ( closed end ) .

the difference between the value of an mmf's assets and its liabilities is called the net asset value , or nav .

since investors would like to receive more than a dollar for every dollar invested , mmfs attempt to keep their nav greater than $1.00 .

if the nav falls below $1.00 , the mmf has "broken the buck," and its investors are essentially receiving negative interest on their shares .

the mmf industry suffered a run after the failure of lehman brothers in september , 2008 .

recall that in figure 1 , an open end mmf has structurally similar financial intermediation as a depository bank .

lehman's bankruptcy filing meant that holders of its debt would likely receive less than full payment of the debt ( credit risk ) .

as a result , a prominent mmf ( the reserve fund ) that held lehman's debt announced that it had "broken the buck. .

the reserve fund's announcement , combined with more general financial turmoil , led investors to withdraw their shares from mmfs , which open end funds could not avoid .

people who had relied on mmfs to finance their activities , such as governments and issuers of commercial paper , lost their traditional source of funding .

policymakers undertook emergency measures to try to stabilize the mmfs following the run on the industry .

treasury announced an insurance plan for mmfs , backed by the exchange stabilization fund ( esf ) — a fund available to treasury to stabilize the dollar under the old bretton woods exchange rate system .

subsequently , congress enacted legislation to prohibit treasury from using the esf to stabilize mmfs in the future .

however , the extension of government assistance for one asset class during a crisis may create an expectation of assistance should a future crisis occur , perhaps encouraging excessive risk taking ( moral hazard ) .

mmfs continue to face the risk of runs .

structurally , the industry faces possible credit risk , maturity mismatch , liquidity problems , and other fundamental problems of financial intermediation .

prior to the financial crisis , the regulatory approach of the sec had been to treat mmfs as securities issuers .

although eligible assets of mmfs are limited , and the portfolios of mmfs are subject to diversity requirements , mmfs are not subject to periodic examinations in the way that banks are .

rather , mmfs are required to provide periodic disclosures like other firms funded through securities markets .

the experience of the crisis has led other financial regulators to encourage the sec to adopt a prudential regulatory approach , more similar to banking , than the traditional securities regulation for mmfs .

through the minutes of the fsoc , other regulators have formally expressed their desire for additional regulations to address the potential for runs .

the sec proposed several new rules for mmfs on june 5 , 2013 .

the formal comment period ended in september 2013 , but final rules had not been issued as of time of this report's publication .

the proposed rule contained two primary features designed to avoid runs in the mmf industry .

the first would require a floating net asset value ( nav ) for prime institutional money market funds .

the second would allow the use of liquidity fees and redemption gates in times of stress .

redemption gates include provisions that limit the ability of investors to fully withdraw their funds in a crisis , such as temporary fees or aggregate withdrawal limits .

the call for comment included discussion of allowing these as alternatives or to be used in combination .

in addition to these primary features , proposed rule also included additional diversification and disclosure measures that would apply under either alternative .

although researchers use the term shadow banking inconsistently , with important implications for their policy analysis , the concept always excludes luminated banking .

the term luminated banking describes debt funded by the insured deposits of firms with special banking charters .

nonbanks often facilitate shadow banking by funding debt through securities markets .

similarly , banks can be involved in shadow banking if they find short - term substitutes for insured deposits .

whether offered by nonbanks or by banks , the creation and funding of debt is often subject to several economic vulnerabilities linked to financial intermediation , such as vulnerabilities to runs or fire - sales .

securities markets and firms with banking charters are both regulated ; thus , much of what is described as shadow banking is subject to some federal regulation .

however , the type of regulation that applies to shadow banking varies .

banking regulation is typically prudential ( risk - based ) , but securities regulation typically is not .

securities regulation is typically not limited to firms with a special charter , but banking regulation typically is .

bank holding companies that participate in shadow banking are subject to prudential regulation , at least on a consolidated level .

the fsoc and the fsb have identified several components of shadow banking that may be of heightened concern .

the diversity of these practices and firms makes broad generalizations about policies to address shadow banking difficult .

in many cases , policy proposals attempt to apply bank - like regulation to nonbanks .

the dodd - frank act extends several prudential regulatory principles associated with banking regulation to nonbanks if they are designated as systemically important .

some believe that extension of bank - like regulation is inappropriate for some firms with different balance sheets ( such as insurance companies ) .

others believe that the dodd - frank act did not extend bank - like regulation enough because some intermediaries are too small to be systemically important , but the industry as a whole may be financially vulnerable ( such as mmfs ) .

