in november 2011 , president obama and leaders of the european union ( eu ) named a high level working group on jobs and growth to recommend steps to broaden transatlantic economic ties .

in its final report , issued in february 2013 , the working group called for a new bilateral agreement to govern transatlantic trade and investment .

such an agreement , the working group urged , should provide for "the promotion of more compatible approaches to current and future regulation and standard - setting and other means of reducing non - tariff barriers to trade. .

one month later , president obama notified congress that the united states would enter into negotiations with the eu to seek a free trade agreement , referred to as the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) .

the negotiations , the president wrote , would seek greater compatibility of u.s. and eu regulations and related standards development processes , with the objective of reducing costs associated with unnecessary regulatory differences and facilitating trade , inter alia by promoting transparency in the development and implementation of regulations and good regulatory practices , establishing mechanisms for future progress , and pursuing regulatory cooperation initiatives where appropriate .

the formal ttip negotiations began in july 2013 .

motor vehicle safety and emissions standards are areas where the united states and the eu could break new ground .

trade in vehicles and parts between the united states and the eu reached $57 billion in 2012 , and numerous companies manufacture on both sides of the atlantic .

the major u.s. and european motor vehicle manufacturer associations have called for ttip to provide for mutual recognition of existing technical standards and the creation of a u.s. - eu process for harmonization of future vehicle regulations .

such steps , an industry alliance has contended , would "increase trade , lower costs , create jobs and improve the international competitiveness of the industry" in both north america and europe .

the alliance estimates that current non - tariff barriers on vehicles are equivalent to a 26% tariff on vehicle imports .

it projects that elimination of tariffs and just 10% of non - tariff barriers could raise u.s. vehicle and parts exports to the eu by over 200% and eu parts and vehicle exports to the united states by 71% .

safety , fuel efficiency , and emissions standards differ between the two regions ( see table 1 ) , due to historical differences in producer and consumer preferences as well as the role of government in industry practices .

the united states and the eu have different standards even for an item as simple as a seat belt .

some of these differences may reflect past efforts to protect domestic vehicle industries against foreign competition , and others may result from different legal traditions or divergent views as to the best way of achieving goals such as cleaner air and reduced oil consumption .

past auto agreements have been effective in leading to a more globalized auto industry .

the 1965 motor vehicle agreement between the united states and canada and the 1994 north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) removed barriers to trade and cross - border trade in autos and established a more regional motor vehicle industry in the process .

the trans - pacific partnership , a separate negotiation involving the united states and 11 other pacific rim countries , could have a similar effect .

with respect to the auto industry , ttip represents another effort to extend these regional templates to encompass a greater share of trade and investment .

the eu and the united states are the second - and third - largest vehicle producers in the world ( see figure 1 ) , together accounting for nearly one - third of global auto production .

in 2012 , the eu 27 produced more than the united states — 16.2 million vehicles compared to 10.3 million .

sales in each region were about the same in 2012: 14.8 million vehicles sold in the united states and 14.3 million in the eu .

the remainder of eu production was exported , much of it to the u.s. market .

seventeen of the eu member states manufacture vehicles .

germany is by far the largest auto producer within the eu ( see figure 2 ) .

the five top countries — germany , spain , france , united kingdom and czech republic — manufacture more than 76% of all vehicles produced in the eu .

in the united states , vehicles are manufactured in 15 states .

unlike some consumer goods , such as computers and apparel , most vehicles are sold in the region where they are produced because of local consumer preferences and vehicle standards .

in 2012 , imports constituted about 20% of u.s. sales , and about 17% of sales in the eu .

in some cases , a vehicle that is entirely legal in one country may not be sold in another due to differing fuel efficiency , safety , and emissions standards , unless the manufacturer is willing to make major investments to bring the vehicle into compliance .

for example , ford motor company's econetic high - efficiency diesel engine , made in great britain , gets up to 71 miles per gallon ( mpg ) of fuel .

this engine is not sold in north america because it does not comply with u.s. and canadian emissions standards .

ford has determined that expanding its mexican engine plant to make a redesigned version of the econetic for north america would cost $350 million , and it does not believe consumer demand justifies the expenditure .

increasingly , however , auto manufacturers and their parts suppliers have sought to organize their production on a global basis .

the german automaker bmw , as an example , produces sport utility vehicles for markets worldwide from a plant in south carolina .

greater commonality in regulation would make it easier for automakers and parts makers to coordinate production across major markets .

this is consistent with individual companies' efforts to reduce costs with new design and production plans , such as the following: reducing platforms .

automakers are developing global vehicle platforms that will reduce the number of models sold around the world , while consolidating suppliers and cutting costs .

for example , the new jeep cherokee and dodge dart are based on fiat's compact wide platform .

the ford focus was developed in europe but is built with similar components in the united states , china , germany , russia , and thailand and sold in 130 countries .

joining forces to meet tightening world emission standards .

many countries , including the united states , have adopted new standards that will be costly for manufacturers to meet .

automakers have responded by creating partnerships to develop more powerful batteries , multispeed transmissions , techniques to improve engine efficiency , and other technological advances .

along these lines , bmw and toyota have agreed to jointly develop fuel cell technology .

growing u.s. interest in diesel - powered vehicles .

about half of all the passenger cars sold in europe have diesel engines , which are more efficient than gasoline engines and emit a lower level of some greenhouse gases .

many automakers believe that offering diesels ( as well as higher - performing gasoline , electric , and hybrid vehicles ) will be necessary to meet higher u.s. fuel efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions standards currently projected between now and 2025 .

having similar standards for diesel engines in the two regions could reduce design and manufacturing costs .

the processes by which the united states and the eu establish vehicle safety , fuel efficiency , and emission standards have evolved in different ways .

in the united states , private standards and state regulation prevailed until the 1960s and 1970s , when federal legislation was passed .

since then , congress has delegated vehicle regulation to federal agencies , occasionally providing specific direction through legislation .

in europe , a system of governmental control over autos was more prevalent , first in each country and later through the eu .

eu directives passed by the european parliament have the force of regulations , thereby vesting the legislators with a more direct role in the regulatory process than is the case in the united states .

european , u.s. and japanese auto industry groups sought common regulatory ground in 1996 , when they proposed that the united states , the eu , japan , and unece harmonize regulation of five vehicle components , including windshield wipers , defoggers , and seat belt assemblies .

they believed that these five components were functionally equivalent , although each was slightly different .

the regulatory bodies did not agree to any changes , however , because the data - driven review process made it difficult to prove functional equivalency of even a standard component such as a seat belt .

this experience suggested that obtaining functional equivalency determinations from regulatory agencies might be difficult .

an alternative approach was developed in the 1998 un agreement on global technical regulations , which created a global registry of processes and common technical standards .

this initiative , resulting in the creation of the world forum for harmonization of vehicle regulations , has resulted in agreement on only 13 global technical regulations to date .

simultaneously , there has been a transatlantic dialogue on autos since the mid - 1990s through the u.s. - eu high - level regulatory cooperation forum .

in 1995 , president clinton signed an action plan which sought to move the united states and europe toward regulatory conformity and to encourage collaborative testing and certification .

the 1996 transatlantic automotive industry conference on international regulatory harmonization produced a report on the auto sector , including ten principles to guide steps toward convergence .

nhtsa sent a report to congress in april 1997 discussing potential harmonization of u.s. and european side impact standards .

a similar bilateral regulatory initiative has been under way since 2011 with canada .

an eu initiative , the competitive automotive regulatory system for the 21s century , or cars 21 , has also explored harmonization issues .

a 2012 cars 21 report recommended exploration of ways to bring about "stronger internationalisation of the regulatory environment" related to autos .

in 2006 , cars 21 called for gradually replacing some eu laws with un regulations , and more than 40 eu directives have been replaced with corresponding un regulations since that time .

there are different ways in which the united states and the eu could address convergence of automotive regulations under ttip .

these include the following: h armonization of rules .

harmonization need not mean having identical rules in both regions .

from the viewpoint of auto manufacturers , it means minimizing unnecessary differences in regulations so that a "single vehicle standard can be built to satisfy all requirements. .

c omprehensive mutual recognition .

this approach would permit automakers to sell vehicles in either market if they meet either a u.s. standard or a standard accepted in the eu .

a car certified as compliant with u.s. safety , emission , and fuel efficiency standards would be accepted as compliant in the eu , and vice versa .

this approach is how the eu certification process works .

s elective mutual recognition .

this approach would identify certain major standards for which ttip could provide mutual recognition , rather than providing mutual recognition of all standards .

u.s. and european automakers have identified occupant crash protection , side impact protection , child restraint systems , and some emissions standards as priorities for selective mutual recognition .

f orward - looking rules .

a fourth option would be to forge an agreement on emerging regulations , such as those dealing with electric and fuel cell vehicles , rather than focusing on existing regulations .

under this approach , the united states and the eu would commit to jointly develop standards covering new issues or technologies .

the pending free trade agreement between the eu and canada may influence the direction of ttip .

the full text of the agreement has not been released , but according to an eu statement , "canada will recognise a list of eu car standards and will examine the recognition of further standards .

this will make it much easier to export cars to canada. .

the agreement is also said to allow canadian vehicles to be certified in canada for the eu market .

convergence of vehicle standards has potential drawbacks .

one aspect pertains to the lack of speed with which governmental agencies — whether in the united states or europe — can address new technologies and vehicle innovations .

the rule - making process is already lengthy , and the need for international coordination could make it even longer .

this raises the prospect that technologies that could reduce accidents — such as new types of headlamps that can illuminate the road better without blinding oncoming drivers — may be delayed in reaching the market .

additionally , the eu acknowledges that if vehicle standards become international , there could be less room for legislative scrutiny and for involvement by regional and national interest groups .

u.s. consumer advocacy groups have raised similar concerns , writing u.s. and eu leaders in july 2013 that ttip "must not limit the united states or the eu ( or its member states ) from adopting and enforcing standards that provide higher levels of consumer , worker , and environmental protection. .

congress could play an important role if a ttip agreement contains significant provisions related to auto safety , emissions , and fuel economy regulations .

congress established the u.s. government agencies whose regulations are the focus of the negotiations on automobile standards , and it has retained a strong oversight interest in vehicle safety and emissions .

if the ttip effort to obtain mutual recognition or harmonization affects agencies' authority or changes the ways in which automotive regulations are developed and implemented , congress may well be asked to modify the underlying statutes that govern motor vehicle safety , emissions , and fuel efficiency .

emission standards u.s .

vehicle emission standards and implementation the clean air act amendments ( caaa ) of 1990 ( p.l .

101-549 ) established standards to limit tailpipe emissions from new motor vehicles effective in 1994 .

these tier 1 standards applied to all new light - duty vehicles , such as passenger cars , light - duty trucks , sport utility vehicles ( suvs ) , minivans , and pick - up trucks , and covered the four major pollutants ( co , no x , pm , and hc [subdivided as total hydrocarbons ( thc ) and non - methane hydrocarbons ( nmhc ) ] ) .

separate sets of standards were defined for each vehicle category , with more relaxed limits for heavier vehicles .

the caaa also required epa to study the need for more stringent "tier 2" emission standards .

subsequently , epa promulgated "tier 2" standards on february 10 , 2000 .

the tier 2 regulations introduced more stringent numerical emission limits and a number of additional changes that tightened the standards for larger vehicles .

under the tier 2 regulations , the same emission standards apply to all vehicle weight categories .

further , the same emission limits apply to all vehicles regardless of the fuel they use .

since light - duty emission standards are expressed in grams of pollutants per mile , vehicles with large engines ( such light trucks or suvs ) were required to use more advanced emission control technologies than vehicles with smaller engines .

to provide flexibility to vehicle manufacturers , the tier 2 emission standards were structured into eight permanent and three temporary certification levels of different stringency , called "certification bins. .

manufacturers had a choice to certify particular vehicles to any of the available bins , but were required to meet a fleet - average requirement for no x emissions in any given model year .

u.s. emissions standards are shown in table a - 1 .

 ( note that tables a - 1 and a - 2 are not strictly comparable because u.s. standards are based on grams per mile and eu standards are based on grams per kilometer .

eu vehicle emission standards and implementation in june 1991 , the council of ministers of the european council adopted the consolidated emissions directive ( commonly referred to as "euro 1" ) under which exhaust emission standards for all passenger cars , including diesels , were certified .

the council of ministers has since adopted several stricter revisions to the euro 1 standards ; and , in september of 2014 , euro 6 standards will be introduced .

eu emission limits for each "euro" stage are summarized in table a - 2 .

fuel economy and greenhouse gas standards u.s. fuel economy and ghg standards and implementation the 2012 cafe and ghg vehicle standards call for combined passenger car and light truck greenhouse gas emissions of no more than 163 grams per mile by 2025 .

this translates into a 54.5 mile - per - gallon equivalent .

the ghg standards are based on co 2 emissions - footprint curves , where each vehicle has a different co 2 emissions compliance target depending on its "footprint" value , related to the size of the vehicle — an approach first introduced in the reformed cafe ( 2008-2011 ) standards for light trucks .

table a - 3 shows the projected fleet - wide co 2 emission and fuel economy requirements .

the epa co 2 - equivalent fuel economy figures are different from the cafe figures because the epa allows additional co 2 credits for air conditioning improvements and other flexibilities .

in addition to the fleet - average co 2 emission targets , the rule also includes emission caps for tailpipe nitrous oxide and methane emissions ( n 2 o: 0.010 g / mile and ch 4 : 0.030 g / mile ) .

the regulation also includes a system of averaging , banking , and trading ( abt ) of credits , based on a manufacturer's fleet average co 2 performance .

credit trading is allowed among all vehicles a manufacturer produces , both cars and light trucks , as well as between companies .

eu ghg standards and implementation the eu does not issue fuel economy standards similar to the u.s. cafe standards .

as shown in table a - 4 , eu fleet - average co 2 emission targets as required by eu regulation ( ec ) no 443 / 2009 are 130 g / km to be reached by 2015 and a long - term target of 95 g / km to be reached by 2020 .

