food fraud , or the act of defrauding buyers of food and food ingredients for economic gain — whether they be consumers or food manufacturers , retailers , and importers — has vexed the food industry throughout history .

some of the earliest reported cases of food fraud , dating back thousands of years , involved olive oil , wine , spices , and tea .

these same products continue to be associated with fraud , along with a range of other products .

overall , foods and food ingredients commonly associated with food fraud include olive oil , fish , honey , milk and dairy products , meat products , grain - based foods , fruit juices , wine and alcoholic beverages , organic foods , spices , coffee , and tea , and some highly processed foods .

it is not known conclusively how widespread food fraud is in the united states or worldwide .

in part , this is because those who commit fraud do not intend to cause physical harm and want to avoid detection .

most incidents go undetected since they usually do not result in a food safety risk and consumers often do not notice a quality problem .

moreover , as the motivation to commit fraud is illicit monetary gain , the type of food that might be or become adulterated is a secondary consideration ( i.e. , it could be any type of food or food ingredient ) ; rather , it is the opportunity or feasibility of committing fraud that generally triggers the fraud .

although the vast majority of food fraud incidents do not pose a public health risk , there have been fraud cases that have resulted in actual or potential public health risks .

perhaps the most widely cited , high - profile cases have involved the addition of melamine to high - protein feed and milk - based products to artificially inflate protein values in products that may have been diluted .

for example , in 2007 , evidence emerged that adulterated pet food ingredients from china had caused the deaths of a large number of dogs and cats in the united states .

this was followed by reports that melamine - contaminated baby formula had sickened an estimated 300,000 chinese children , killing a reported 6 infants .

evidence now suggests that safety risks associated with melamine - tainted feed date back to 2003 , and that melamine was first reported to be added to artificially increase protein content in feed as far back as 1982 .

reports also indicate fish and seafood fraud may be widespread in some markets , consisting mostly of the mislabeling or substitution of a higher - valued species with something different from and inferior to the expected species , possibly with a fish species which could be associated with some types of food poisoning or exposure to certain allergens .

similarly , substitution of olive oil with other types of seed , legume , or nut oils could have unintended consequences , if consumed by those with certain food allergies .

some cases might not initially appear to involve intentional adulteration , except on closer examination .

charges of fraud were part of the federal criminal indictment charging former officials of the peanut corporation of america with numerous offenses in connection with the salmonella outbreak in 2009 — which killed 9 people and sickened 700 — since company officials were found to have sold and distributed product known to be contaminated .

that case resulted in one of the largest product recalls in u.s. history , including 3,912 products that contain peanut butter and peanut paste ingredients , such as cookies , crackers , cereal , candy , ice cream , pet treats , and other foods , which were manufactured by more than 200 companies .

risks from other types of fraudulent foods are not as well - documented and may be less immediate or may never be known .

generally , only those who have knowledge of the fraud are those who commit the fraud .

in some cases , independent tests might uncover fraud .

for example , fda testing upon import has documented the presence of unapproved chemicals in honey , which have triggered import alerts .

reports indicate that honey from china may contain certain unapproved antibiotics or other agricultural chemicals .

reports also indicate that some fruit juices may be made from or diluted with juice from rotten fruit and may contain toxic mold .

in recent years , fraud involving the addition of certain food processing aids ( known as "clouding agents" ) has raised concern given the potential public health risks and reportedly increased use in certain highly processed foods .

some fraud cases might only be uncovered following an investigation in the wake of a public health event , such as when pet food adulterated with melamine caused the deaths of dogs and cats in the united states .

some fraud cases , however , might never be discovered even though they could contribute to chronic long - term health consequences .

other food fraud concerns might not result in a public health or food safety crisis , but instead deprive the food buyer of the product they think they are getting .

most food fraud cases involve the substitution of a high - value product with a less expensive or lower quality alternative .

such cases include cheaper products mislabeled as extra virgin olive oil from italy , wild alaskan salmon , caviar , and pomegranate juice or juices from other "super" fruit .

in another example , in europe in early 2013 , it was reported that products labeled as containing beef were found to actually contain 80% - 100% horsemeat , which the meat supplier had knowingly failed to report to local authorities .

although the horsemeat incident ultimately did not result in public health consequences , initial concerns about potential health risks due to , for example , phenylbutazone resulted in a substantial expenditure of public resources over the course of the investigation .

such cases also erode consumer confidence and may cause other concerns for a variety of societal or cultural reasons .

the grocery manufacturers association ( gma ) estimates that fraud may cost the global food industry between $10 billion and $15 billion per year , affecting approximately 10% of all commercially sold food products .

however , most researchers acknowledge that the full scale of food fraud "may be unknown or even possibly unknowable" even though the number of documented incidents is "most likely a fraction of the true number of incidents , since the goal of adulteration for economic gain is not to be detected. .

compared to the trillions of dollars spent on food and food ingredients globally each year , however , "the prevalence of food fraud is ultimately very low. .

fraud resulting in a food safety or public health risk event , however , could have significant financial or public relations consequences for a food industry or company .

gma estimates that fraud costs food businesses in terms of lost sales , estimated between 2% and 15% of annual revenues , as well as possible bankruptcies if adverse public health consequences occur .

the text box on the next page describes some of the types of foods and food ingredients associated with fraud based on available research and information .

addressing food fraud concerns has become exceedingly complicated by rising u.s. imports and increased globalization of the world's food and agricultural supplies .

increasingly , multiple product ingredients and inputs are sourced from a range of countries , both in terms of individually sourced products and ingredients between individual food companies / importers as well as in terms of internally sourced products from foreign - owned entities within a larger multinational company ( such as global sourcing between parent and subsidiary ) .

it is difficult to detect and trace not only the source of unintentional contamination and related food safety concerns , but it is often more difficult to detect and trace - back instances of intentional product fraud , especially in highly processed foods with multiple ingredients and inputs from multiple suppliers .

this report provides an overview of issues pertaining to food fraud and "economically motivated adulteration" or ema , a category within food fraud .

first , the report provides general background information on food fraud and ema , including how it is defined and the types of fraud , as well as how food fraud fits into the broader policy realm of food safety , food defense , and food quality .

second , the report provides available information about foods and ingredients with reported cases of fraud from two databases: ( 1 ) the united states pharmacopeial convention ( usp ) food fraud database and ( 2 ) the national center for food protection and defense ( ncfpd ) ema incident database .

finally , the report describes previous and ongoing federal and congressional actions to address food fraud .

in the united states , no single federal agency and no single u.s. law or statute directly addresses food fraud or "economically motivated adulteration" of food and food ingredients .

instead , food fraud and intentional adulteration of food is broadly addressed through food safety authorities and border protection and import authorities and activities .

accordingly , fda and usda are the principle federal agencies that are working to protect the food supply from food safety risks , including both unintentionally and intentionally introduced contamination , in conjunction with enforcement of fda and usda laws by the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) as part of its border inspections .

fda and usda are the leading food safety regulatory authorities .

fda , an agency of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for ensuring the safety of all domestic and imported food products ( except for most meats and poultry ) .

usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) regulates most meat and poultry and some egg products .

however , the boundaries between the two agencies' jurisdictions are complex and often at odds with commonplace distinctions among food groups .

the laws that grant these and other federal agencies authority over foods and food ingredients also provide these agencies with the authority to govern the labeling of these products , which might also act as a further deterrent to food fraud in some cases .

other federal agencies also provide product quality standards and grading , including fda , usda's agricultural marketing service ( ams ) , and the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) , which is part of the u.s. department of commerce's national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .

state and local food safety authorities assist the federal agencies with inspection , outbreak response , and other food safety functions , among other functions .

import security measures by fda and usda are conducted in conjunction with border inspections by the customs and border protection ( cbp ) , which is part of dhs .

other agencies also have played a role in food fraud prevention .

the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) has actively pursued a number of food fraud cases in the u.s. courts involving a range of products and resulting in criminal convictions in some cases .

in the high - profile case involving the peanut corporation of america , company executives were indicted in early 2013 with federal criminal charges that included fraud , conspiracy , and the introduction of adulterated food into interstate commerce with the intent to defraud or mislead .

usda's national organic program ( nop ) has taken numerous enforcement actions against companies involving false labeling claims on organic foods , and a number of advocacy groups have filed lawsuits involving concerns about the validity of organic claims .

noaa also has conducted federal investigations and taken enforcement actions involving seafood labeling and misbranding .

the text box below provides a comparison of fda and usda responsibilities for food safety and regulations , and responsibilities of other federal agencies .

the federal government also has helped fund some of the ongoing research .

these efforts were developed with the support of funding from dhs , fda , and usda .

in addition , fda is developing a number of tools and guidance materials for the food industry to address intentional adulteration as part of its food defense strategy .

the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) has conducted a series of investigations into food fraud cases , including fruit juice and seafood .

gao's most recent report addressed a wider range of fraudulent foods and issued more broad - based recommendations .

gao's recommendations involving food fraud addressed the need for improved cross - agency communication and coordination and enhanced information sharing and transparency .

other recommendations called for the creation of an information clearinghouse and the need for increased oversight and inspections , and increased risk - based testing , in some cases .

a 2013 report by the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) cited research indicating that current standards for extra virgin olive oil are widely unenforced and result in a wide range of olive oil qualities to be labeled as "extra virgin" oil .

the study further concluded that this may lead to adulterated and mislabeled product , which could further weaken the competitiveness of u.s. - produced olive oil in the domestic market .

in europe , in the wake of the horsemeat scandal , some countries have debated the need for tougher laws to protect consumers against food fraud .

the european parliament released its draft report regarding food fraud in october 2013 , calling for increased enforcement and oversight regarding fraud prevention through the food supply chain .

congress has introduced a number of bills intended to address concerns about food fraud , mostly with respect to concerns about a particular food or food ingredient , but has not introduced legislation that would specifically address fraud in a comprehensive manner .

most previous legislation in the past few years has tried to address fish and seafood fraud mostly through improved inter - agency cooperation and coordination .

these include h.r .

1012 / s. 520 ( markey / begich ) in the 113 th congress , s. 50 ( inouye ) in the 112 th congress , and s. 3928 ( inouye ) in the 111 th congress .

increased inspections of foreign seafood facilities were proposed in s. 2934 ( vitter ) in the 111 th congress .

other previously introduced legislation would address fraudulent maple syrup ( for example , h.r .

3363 in the 112 th congress ) .

among other legislation introduced in the 113 th congress is h.r .

2400 ( capps ) , which seeks to improve recordkeeping and authorize investigations and enforcement actions for violations of the organic products standards .

previous congressional efforts have also highlighted concerns about fraudulently labeled "organic" products that might undermine the usda - certified organic food industry .

in addition , both the house - passed and senate - passed versions of the 2013 farm bill ( h.r .

2642 / s. 954 ) include a provision to require usda to submit a report to fda that describes an appropriate federal standard for the identity of honey .

this provision relates to previous congressional effort to push fda to create "pure honey" standards that would allow federal border agents to better combat adulteration , misbranding , and fraudulent mislabeling of honey .

a previous version of the house farm bill had also contained a provision that would establish tighter import controls on olive oil imports to enforce quality standards under the agricultural adjustment act ( 7 u.s.c .

§608e - 1[a] ) .

this provision was removed by amendment during floor debate ( h.amdt .

213 ) .

