this report examines legislative efforts in congress to delay the gradual phase - out of subsidized flood insurance premiums , which is required under sections 100205 and 100207 of p.l .

112-141 , the biggert - waters flood insurance reform and modernization act of 2012 .

this new law extended the authorization for the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) for five years , through september 30 , 2017 , while requiring significant program reforms affecting flood insurance , flood hazard mapping , and floodplains management .

the law also produced widespread policy concerns about affordability and , more broadly , the feasibility of balancing program solvency concerns against the marketability of actuarial full - risk rates policies that now consider the elevation or height of the structure .

after a brief discussion of the circumstances surrounding the nation's increasing exposure to flood risk that led to changes in the nfip's premium rate structure , the report examines the nfip's rate - making process , including the elevation rating components required to rate policies , and summarizes key relevant rate structure reform and solvency provisions required by the biggert - waters act .

the report focuses specifically on key relevant differences between sections 100205 and 100207 of the biggert - waters act that affect the transition of subsidized rates for certain properties to risk premium rates , more commonly known as full - risk or actuarial rates .

it also examines the homeowner flood insurance affordability act of 2014 ( s. 1926 ) that passed the senate on january 31 , 2014 , h.r .

3370 ( the legislative substitute bill ) , and section 572 of the fy2014 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

113-76 ) that president barack obama signed into law on january 17 , 2014 .

in 1968 , after several decades of continuous effort to control flood losses with flood control infrastructure ( primarily levees ) , congress enacted the national flood insurance act of 1968 to establish a federal program to identify and communicate flood hazards and risks and to offer flood insurance to property owners and businesses in communities that agree to adopt flood mitigation measures ( i.e. , land use planning and construction standards ) .

currently , the nfip has about 5.6 million policies providing over $1.2 trillion in coverage in almost 22,000 communities in 56 states and jurisdictions that participate in the program .

the program collects about $3.5 billion in annual premium revenue .

according to fema , the program saves the nation an estimated $1.6 billion annually in flood losses avoided because of the nfip's building and floodplain management regulations .

flood insurance premium rates were initially set "based on consideration of the risk involved and accepted actuarial principles. .

in 1973 , congress amended the 1968 act to: ( 1 ) authorize fema to set rates at less than full - risk rates , which fema refers to as subsidized rates , and ( 2 ) prohibit fema from offering subsidized rates to properties that were constructed or substantially improved after december 31 , 1974 , or after the date upon which fema published the first flood insurance rate map ( firm ) for the community , whichever was later .

therefore , by statute , premium rates charged on pre - firm structures are explicitly lower than what would be expected to cover expected costs .

the availability of subsidized flood insurance was intended to allow floodplain residents to contribute in some measure to pre - funding their recovery from a flood disaster instead of relying solely on federal disaster assistance .

in essence , insurance could distribute the financial burden among those protected by flood insurance and the public .

however , the statute's provision creates an inability to collect the full risk - based premiums on about 1.1 million of the program's 5.6 million policies and has , arguably , eroded the program's long - term ability to pay future claims made by all policyholders .

the actuarial shortfall from charging less than full - risk ( or actuarial premiums ) has drawn greater scrutiny as a result of ( 1 ) the catastrophic flood events from 2005 through 2012 , ( 2 ) uncertainty surrounding future flood risk , especially in coastal hazard areas , and ( 3 ) the budgetary consequences of frequent ad - hoc emergency supplemental appropriations for disaster relief on the deficit and the program's solvency .

prior to hurricane katrina in 2005 , the nfip had been able to cover its cost , borrowing relatively small amounts from the u.s. treasury to pay claims , and then repaying the loans with interests .

however , in the wake of the unexpected need for significant intergovernmental borrowing from the u.s. treasury to pay claims , and the recognition among policymakers of the nation's increasing vulnerability to hurricane - induced catastrophic flood events in coastal hazard areas , congress passed legislation in 2012 to address the program's long - term solvency .

the nfip's risk assessment and pricing model is based on a hydrologic model for estimating the expected average annual flood damage and insurance rate originally developed in the 1960s by the u.s. army corp of engineers .

the rating methodology is applied on a structure - by - structure basis within flood maps that link different risk categories and associated insurance risk zones to floodplain management regulations , particularly in high - risk areas where there is at least a 1% annual chance of flooding — the so - called "base flood. .

fema uses three primary key characteristics to classify properties based on flood risks .

structures are categorized by ( 1 ) specific risk zone , ( 2 ) the elevation of the structure relative to the base flood elevation ( bfe ) , and ( 3 ) occupancy type ( eg , single family , 2-4 family , other residential , non - residential and mobile / manufactured homes ) , along with other specific determinants of risk .

the flood risk zones — based on return periods that cover a wide range of flooding events — are modeled using national topographical maps , hydrological data , digital terrain ( elevation ) models , extreme flood scenarios , and flood vulnerability data , including flood hazard data and historical flood loss data .

owners of property with a mortgage from a federally regulated lender and living in a special flood hazard area ( sfha ) — that is , a high - risk zone — are subject to a mandatory purchase requirement .

flood insurance is optional for residents living in low - risk , non - sfhas .

residents outside of sfhas typically voluntarily purchase a low - cost preferred risk policy ( prp ) .

table 1 shows flood - risk zones that are depicted on firms .

fema is responsible for undertaking flood insurance studies ( fiss ) nationwide to identify areas within the united states having special flood , mudslide , and flood - related erosion hazards ; assess the flood risk ; and designate insurance zones .

fema consults with local officials to determine bfes throughout the community .

communities are required to submit pertinent data concerning flood hazards , flooding experience , mitigation plans to avoid potential flood hazards , and estimates of historical and prospective economic impacts on the community .

as mentioned previously , fema's rate - setting process has allowed the agency to set rates below the full cost for some structures built before the community's initial firm .

recognizing the increasing frequency and severity of hurricane - induced coastal flooding , and the nfip's increasing debt owed to the u.s. treasury , which now stand at about $24 billion , and congress approved changes under biggert - waters to make flood rates more accurately reflect the true risk of flooding .

according to fema , approximately 19% ( or 1,075,248 ) of the nfip's 5.6 million total policyholders receive subsidized premium rates , as of december 31 , 2012. about 5% of all nfip policies ( 252,851 policies ) — that is , non - primary residences , businesses , and severe repetitive loss properties — will see immediate rate increases under the biggert - waters law .

10% of all policies cover subsidized primary residences ( 578,312 ) , which will remain subsidized unless or until sold to new owners or the policy lapses .

4% of the total nfip policies include subsidized condominiums and non - condo multifamily structures ( 244,085 ) that will keep their subsidies until fema develops guidance for their removal .

the remaining 4,480,669 policyholders are post - firm properties subject to actuarial rates .

the effects of charging full - risk ( actuarial ) rates for pre - firm properties are that owners of these properties must , for the first time , obtain elevation certificates ( ecs ) that show the elevation ( height ) of the lowest floor of a building relative to the community's base ( 1-percent - annual - chance ) flood .

when the elevation level becomes a rating factor for pre - firm structures , the resulting full - risk rates could become unaffordable for many property owners .

table 2 and table a - 1 provide a rough illustrative comparison of premium rates before and after implementation of section 100205 of biggert - waters .

for example , table a - 1 , in appendix a , shows actuarial full - risk rates based on flood risk zones that would apply when the elevation of the structure is a rating factor in determining the rates to be charged .

in the aftermath of biggert - waters reforms and fema's adoption of "elevation rating" of pre - firm structures , owners of certain properties that , heretofore , did not have to consider the elevation of the structure in the insurance pricing process , now face relatively large rate increases .

although the new elevation - rating requirement is program - wide , the policy implications of the affordability challenges are particularly acute in urbanized coastal communities along the gulf of mexico and atlantic coasts facing increasing exposure to coastal flood hazards , such as sea level rise , storm surge , and coastal flood inundation .

the response to the implementation of sections 100205 and 100207 of the biggert - waters act was swift .

some members of congress introduced legislation , principle among them h.r .

3370 and s. 1846 , as introduced , the homeowners flood insurance affordability act , that would delay the gradual phase - out of subsidized flood insurance premiums and grandfathered policies .

the biggert - waters act led to increased debate about affordability and , more broadly , the feasibility of balancing program solvency concerns against the marketability of actuarial full - risk rates policies that now consider the elevation or height of the structure .

public debate on sharply higher rates required after the removal of premium subsidies has resulted in issues of affordability for residents in high - risk flood zones .

this affordability issue has raised congressional concerns about the cost effectiveness of balancing affordability against the need to ensure the nfip's long - term fiscal solvency .

policy makers might also consider innovative approaches to minimize future flood damages .

for example , congress might examine ways to strengthen fema's hazard mitigation assistance ( hma ) programs that provide funds for projects that reduce the risk to individuals and property from natural hazards .

under the fema hma program , local community officials develop projects that reduce flood damage and submit grant applications to the states — and eventually fema for funding .

debate on h.r .

3370 and other measures , which would delay the removal of pre - firm premium subsidies and grandfathered rates , may lead congress to consider ways to balance fema's use of elevation rating for pre - firm and grandfathered rated properties against the program's statutory mandate for coverage to be reasonably priced and widely available .

resolving the actuarial , financial , and social tensions surrounding the affordability of flood insurance coverage would arguably require a three - pronged approach to policy analysis .

the first policy analysis approach is to determine the scope of the affordability problem associated with the transition toward full - risk rates .

in other words , could existing and potential policyholders afford the higher actuarial rates ? .

but how do policy makers determine what is affordable and at what level of income ? .

to address these policy questions , policy makers might choose to consider best practices in quantifying and mapping flood risks , including risk that accounts for future conditions , where to assign the risk ( using "elevation rating" methods ) , and what behavior should be changed to reduce future flood losses and , thereby , strengthen the nfip's long - term financial solvency .

the second policy analysis approach to addressing the affordability issue could be to find ways to reconcile the nfip's long - standing ratemaking procedures that distinguished between the full - risk rated actuarial premiums paid and the subsidy premium amounts that will be eliminated to address the long - term solvency of the nfip .

given the expected increases in premium rates associated with pre - firm structures when elevation is used in the calculation , it is questionable whether means - tested vouchers designed to address the affordability concerns of low - to moderate - income households might be sufficient to make the insurance policies marketable .

traditional principles of insurance suggest that for an insurance market to exist the policy must be marketable to policyholders — that is , people who want to purchase the coverage and have the financial means to do so .

the third policy analysis approach could be to explore alternative , innovative risk - financing options and ratemaking approaches with the aim of encouraging greater spatial and temporal ( over time ) spread of risk without the requirement to borrow from the u.s. treasury .

appendix a. nfip october 1 , 2013 rate table: zone ae , single family residential dwelling , non - elevated with no basement or crawl space appendix b. side - by - side of h.r .

3370 and s. 192 .

