in the early morning of friday , november 8 , 2013 , typhoon haiyan ( known in the philippines as yolanda ) , one of the strongest typhoons to strike land on record , slammed into the central visayas region .

over a 16 hour period , the super typhoon or cyclone , with a force equivalent to a category 5 hurricane and clouds that covered two - thirds of the country , directly swept through six philippine provinces and affected over 10% of the nation's population of 105 million people .

haiyan's estimated wind speeds were 195 mph at its peak and 155 mph as it weakened and moved west , with wind gusts of up to 235 mph .

several hundred thousand people reportedly had fled their homes in advance of haiyan's arrival .

many of those displaced were moved to evacuation centers .

 ( see figure 1 and figure 2 . ) .

the speed of the storm as well as advance warning prevented greater flooding and may have saved many lives .

however , in some of the hardest hit areas , particularly in coastal communities in eastern and western leyte province and the southern tip of eastern samar , there appears to have been little defense against haiyan's wrath .

between two - thirds and 90% of structures were heavily damaged or destroyed , including medical facilities .

downed trees and other debris blocked roads .

airports , vital links to the rest of the archipelagic country , were damaged .

furthermore , decentralized government authority , a shortage of available government workers , looting , and heavy rains delayed some relief efforts .

the typhoon was the deadliest natural disaster ever recorded in the philippines .

within a few days of the typhoon , the philippine government reported that an estimated 11.5 million people had been affected by the storm , with more than 540,000 displaced ( of which roughly 380,000 were staying in 1,215 evacuation centers and 162,000 outside the centers ) .

the government also reported that 792,000 people were evacuated in advance of the disaster .

the city of tacloban ( population 220,000 ) , capital of leyte province , was one of the hardest hit places and the scene of the most concentrated destruction and death .

thousands of tacloban residents reportedly drowned in a "two - story - high" storm surge , including people seeking safety in a sports stadium that served as a shelter .

many others were killed by flying debris .

 ( see figure 3 , figure 4 , and figure 5 . ) .

the estimated number of dead and missing is often fluid and subject to change in the days , weeks , and months following a natural disaster , particularly one on the scale of typhoon haiyan ( yolanda ) .

two and a half months after the typhoon struck , based on figures provided by the philippine government , the u.n. office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( ocha ) reported that 14.1 million people had been affected , with more than 4.1 million displaced ( as of mid - january 2014 , 26,000 were staying in evacuation centers ) .

estimates of the number killed had risen to 6,201 with more than 1,785 missing .

the number of injured was unknown .

in addition , assessments revealed that nearly 5.6 million people required food assistance and an estimated 1.1 million houses had been damaged or destroyed .

all numbers remain subject to revision .

steady population increases in disaster - prone areas , combined with a geography consisting of islands and poor infrastructure , make the philippines vulnerable to humanitarian crises .

an average of 20 major storms batter the country each year .

in 2012 , typhoon bopha ( pablo ) struck the southern island of mindanao , leaving nearly 2,000 people dead or missing .

on the island of bohol , a 7.1 magnitude earthquake in october 2013 displaced 350,000 people , many of whom resisted going to shelters as haiyan approached , fearing that they might collapse in an aftershock .

until haiyan , the country's most destructive typhoon was tropical storm thelma ( uring ) of 1991 , which killed over 5,000 people in the visayas region .

in general , experts divide relief operations into several phases: search and rescue ; treatment and survival ; relocation and rehabilitation ; early recovery ; and long - term reconstruction .

as with any significant natural disaster that has many moving parts , it can take days and sometimes weeks to get a relief effort underway .

delays in transportation and congestion , lack of transportation infrastructure , bureaucratic problems , and lack of access all can cause bottlenecks at key points in the system .

while timing is critical to save lives , a relief effort of this size requires the coordination of assessments and appropriate responses with the government , local communities , and the international community to function efficiently .

the humanitarian relief operation , led by the philippine government , was initially hampered by a number of significant challenges , not unusual in a disaster of this magnitude , including a general lack of transportation , extremely limited communications systems , and damaged infrastructure .

although aid personnel and humanitarian supplies arrived within days in many of the affected areas , there were challenges getting food and relief commodities to some of the more remote locations .

despite the physical and logistical challenges facing the relief effort , regular relief activities reportedly reached most of the worst - stricken areas within two weeks of the storm .

in - depth assessments , necessary to obtain a better understanding of the situation on the ground , were conducted and are ongoing .

overall aid delivery to affected areas has been mobilized and sustained .

by mid - december , a little more than one month after the typhoon struck , immediate , life - saving efforts in general began to shift more towards early recovery programming and the development of plans for longer - term recovery and reconstruction .

however , affected areas were impacted by the heavy rains and strong winds associated with tropical depression agaton from january 17-20 , 2014 .

the impact of the storm exposed ongoing vulnerabilities of those affected by typhoon haiyan .

the philippine government plans and administers disaster relief primarily through the national disaster risk reduction and management center ( ndrrmc ) and the department of social welfare and development ( dswd ) .

other agencies involved in relief efforts include the armed forces of the philippines , the office of civil defense , and the department of health .

the ndrrmc oversees activities along with local disaster risk reduction management councils ( ldrrmcs ) , the dswd , dswd field offices , local governments , and other agencies .

the dswd and its field offices coordinate relief efforts on the ground .

the ndrrmc also collaborates with private sector disaster management networks .

the department of foreign affairs serves as the first point of contact for countries and international organizations wishing to provide assistance .

taking the lead on the disaster response , the philippine government formed a high - level national taskforce to ensure fast track transition from relief efforts to the rehabilitation and rebuilding of affected areas .

president aquino appointed senator ping lacson as presidential assistant for rehabilitation and recovery , a cabinet - level position .

in response to widespread fears about government corruption , the aquino administration launched a web portal that allows the public to track international disaster funds , the foreign aid transparency hub ( faith ) .

the philippine government launched a four - year reconstruction assistance in yolanda ( ray ) plan , on december 18 , 2013 .

requesting nearly $8.2 billion , ray focuses on rebuilding areas affected by the typhoon and developing resilience to natural disasters .

three main activities include $780 million for critical actions focused on shelter , education , agriculture , livelihoods , and protection ; $2 billion for short - term interventions through 2014 ; and $5.3 billion to address longer - term needs through 2017 .

the government has launched an effort to provide temporary housing — 469 "bunkhouses" have been built or planned so far — for people living in tent cities , particularly for those who formerly lived closed to the sea and are not allowed to return due to the risk of future storm surges .

each bunkhouse consists of 24 rooms ( one room per family ) and common kitchen and bath areas .

the homes lack electricity and running water .

international aid agencies have criticized them for not meeting international standards .

in january 2014 , the government announced that it would build 60,000 permanent housing units over a two - year period .

on november 9 , 2013 , u.s .

charge d'affaires brian l. goldbeck issued a disaster declaration , and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , through the office of foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) , immediately authorized funds to be released for the initial implementation of an emergency response program .

secretary of defense chuck hagel directed the u.s. pacific command to deploy rescue teams , dispatch helicopters for airlifts , and conduct other relief efforts .

as of january 31 , 2014 , the united states has provided over $87 million in humanitarian assistance through usaid , the department of state , and the department of defense ( dod ) , and $59 million in private sector contributions .

the united states and the republic of the philippines maintain close ties stemming from the u.s. colonial period ( 1898-1946 ) , a security alliance , extensive military cooperation , and common strategic and economic interests .

other pillars of the bilateral bond include shared democratic values and people - to - people contacts .

filipino americans number approximately 4 million , making them the second - largest asian american population , and comprise the largest foreign - born group in the u.s. armed forces .

an estimated 150,000 americans live in the philippines .

the philippines is a lower middle income country with an estimated population of 105 million — southeast asia's second largest .

once one of the wealthiest nations in southeast asia , it had been considered one of the region's economic laggards since the 1970s , due in large part to widespread corruption and poor governance .

however , in the past three years , the philippines had emerged as one of asia's strongest economies .

the 7.6% gdp growth rate it posted in 2010 was the country's fastest annual growth rate in 30 years .

the philippines' overall growth represents a strong resurgence for a country that had been a recipient of imf loans beginning in 1983 , due to fiscal crises in the 1980s and the economic vulnerabilities exposed by the asian financial crisis in the 1990s .

many philippine observers felt it was symbolically important that the country became an imf creditor in 2012 , contributing to multilateral loans to europe .

analysts note that the philippines , like many southeast asian nations , has benefitted from substantial investment inflows over the past three years , but this raises the risks that the trend could reverse , with private capital outflows possibly arising from the typhoon or for other reasons , such as the possible tightening of u.s. monetary policy in the coming years .

the areas damaged by haiyan are some of the poorest parts of the philippines , many of them dominated by agricultural and fishing industries , with some tourist destinations also severely harmed by the storm .

damage to other crops , such as sugar cane , coconut , and pineapple , is likely to have considerable impacts on livelihoods in the visayas region .

the philippine government has sought temporary trade arrangements with export markets such as the united states that would allow duty - free access for a limited number of products coming from affected areas .

according to some analysts , gdp growth is expected to continue to be strong despite the costs of typhoon haiyan , estimated at $13 billion .

the philippines' economy is forecast to expand by 6.7% in 2014 , slightly less than the estimated 6.9% growth of 2013 .

because the region affected by the storm is one of the country's least developed , impacts on the philippines' manufacturing base and overall gdp may not be deep .

economists also note that once reconstruction efforts begin , construction spending is likely to spur growth .

furthermore , the storm's drag on the economy may be only slightly greater than the effects of other natural disasters in recent years .

many observers have been surprised the economy has fared so well .

economic secretary arsenio balisikan reportedly called the performance "a remarkable turnaround. .

nonetheless , although the affected areas are not the country's largest sources of rice , the damage to rice crops in the region may reverse the philippines' trend in recent years towards rice self - sufficiency , and rice imports are likely to rise .

one important issue for the philippine economic recovery in the months and years ahead will be whether decentralized governance and corruption limits the efficiency of stimulus efforts .

the philippine central government's relative lack of control over decisions by regional governments has been one of the chief obstacles to philippine economic development for decades , many observers say .

while the world bank rated the philippines one of the world's 10 most improved business environments in an october 2013 survey , the strains arising from the typhoon's damage will be a test of whether the central government can effectively implement economic stimulus without running into the issues of corruption or poor local governance .

the impact of typhoon haiyan is of significant interest to the united states .

as the extent of the disaster becomes clearer , other issues may emerge for congress as it considers the ongoing u.s. response .

these fall into several possible categories: the initial humanitarian relief period: congressional interest and support is likely to focus on the humanitarian impact of the disaster , the u.s. and international response , and ongoing humanitarian developments .

ongoing oversight: congress may exercise its oversight authority in the ongoing provision of u.s. humanitarian assistance .

it may consider how usaid and dod responses to the haiyan disaster mesh with overall and existing u.s. foreign aid programs , contributions by other governments , and overall global humanitarian priorities .

longer - term assistance strategy: given the extensive damage to the central philippines' economy and infrastructure , congress may consider broad , long - term u.s. assistance strategies in the philippines , including policies to boost philippine exports from storm - affected areas .

lessons learned from the response to the philippines typhoon may influence future u.s. global disaster assistance strategies and the provision of food aid .

strategic questions: congress may consider how the u.s. disaster response may impact the u.s. - philippines relationship as well as regional geopolitical dynamics , and how existing and ongoing u.s. military activities in the philippines may be affected by dod's role in disaster relief .

appendix a. donor contributions and pledges to the philippines in response to typhoon haiyan ( yolanda ) appendix b. u.s. government humanitarian assistance to typhoon haiyan ( yolanda ) relief appendix c. sources for further information u.s. embassy in manila , philippines disaster assistance: http: / / manila.usembassy.gov / disaster - assistance.html u.s. citizen services: http: / / manila.usembassy.gov / wwwha017.html#missing this page provides information for persons trying to find american citizens who were in the philippines at the time of the storm .

u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) http: / / www.usaid.gov / haiyan http: / / www.usaid.gov / philippines usaid office of foreign disaster assistance ( usaid / ofda ) twitter feed: https: / / twitter.com / theofda u.s. department of defense operation damayan: http: / / www.defense.gov / home / features / 2013 / 1113_haiyan / government of the philippines official gazette updates on typhoon yolanda: http: / / www.gov.ph / crisis - response / updates - typhoon - yolanda / u.n. news centre http: / / www.un.org / news / the un news service publishes reports on the humanitarian aid efforts in the philippines , as well as news about the united nations' work in other countries .

relief web http: / / reliefweb.int / disaster / tc - 2013-000139-phl this site is administered by the u.n. office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( ocha ) and provides links to r eports by governments , international and intergovernmental entities , and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) on humanitarian activities as well as maps and fact sheets .

this site is continuously updated .

selected u.n .

entities u.n. country team in the philippines http: / / reliefweb.int / organization / unct - philippines united nations children's fund ( unicef ) http: / / www.unicef.org / infobycountry / philippines.html world food program ( wfp ) http: / / www.wfp.org / countries / philippines world health organization ( who ) http: / / www.who.int / hac / en / index.html united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) http: / / www.unhcr.org / 52820a359.html food and agricultural organization of the united nations ( fao ) http: / / www.fao.org / emergencies / crisis / philippines - typhoon - haiyan / en / interaction http: / / www.interaction.org / crisis - list / interaction - members - respond - typhoon - haiyan interaction is an alliance of more than 180 u.s. - based nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) that work around the world .

the site describes the humanitarian assistance being provided by each member organization responding to the philippines disaster and provides links to the individual websites where contributions can be made .

appendix d. how to contribute to relief efforts usaid — how to help http: / / www.usaid.gov / what - we - do / working - crises - and - conflict / crisis - response / how - help u.s. embassy in manila , philippines how to contribute: http: / / manila.usembassy.gov / response - contribute.html charity navigator super typhoon haiyan disaster relief: http: / / www.charitynavigator.org / index.cfm ? bay=content.view&cpid=1659 provides analysis , eval uations , and rat ings of charity finances as well as accountability and transparency .

guide star helping typhoon haiyan survivors: http: / / www.guidestar.org / rxg / give - to - charity / donor - resources / philippines - typhoon - relief.aspx ? gsicn=november11typhoonrelief&gsici=homepagefeature this organization gathers information about nonprofit organizations and reports on each organization's mission , legitimacy , impact , reputation , finances , programs , transparency , and governance .

appendix e. the u.s. government emergency response mechanism for international disasters the united states is generally a leader and major contributor to relief efforts in response to humanitarian disasters .

the president has broad authority to provide emergency assistance for foreign disasters and the u.s. government provides disaster assistance through several u.s. agencies .

the very nature of humanitarian disasters — the need to respond quickly in order to save lives and provide relief — has resulted in a rather unrestricted definition of what this type of assistance consists of at both a policy and an operational level .

while humanitarian assistance is assumed to provide for urgent food , shelter , and medical needs , the agencies within the u.s. government providing this support typically expand or contract the definition in response to circumstances .

funds may be used for u.s. agencies to deliver services or to provide grants to international organizations ( ios ) , international governmental and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , and private or religious voluntary organizations ( pvos ) .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) is the u.s. government agency charged with coordinating u.s. government and private sector assistance .

it also coordinates with international organizations , the governments of countries suffering disasters , and other governments .

the office of foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) in usaid's bureau for democracy , conflict , and humanitarian assistance ( dcha ) provides immediate relief materials and personnel , many of whom are already abroad on mission .

it is responsible for providing non - food humanitarian assistance and can quickly assemble disaster assistance response teams ( darts ) to assess conditions .

ofda has wide authority to borrow funds , equipment , and personnel from other parts of usaid and other federal agencies .

usaid has two other offices that administer u.s. humanitarian aid: food for peace ( ffp ) and the office of transition initiatives ( oti ) .

usaid administers emergency food aid under the food for peace act ( title ii of p.l .

480 ) and provides relief and development food aid that does not have to be repaid .

oti provides post - disaster transition assistance , which includes mainly short - term peace and democratization projects with some attention to humanitarian elements but not emergency relief .

although not all applicable to the disaster in the philippines , the department of defense ( dod ) overseas humanitarian , disaster , and civic aid ( ohdaca ) funds three dodd humanitarian programs: the humanitarian assistance program ( hap ) , humanitarian mine action ( hma ) program , and foreign disaster relief and emergency response ( fdr / er ) .

ohdaca provides humanitarian support to stabilize emergency situations and deals with a range of tasks including providing food , shelter and supplies , and medical evacuations .

in addition the president has the authority to draw down defense equipment and direct military personnel to respond to disasters .

the president may also use the denton program to provide space - available transportation on military aircraft and ships to private donors who wish to transport humanitarian goods and equipment in response to a disaster .

generally , ofda provides emergency assistance for 30 to 90 days after a disaster .

the same is true for department of defense humanitarian assistance .

after the initial emergency is over , assistance is provided through other channels , such as the regular country development programs of usaid .

the state department also administers programs for humanitarian relief with a focus on refugees and the displaced .

the emergency refugee and migration account ( erma ) is a contingency fund that provides wide latitude to the president in responding to refugee emergencies .

assistance to address emergencies lasting more than a year comes out of the regular migration and refugee account ( mra ) through the population , migration , and refugees ( prm ) bureau .

prm assists refugees worldwide , conflict victims , and populations of concern , often extended to include internally displaced people ( idps ) .

humanitarian assistance includes a range of services from basic needs to community services .

appendix f. mass fatality management management of the dead is one challenge of the response to a catastrophe .

the task often falls upon local communities , which are typically overwhelmed tending to the needs of the living .

a pervasive myth holds that human remains cause epidemics in disaster - stricken communities .

human remains do not carry pathogens that are not already in circulation in a community , and they do not generally pose an additional threat to the public .

rather , epidemics of intestinal illness that follow a disaster typically result from loss of the infrastructures that prevent sewage from contaminating potable water .

under such circumstances , many become exposed to the illnesses of a few .

upon review of the aftermath of the 2004 asian tsunami , the pan american health organization ( paho ) , the world health organization ( who ) , and the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) published a first responder manual on mass fatality management .

in it they said that "political pressure brought about by [rumors of epidemics from human remains] causes authorities to use unnecessary measures such as rapid mass burials... .

the consequences of mismanagement of the dead include mental distress and legal problems for relatives of the victims. .

responders are urged to take steps that allow the eventual identification of remains , and the opportunity for relatives to claim remains .

recommended approaches include rapid retrieval of remains by responders who are not medical personnel ( in order to focus the efforts of medical personnel on survivors ) , best practices for victim identification , and options for storage of remains pending identification .

because the means for optimal storage — ice and refrigeration — may be in short supply following a disaster and are also needed by survivors , the manual recommends temporary burial as a good option for immediate storage where no other method is available .

