the buy america act is the popular name for a group of domestic content restrictions that have been attached to funds administered by the department of transportation ( dot ) .

these funds are used to make grants to states , localities , and other non - federal government entities for various transportation projects .

the buy american act , another statute requiring domestic content preferences in federal government procurement , does not apply to these funds because , while the source of the money is federal , purchases are not made directly by the federal government .

generally , these statutes require applicable agency grant programs and spending to be used to fund projects that only include steel , iron , and / or manufactured products produced in the united states .

each provision includes a series of circumstances under which the agency may issue a nationwide or project - specific waiver to these domestic content requirements .

such exemptions could be based upon a finding that application of the domestic content requirement is not in the public interest , the needed materials are not produced in sufficient quantity and / or quality in the united states , or the cost of using domestic materials is unreasonable , among others .

in 2008 , the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 ( priia ) was enacted , authorizing appropriations to establish several new grant programs supporting intercity passenger rail and high - speed rail services .

spending authorized under priia is subject to buy america requirements stated in 49 u.s.c .

section 24405 ( a ) .

the statute requires that appropriations enacted to carry out chapter 244 , created in priia , may be obligated "only if the steel , iron , and manufactured goods used in the project are produced in the united states. .

however , this requirement only applies to "projects for which the costs exceed $100,000. .

the fra has not yet promulgated regulations implementing these buy america requirements but has stated its intent to do so .

it has published a frequently asked questions document in the federal register that addresses the applicability and requirements of section 24405 ( a ) .

this document notes that until the fra publishes its own regulations it will reference certain sections of the fta's regulations at 49 c.f.r .

part 661 , discussed above , for the purpose of providing guidance to the fra's grantees .

many provisions of the fta's buy america statute are identical to section 24405 ( a ) .

specifically , the fra will use the fta's definition regarding when manufactured goods are considered "produced in the united states. .

this definition requires the manufacturing processes for an end product to take place in the united states and all of the end product's components to be of domestic origin .

the origin of a component's subcomponents is not relevant to this determination .

the fra is prohibited from creating funding limitations that restrict a state from imposing "more stringent" requirements on the "use of articles , materials , and supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in foreign countries.... .

waivers may be issued if the fra finds that ( 1 ) applying the buy america requirements is inconsistent with the public interest ; ( 2 ) domestically produced steel , iron , and manufactured goods are not produced in sufficient and reasonably available amounts or are not of satisfactory quality ; ( 3 ) "rolling stock or power train equipment cannot be bought and delivered in the united states within a reasonable time" ; or ( 4 ) using domestic materials will increase the cost of the overall project by more than 25% .

unlike the statutory provisions governing fta funding , the fra statute does not authorize a waiver when procuring rolling stock if the cost of the domestic components is more than 60% of the cost of all of the components .

proposed waivers must be published in the federal register and provide public notice and a reasonable period of time for public comment .

completed waiver requests may also be viewed on the fra's website .

just like the fta , the fra is prohibited from issuing waivers for goods produced in a foreign country if that country has an agreement with the united states , under which the buy america requirements have been waived , and has violated that agreement in specific ways .

additionally , the fra has stated that it will apply the statutory buy america provision strictly and will issue a waiver only when the bidder / offeror has demonstrated by clear evidence that it has met the requirements for a waiver .

moreover , fra considers the need to grant waivers under these circumstances as strictly temporary because it expects that achieving domestic manufacture and 100% domestic component content can and will occur in the very near future .

amtrak was established in statute as a for - profit corporation and "not a department , agency , or instrumentality of the united states government. .

therefore , the buy american requirements that apply to direct purchases of the federal government do not restrict amtrak spending .

however , amtrak has its own buy america requirements at 49 u.s.c .

section 24305 ( f ) .

when the cost of articles , material , or supplies bought is at least $1,000,000 , amtrak may only buy ( a ) unmanufactured articles , material , and supplies mined or produced in the united states ; or ( b ) manufactured articles , material , and supplies , manufactured in the united states substantially from articles , material , and supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states .

the fra has interpreted the "substantially from articles , material , and supplies mined , produced or manufactured in the united states" requirement to mean that the manufactured goods must have domestic component content greater than 50% , by cost .

this interpretation borrows from the definition of "domestic end product" from buy american regulations .

amtrak may also be subject to the buy america requirements in 49 u.s.c .

section 24405 , discussed above , if it is operating under funds subject to those restrictions .

amtrak may be exempted from the section 24305 ( f ) requirement as it relates to particular articles , material , or supplies if the fra determines that one of the following is true: imposing the requirement is inconsistent with the public interest ; the cost of imposing the requirement is unreasonable ; or the necessary goods are not "mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states in sufficient and reasonably available commercial quantities and are not of a satisfactory quality. .

additionally , amtrak may receive an exemption from the buy america requirements for rolling stock or power train equipment when those items "cannot be bought and delivered in the united states within a reasonable time. .

