b roadly understood , domestic content restrictions are provisions which require that items purchased using specific funds appropriated by congress be produced or manufactured in the united states .

over the years , congress has enacted a number of such restrictions , pursuant to its broad power over federal spending , in order to protect u.s. businesses and labor by generally barring the use of federal funds to purchase "foreign" products .

however , these restrictions are potentially less stringent than they might at first appear , since congress has permitted the president to waive them so that the united states may comply with its obligations under various international trade agreements and accomplish certain other goals , or expressly provided for supplies produced or manufactured in countries with which the united states has trade agreements to be treated the same as supplies produced or manufactured domestically .

such promotion of trade has also been seen as generally benefitting u.s. firms and labor by facilitating the export of supplies and services in whose production the united states enjoys competitive advantages .

federal law currently has four major domestic content regimes , which apply in different contexts and impose different requirements upon the use of federal procurement , grant , and other funds: 1 .

the buy american act of 1933 , as amended , generally requires federal agencies to purchase "domestic end products" and use "domestic construction materials" on contracts exceeding the micro - purchase threshold ( typically $3,500 ) performed in the united states .

2 .

the trade agreements act of 1979 , as amended , permits the waiver of the buy american act and has resulted in "eligible products" from "designated countries" receiving equal consideration with domestic offers when certain federal agencies procure certain goods or services whose value exceeds certain monetary thresholds .

3 .

the berry amendment ( 10 u.s.c .

§2533a ) and its former "specialty metals" provision , now codified at 10 u.s.c .

§2533b , require that food , clothing , tents , certain textile fabrics and fibers , and hand or measuring tools purchased by the department of defense ( dod ) be entirely grown , reprocessed , reused , or produced in the united states ; and that any "specialty metals" contained in any aircraft , missile and space system , ship , tank and automotive item , weapon system , ammunition , or any components thereof , purchased by dod be melted or produced in the united states .

4 .

the buy america act — which is the popular name for a group of domestic content restrictions that have been attached to specific grant funds administered by the department of transportation ( dot ) and certain other federal agencies — generally requires that steel , iron , and manufactured products made primarily of steel or iron and used in infrastructure projects be produced or manufactured in the united states .

however , there are also a number of other domestic content restrictions that apply in specific contexts and , in many cases , are intended to address perceived "gaps" left by the four major domestic content regimes noted above .

this report provides an overview of the buy american act , trade agreements act , berry amendment ( including its former specialty metals provision ) , and buy america act , specifically highlighting the commonalities and differences among them .

the report also lists other federal domestic content restrictions codified in the u.s. code .

it does not address state or local "buy american" provisions ; nor does it address use of the "made in america" label .

it is also important to note that existing domestic content restrictions generally pertain to the place of production or manufacture of supplies .

they generally do not address the place of performance of services , or , with certain exceptions , the nationality of the vendor .

the buy american act is the earliest and arguably the best known of the major domestic content restrictions .

on its face , the buy american act appears to prohibit federal agencies from acquiring "foreign" goods by providing that "[o]nly unmanufactured articles , materials , and supplies that have been mined or produced in the united states , and only manufactured articles , materials , and supplies that have been manufactured in the united states substantially all from articles , materials , or supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states , shall be purchased for public use. .

as implemented , however , the act is better understood as generally establishing a price preference for domestic end products and construction materials .

specifically , the provisions of the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) implementing the buy american act require that , when a domestic offer ( i.e. , an offer of a domestic end product ) is not the low offer , the procuring agency must add a certain percentage of the low offer's price ( inclusive of duty ) to that offer before determining which offer is the lowest priced , or provides "best value" for the government .

this percentage typically ranges from 6% , in cases where the lowest domestic offer is from a large business ; to 12% , when the lowest domestic offer is from a small business ; to 50% , for department of defense procurements , although agencies may adopt higher percentages by regulation .

if the domestic offer is the lowest , or tied for lowest , after the application of this price preference , the agency must generally award the contract to the domestic offeror .

however , if the foreign offer still has the lowest price , the agency may generally award the contract to the foreign offeror pursuant to provisions of the buy american act permitting the purchase of foreign end products , and the use of foreign construction materials , when the costs of domestic ones are "unreasonable. .

the buy american act makes separate provisions for federal agencies' purchase of supplies and their construction of "public works," as discussed below .

it also incorporates several exceptions that permit the use of foreign end products and construction materials even if the cost of domestic ones is not "unreasonable. .

in addition , the application of the buy american act has been waived in certain procurements pursuant to the trade agreements act ( taa ) .

the trade agreements act ( taa ) allows the president to waive "the application of any law , regulation , procedure , or practice regarding government procurement" that would discriminate against eligible products or suppliers from "designated countries" so that the united states may comply with its obligations under various international trade agreements and accomplish certain other goals .

laws subject to waiver include the buy american act and similar domestic content restrictions .

under the taa and its implementation in the far , offers of "eligible products" from certain countries with which the united states has trade agreements , or which it otherwise treats as designated countries , are generally entitled to "receive equal consideration with domestic offers" whenever the value of the acquisition exceeds certain monetary thresholds .

the taa also prohibits procurement of products of nondesignated countries , with certain exceptions and waivers , in acquisitions covered by the world trade organization ( wto ) government procurement agreement ( gpa ) whose value exceeds the relevant monetary thresholds , in order to encourage additional countries to join this agreement and provide reciprocal competitive government procurement opportunities to u.s. products and suppliers .

the far implements this prohibition by requiring federal agencies to acquire only "u.s. - made or designated country end products or u.s. or designated country services" in acquisitions covered by the wto gpa , subject to certain exceptions .

a "substantial transformation" test is used to determine whether an end product originates in a particular country for purposes of the taa when the product consists at least in part of materials from another country .

the berry amendment has existed since the beginning of world war ii and , historically , was included in yearly defense appropriations acts .

however , it became permanent law in 1993 , and was ultimately codified at 10 u.s.c .

§2533a in 2002 .

over the years , the scope of the amendment has changed , though its core purposes have remained constant: safeguarding the united states' national security interests and protecting the u.s. industrial base to enable it to meet defense requirements during times of need .

pursuant to the berry amendment , dod cannot use appropriated or otherwise available funds to purchase a covered item unless that item is entirely grown , reprocessed , reused , or produced within the united states .

in other words , the berry amendment requires a higher level of domestic content than is required under the buy american act , which permits manufactured items to qualify as "domestic" so long they are manufactured in the united states , and ( 1 ) the cost of components mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states exceeds 50% of the cost of all components , or ( 2 ) the items are cots items .

for purposes of the berry amendment , covered items include food , clothing , tents , certain textile fabrics and fibers , and hand or measuring tools .

until 2006 , the berry amendment also included provisions addressing specialty metals , but this language has since been codified in 10 u.s.c .

§2533b , discussed below .

there are a number of exceptions within the berry amendment , permitting dod to acquire covered items that are not entirely grown , reprocessed , reused , or produced within the united states when 1. the secretary of defense , or the secretary of a military department , determines that items of satisfactory quality or sufficient quantity cannot be acquired "as and when needed at united states market prices" ; 2. the value of the purchase is below the simplified acquisition threshold ( generally $150,000 ) ; 3. procuring items outside the united states in support of combat operations ; or procuring food , or hand or measuring tools , outside the united states in support of contingency operations ; 4. procuring food or hand or measuring tools in circumstances in which the unusual and compelling urgency of the need does not permit the use of competitive procedures ; 5. vessels procure items in foreign waters ; 6. conducting "emergency procurements," or establishments located outside the united states procure perishable foods for the personnel attached to that establishment ; 7. acquiring items for commissary resale ; 8. procuring food products ( other than fish , shellfish , or seafood ) processed or manufactured in the united states ; 9. acquiring waste and byproducts of cotton and wool fiber for use in the production of propellants and explosives ; or 10. procuring "chemical warfare protective clothing" produced outside the united states is necessary to comply with certain u.s. agreements with foreign governments .

even if an acquisition is exempt from the requirements of the berry amendment , it is potentially subject to the buy american act .

however , if the berry amendment applies to an acquisition , the buy american act does not .

neither the berry amendment nor the specialty metals restriction , discussed below , have been waived pursuant to the taa , and certain trade agreements of the united states expressly provide that they do not apply to procurements involving textiles , clothing , food , and "specialty metals. .

the buy america act is the popular name for a group of domestic content restrictions that have been attached to specific funds administered by the department of transportation ( dot ) and certain other federal agencies .

these funds are used to make grants to states , localities , and other nonfederal government entities for various purposes , including transportation projects or for water - related infrastructure systems .

the buy american act does not apply to these funds because , while the source of the money is federal , purchases are not made directly by the federal government .

in other words , these purchases are not federal procurements for purposes of the buy american act .

the various buy america requirements have not been waived pursuant to the taa , and certain u.s. trade agreements expressly exclude "non - contractual agreements or ... any form of [government] assistance," such as grants , from their coverage .

 table 1 , below , summarizes key aspects of the four major domestic content regimes in federal law , in order to better highlight the similarities and differences among them .

in addition to the four major domestic preference regimes previously discussed , there are also numerous other domestic content restrictions that apply in specific contexts and are intended to address perceived "gaps" left by the buy american act , in particular .

in some cases , as with the berry amendment , these provisions require a higher level of domestic content than is required under the buy american act , which permits manufactured items to qualify as "domestic" so long as they are manufactured in the united states , and ( 1 ) the cost of components mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states exceeds 50% of the cost of all components , or ( 2 ) the items are cots items .

in other cases , as with the buy america act , these provisions apply to federal grants or other funds that are spent by entities that are not federal agencies , and thus not subject to the buy american act and other federal procurement laws .

in yet other cases , the provision seeks to "encourage" procurement of domestic content by federal agencies or other entities without strictly mandating it .

listed below are the domestic content restrictions that have been codified , including in notes , in the u.s. code .

this listing is intended to be comprehensive .

however , it is important to note that un - codified provisions — such as might appear in annual appropriations measures — are not included .

provisions are given in numerical order by the title of the u.s. code in which they appear .

3 u.s.c .

§110: directs that all furniture purchased for the use of the executive residence at the white house be , "as far as practicable," of domestic manufacture .

6 u.s.c .

§453b: prohibits the department of homeland security from using funds appropriated or otherwise available to it to procure covered items unless the item was grown , reprocessed , reused , or produced in the united states , with certain exceptions .

covered items include ( 1 ) articles and items of clothing , and the materials and components thereof , other than sensors , electronics , or other items added to and not normally associated with clothing ; ( 2 ) tents , tarpaulins , covers , textile belts , bags , protective equipment , sleep systems , load carrying equipment , textile marine equipment , parachutes , and bandages ; ( 3 ) cotton and other natural fiber products , woven silk or silk blends , spun silk yarn for cartridge cloth , synthetic fabric or coated synthetic fabric , canvas products , and wool , and ( 4 ) any item of individual equipment manufactured from or containing such fibers , yarns , fabrics , or materials .

7 u.s.c .

§612c note: requires that community distribution programs receiving certain federal funds purchase , "whenever possible," only "food products that are produced in the united states," with certain exceptions .

7 u.s.c .

§903 note: mandates that , as a condition of certain loans made for purposes of rural electrification , "to the extent practicable and the cost of which is not unreasonable," borrowers agree to use , in connection with the expenditure of borrowed funds , only ( 1 ) unmanufactured articles , materials , and supplies that have been mined or produced in the united states or an "eligible country" ( i.e. , a country with which the united states has certain trade agreements ) , or ( 2 ) manufactured articles that have been manufactured in the united states or an eligible country from articles , materials , or supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states or an eligible country .

7 u.s.c .

§1506 ( p ) : expresses the sense of congress that , "to the greatest extent practicable," all equipment and products purchased by the federal crop insurance corporation using funds available to the corporation should be "american - made" ; and that , in providing financial assistance to , or entering contracts with , entities for the purchase of equipment and products to carry out this subchapter , the corporation , "to the greatest extent practicable," shall notify the entity of this policy .

7 u.s.c .

§7012: expresses the sense of congress that , "to the greatest extent practicable," all equipment and products purchased using funds made available pursuant to chapter 98 of title 7 — which addresses the consolidated farm service agency , the rural utilities service , the rural business and cooperative development service , and the rural development disaster assistance fund — should be "american - made" ; and that , in providing financial assistance to , or entering contracts with , entities for the purchase of equipment and products to carry out this subchapter , the secretary of agriculture , "to the greatest extent practicable," shall notify the entity of this policy .

10 u.s.c .

§2302 note: requires the secretary of defense to "encourag[e] increased domestic breeding," while ensuring that military working dogs are procured as efficiently as possible and at best value to the government .

10 u.s.c .

§2436: directs the secretary of defense to plan and establish an "incentive program" for contractors to purchase capital assets manufactured in the united states , in part with funds made available to dod .

10 u.s.c .

§2534: prohibits dod from procuring sonobuoys manufactured in a foreign country if u.s. firms that manufacture sonobuoys are not permitted to compete on an equal basis with foreign manufacturing firms for the sale of sonobuoys in that country , with certain exceptions .

10 u.s.c .

§2534 note: mandates that dod incorporate clauses into any of its contracts that provide for photovoltaic devices to be ( 1 ) installed on dod property or in a facility owned by dod , or ( 2 ) reserved for the exclusive use of dod in the united states for their full economic life , to require that any photovoltaic devices installed under the contract "be manufactured in the united states substantially all from articles , materials , or supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states. .

10 u.s.c .

§7291 note : requires that any vessels constructed or converted under a program for the construction and conversion of cargo vessels incorporating features "essential for military use" incorporate ( 1 ) propulsion systems whose "main components ( that is , the engines , reduction gears , and propellers ) " are manufactured in the united states ; and ( 2 ) bridge , machinery control systems , and interior communications equipment that are manufactured in the united states and have more than 50% of their value , in terms of cost , added in the united states , with certain exceptions .

12 u.s.c .

§1735e - 1: directs the secretary of housing and urban development to encourage the use of materials and products mined and produced in the united states in the administration of housing programs .

14 u.s.c .

§97: prohibits the coast guard from procuring buoy chain that is not manufactured in the united states , or substantially all the components of which are not produced or manufactured in the united states , unless the price of buoy chain manufactured in the united states is "unreasonable" or emergency circumstances exist .

15 u.s.c .

§631 note ; 15 u.s.c .

§661 : requires the administrator of small business , when providing financial assistance with amounts appropriated pursuant to certain amendments made to the small business act in 1992 , "when practicable," to give preference to small businesses which use or purchase equipment and supplies produced in the united states , and to encourage small businesses receiving assistance to purchase such equipment and supplies .

15 u.s.c .

§2221 ( l ) : requires that the recipients of arson prevention grants under chapter 49 ( fire prevention and control ) of title 15 purchase , when available and cost - effective , american - made equipment and products when expending grant funds .

20 u.s.c .

§6067: expresses the sense of congress that no funds appropriated pursuant to chapter 68 ( national education reform ) of title 20 are to be expended by an entity unless the entity agrees to comply with the buy american act in expending the funds , and to purchase only "american - made equipment and products" in the case of any equipment or products that may be authorized to be purchased with financial assistance provided under chapter 68 .

22 u.s.c .

§2354: imposes a number of restrictions on procurements made outside the united states involving foreign assistance funds .

among other things , ( 1 ) funds may not be used to purchase , in bulk , any commodities at prices higher than the market price prevailing in the united states at the time of purchase ( adjusted for differences in the cost of transportation to destination , quality , and terms of payment ) ; ( 2 ) agricultural commodities or products available for distribution under the food for peace act shall , "insofar as practicable," be procured within the united states unless such items are not available in the united states in sufficient quantities to supply emergency requirements of recipients ; ( 3 ) commodities procured must generally be insured in the united states against marine risk with companies authorized to do a marine insurance business in any state of the united states ; ( 4 ) funds made available under chapter 32 of title 22 may not be used to procure any agricultural commodity , or product thereof , outside the united states when the domestic price of such commodity is less than parity , with certain exceptions ; and ( 5 ) funds may not be used to procure construction or engineering services from "advanced developing countries" which have attained a "competitive capability" in international markets for construction services or engineering services .

24 u.s.c .

§225h: requires the district of columbia to comply with the buy american act in all procurements made under subchapter iii ( mental health service for the district of columbia ) of chapter 4 of title 24 ; and prohibits the award of contracts or subcontracts made with funds authorized under this subchapter for the procurement of articles , materials , or supplies produced in countries whose government unfairly maintains in government procurement a "significant and persistent pattern or practice of discrimination" against u.s. products and services that results in identifiable harm to u.s. businesses .

25 u.s.c .

§1638b: requires that all procurements conducted with funds made available to carry out subchapter iii ( health facilities ) of chapter 18 ( indian health care ) of title 25 comply with the buy american act .

31 u.s.c .

§5111: requires that the secretary of the treasury , in order to protect the national security through domestic control of the coinage process , acquire only articles , materials , supplies , and services for the production of coins that have been produced or manufactured in the united states , unless the secretary ( 1 ) determines that doing so would be inconsistent with the public interest , or the cost is unreasonable , and ( 2 ) publishes a written notice stating the basis for this determination in the federal register .

31 u.s.c .

§5114: requires that articles , materials , and supplies procured for use in the production of currency , postage stamps , and other security documents for foreign governments be treated "in the same manner" as articles , materials , and supplies procured for public use within the united states under the buy american act .

31 u.s.c .

§5114 note: provides that none of the funds made available by the treasury , postal service , and general government appropriations act , 1989 ( p.l .

100-440 ) , or any other act with respect to any fiscal year , may be used to contract for the manufacture of "distinctive paper" for u.s. currency and securities pursuant to 31 u.s.c .

§5114 outside the united states or its possessions , with certain exceptions .

33 u.s.c .

§1295: prohibits the award of grants for the construction of water treatment works under subchapter ii ( grants for the construction of treatment works ) of chapter 26 ( water pollution prevention and control ) of title 33 unless only ( 1 ) unmanufactured articles , materials , supplies that have been mined or produced in the united states , and ( 2 ) manufactured articles , materials and supplies that have been manufactured in the united states "substantially all" from articles , materials , or supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states , are used , with certain exceptions .

33 u.s.c .

§2201 note: expresses the sense of congress that , "to the extent practicable," all equipment and products purchased with certain funds made available for water resources development be "american made. .

38 u.s.c .

§2301 ( h ) : prohibits the department of veterans affairs from procuring any burial flags that are not "wholly produced in the united states," unless the secretary determines this requirement cannot reasonably be met , or that compliance with the requirement would not be in the national interest of the united states .

40 u.s.c .

§3313: requires that procurements carried out pursuant to this section ( i.e. , procurements promoting the use of energy - efficient lighting fixtures and bulbs in public buildings ) comply with the buy american act .

42 u.s.c .

§1760: requires , with certain exceptions , that school food authorities participating in the national school lunch program purchase , "to the maximum extent practicable," "domestic commodities or products" ( i.e. , agricultural commodities produced in the united states , and food products processed in the united states "substantially using" agricultural commodities that are produced in the united states ) .

42 u.s.c .

§5206: prohibits the expenditure of funds appropriated under the disaster mitigation act of 2000 , or any amendment made by the act , by any entity unless that entity complies with the buy american act in expending the funds .

42 u.s.c .

§6374: requires that "preference" be given to vehicles that operate on alternative fuels derived from domestic sources when considering which types of alternative fuel vehicles to acquire in implementing the statutory requirement that "the maximum number practicable" of vehicles acquired annually for use by the federal government be alternative fueled vehicles .

42 u.s.c .

§6705: prohibits the award of grants under chapter 80 ( local public works employment ) of title 42 for local public works projects unless the project uses only ( 1 ) unmanufactured articles , materials , or supplies mined or produced in the united states , and ( 2 ) manufactured articles , materials , and supplies manufactured in the united states "substantially all" from articles , materials , and supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states , with certain exceptions .

42 u.s.c .

§13316: requires that the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , in selecting projects for the renewable energy technology transfer program , consider , among other things , the degree to which the equipment to be included in the project is designed and manufactured in the united states ; and ensure that , in carrying out projects , the "maximum percentage" — but in no case less than 50% — of the cost of any equipment furnished in connection with the project shall be attributable to the manufactured u.s. components of such equipment , as well as the "maximum participation" of u.s. firms .

42 u.s.c .

§13362: requires that usaid , in selecting projects for the innovative clean coal technology transfer program , consider , among other things , the degree to which the equipment to be included in the project is designed and manufactured in the united states ; and ensure that , in carrying out projects , the "maximum percentage" — but in no case less than 50% — of the cost of any equipment furnished in connection with the project shall be attributable to the manufactured u.s. components of such equipment , as well as the "maximum participation" of u.s. firms .

42 u.s.c .

§13387: requires that usaid , in selecting projects for the innovative environmental technology transfer program , consider , among other things , the degree to which the equipment to be included in the project is designed and manufactured in the united states ; and ensure that , in carrying out projects , the "maximum percentage" — but in no case less than 50% — of the cost of any equipment furnished in connection with the project shall be attributable to the manufactured u.s. components of such equipment , as well as the "maximum participation" of u.s. firms .

42 u.s.c .

§16312: requires that any agreement for u.s. participation in the international thermonuclear experimental reactor ( iter ) shall , at a minimum , ensure that the share of high - technology components of the iter manufactured in the united states is "at least proportionate" to the u.s. financial contribution to the iter , among other things .

42 u.s.c .

§17353: requires that international clean energy foundation promote the use of american - made clean and energy efficient technologies , process , and services by giving preference to entities incorporated in the united states , or whose technology will be "substantially manufactured" in the united states , when making grants to promote projects outside the united states .

49 u.s.c .

§24305: requires amtrak to buy unmanufactured articles , material , and supplies that are mined or produced in the united states , and manufactured articles , material , and supplies manufactured in the united states substantially from articles , material , and supplies that are mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states when the cost of articles , material , or supplies bought is at least $1 million .

