one of the offsets for raising the defense and nondefense caps in fy2014 and fy2015 in the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( h.j.res .

59 / p.l .

113-67 ) was a reduction in the cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) for many current and nearly all future military retirees .

instead of using the full consumer price index ( cpi ) to adjust retired pay each year , as has been customary in recent years , section 403 of the bipartisan budget act ( bba ) substituted the cpi less 1% for all current and future military retirees under the age of 62 ( except those already receiving reduced colas under the redux retirement option ) .

at age 62 , beneficiaries would receive a bump - up in their benefit level to the amount they would have received had a full cola adjustment been included each year rather than the lower colas .

in subsequent years , this new benefit level would be adjusted using the full cpi .

this change would have affected almost all military retirees below the age of 62 , including those collecting disability retirement , as well as individuals receiving survivor benefits .

the new formula would take effect on december 1 , 2015 .

according to cbo , this change would have saved the department of defense $6.235 billion over the decade .

this provision of the bipartisan budget act generated significant debate .

some called for a reversal , arguing that retaining the full cola adjustment is part of a commitment to servicemembers to preserve benefits including future colas at the full cpi to offset inflation .

some servicemembers and advocates also argued that retirement changes should be delayed until the april 2015 report of military compensation and retirement modernization commission provides a "holistic" solution .

others defended the cola adjustments , arguing that the effect on most retirees would be small compared to their lifetime benefits .

they also argued that the change would help restrain the growth in military compensation over the past decade .

admiral winnefeld , vice - chair of the joint chiefs of staff , recently suggested that these increases have "more than closed previously existing gaps with the rest of our nation's workforce. .

some argued further that military retirement benefits are exceptional because servicemembers do not contribute to their basic retirement benefits , and that military personnel have also been insulated from one of the major expenses for older persons , higher health insurance premiums , because premiums for military personnel have been frozen since 1995 .

note: t he following sections were largely written before the bba was revised by the fy2014 consolidated appropriations act and s. 25 .

they now reflect what would have happened had the or i ginal bba language remained in effect .

based on the profile of the 1.94 million military retirees collecting benefits as of fy2012 , about 40% or 750,000 would likely have been affected in some way by the lower colas that were adopted in the bba .

to get a picture of the potential effect of reducing the cola by 1% , the demographic portrait in table 1 shows average age , years of service , and retirement benefits , with separate entries for officers and enlisted .

while active - duty personnel are eligible for immediate retirement benefits after 20 years of service , reservists generally are not eligible for retirement until age 60 , and so would generally be affected by the bba's cola minus 1% provision for a year .

excluding reservists , some 1.6 million military retirees currently receive benefits .

for nondisabled military retirees as whole , about half are below the age of 62 , and most of those would face reduced colas for 1 to 10 years based on dod actuary statistics .

if fy2012 retirees are representative of future retirees , and the original bba language had remained in effect , then those currently retired would have been less affected than future retirees because of the demographic characteristics described above .

similarly , disabled retirees would have been more affected than nondisabled retirees had the original bba remained in effect .

to estimate the effects of the original bba formula on both current and future retirees , crs used dod actuary data about average age , retirement income , and life expectancy for nondisabled and disabled military and cbo's projections of the cpi .

to project the effect on future retirees , crs used dod actuary statistics about those who retired in fy2012 , the most recent data available .

on average , lifetime retirement benefits for the current retiree population are about $590,000 for enlisted personnel and $1.37 million for officers based on dod actuary figures and cbo projections of consumer price index ( cpi ) .

the average age of nondisabled current retirees is 61 for enlisted and 66 for officers , suggesting that many retirees would not have been affected by reduced colas under the original bba or would have been subject to lower colas for fewer years than future retirees .

as a point of comparison , had the cola adjustment for current disabled military retirees in the bba remained in effect , the average enlisted disabled retiree , with an average age of 53 , would have received $13,000 or 3% less in lifetime benefits of $390,000 .

for disabled officers , with an average age of 66 , few would experience reductions in lifetime benefits of $440,000 .

disabled retirees who are younger than this average would have been affected by larger amounts and those older by lesser amounts .

had the original bba remained in effect , future military retirees would have been more affected than current retirees .

generally in their early 40s , the average future retiree would have received reduced colas for about 18 years until the age of 62 .

to estimate the effect on future nondisabled military retirees under the bba formula , crs calculated average lifetime retirement income for enlisted and officer retirees with a full cpi adjustment and with the cpi less 1% as set in the bipartisan budget act .

crs based its calculations of the effect on future nondisabled retirees using the dod actuary's data on the characteristics of those who retired in fy2012 — average age , retirement income , and life expectancy — and cbo's projections of the cpi .

these estimates exclude reservists and reflect the bump - up to full - cola retired benefits at age 62 and full cpi adjustments for the remainder of a retiree's life as provided in the original bba language .

under these assumptions , the average nondisabled military retiree could be affected by the lower colas as follows .

enlisted personnel would have received a total of about $1.67 million rather than $1.73 million in lifetime retirement benefits , a $69,000 or 4.0% reduction in a 36-year period ; officers would have received a total of $3.74 million rather than $3.83 million in lifetime retired pay , an $87,000 or 2.3% reduction in a 36-year period ( see table 2 ) .

for nondisabled enlisted retirees , the estimate reflects an average where servicemembers joined the military at age 21 , retired at age 43 , received reduced colas for 18 years until they reached the age of 62 in fy2034 , and then full colas for the rest of their lives .

dod actuary figures project a life expectancy of 79 for these nondisabled , enlisted military retirees ( see table 2 below ) .

for nondisabled officer retirees , the average reflects servicemembers who joined the military at age 23 , retired at 47 , received reduced colas for 15 years until they reached the age of 62 in fy2030 , and then full colas for the rest of their lives .

the dod actuary projects a life expectancy of 84 for the average officer .

had the lower colas been applied to disabled retirees as originally required by the bba , the effect on these retirees would have been greater than for nondisabled retirees because disabled servicemembers tend to retire at younger ages resulting in more years with a reduced cola .

in addition , with an average life expectancy of eight years less than nondisabled retirees , disabled retirees would had have fewer years with full - cola benefits ( table 1 ) .

because the average disabled retiree is 55 rather than 62 , the majority of currently disabled retirees would have experienced several years of reduced colas had the original bba remained in effect .

as a point of comparison and to illustrate the effect of the original bba , crs used dod actuary estimates of the effect on future disabled retirees .

based on those data , crs estimated that lifetime retired benefits for the average disabled military retiree would have been affected as follows if the reduced colas had remained in effect .

enlisted personnel would have received about $1.16 million rather than $1.29 million , a reduction of $123,000 or 9.6% in lifetime benefits received over a 37-year period ; officer personnel would have received about $2.60 million rather than $2.74 million , a decrease of $144,000 or 5.3% in lifetime benefits received over a 38-year period ( see table 2 ) .

reflecting dod actuary data , the estimate above reflects an average disabled enlisted retiree who joined the military at 24 , retired at 33 after 9 years of service , and lived until the age of 71 .

the comparable average disabled officer retiree would have begun service at the age of 28 , retired at 40 after 12 years of service , and lived until the age of 77 .

these estimates suggest that under the original bba , the potential effect for disabled retirees would have been about double that faced by nondisabled retirees ( table 2 ) .

these estimates , however , do not include income that about one - third of disabled retirees would receive in additional combat related special compensation ( crsc ) or department of veterans affairs ( va ) disability benefits .

under concurrent receipt , certain disabled military retirees can receive crsc or va disability benefits in addition to their dod retirement benefits if their disability was combat - related or assessed as 50% or greater .

