many federally funded programs to assist unemployed workers are coordinated through state - and locally run ame rican job centers ( ajcs ; also known as one - stop career centers ) .

programs available to jobseekers at ajcs include income support ( typically unemployment insurance ) , as well as a variety of reemployment and training services .

services may be provided on - site at an ajc or by a partner entity at a different location .

ajcs are operated by state and local workforce development boards .

boards are made up of representatives from business , government , the workforce , and other stakeholders .

the federal government delegates most employment and training service decisions to state and local boards under the premise that sub - federal boards are best suited to meet the needs of the local labor market .

there are approximately 2,500 ajc locations nationwide .

the ajc / one - stop system was created by the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia ; p.l .

105-220 ) .

wia established that a group of federal funding streams ( "mandatory partner programs" ) would be coordinated through state and locally run centers .

the workforce innovation and opportunity act of 2014 ( wioa ; p.l .

113-128 ) amended and reauthorized many wia programs and maintained the ajc / one - stop system .

this report aims to offer a brief overview of the programs administered through the ajc system .

it emphasizes eligibility requirements and the scope of benefits and services available to individuals .

it does not emphasize the roles and responsibilities of institutional actors such as state agency grantees and local workforce boards .

readers seeking additional information on the programs discussed are encouraged to consult the crs products and other resources referenced throughout this report .

this report divides ajc partner programs into several groups and subgroups .

unemployment insurance provides weekly cash payments to workers who have involuntarily lost a job , have a demonstrated work history , and meet other requirements .

g rant programs with national scope support employment and training services and have a presence in every state .

competitive grant programs provide employment and training services but tend to be narrower in scope and reach than formula grant programs .

the funding from these programs does not necessarily reach every state .

other partner programs are mandatory ajc partners but may not typically provide benefits to individuals or may have a primary purpose other than placing individual jobseekers in employment .

this report focuses on mandatory partner programs in the ajc / one - stop system with the primary purpose of providing workforce - related benefits to individuals .

some federally funded programs with employment and training components are not required partners with ajcs and therefore are not discussed in this report .

as such , the group of programs included in this report may vary from other reviews of federal employment training programs and should not be considered exhaustive .

unemployment insurance ( ui ) provides a weekly cash payment to workers who involuntarily become unemployed after establishing a requisite work history .

there are two programs currently authorized within the ui system: unemployment compensation ( uc ) extended benefits ( eb ) federal laws and regulations provide broad guidelines on uc benefit coverage , eligibility , and benefit determination .

the specifics of regular uc benefits are determined by each state .

this results in essentially 53 different programs .

when eligible workers lose their jobs , the uc program may provide income support through the payment of uc benefits .

individuals who exhaust uc benefits may be eligible for additional weeks of ui benefits through the permanent eb program , depending on worker eligibility , state law , and economic conditions in the state .

no eb benefits were available in fy2016 ; and , as of the week of july 9 , 2017 , no eb benefits have been available in any state in fy2017 thus far .

table 1 provides data on recent outlays from the uc and eb programs .

the ajc network co - locates and coordinates federally funded employment and training programs .

unlike ui , funding levels for employment and training programs are capped by statute or appropriation level .

as such , it is possible that a jobseeker who is eligible for a program may not receive services .

table 3 at the end of this report provides brief descriptions of each ajc partner program and their fy2017 funding levels .

the largest portion of ajc funding is from a group of grants that have a presence in all states .

most of these programs provide funding to state agencies via formula , though the specific funding processes and grant recipients vary by program .

this report divides these partner programs with national scope into three groups: programs available to all jobseekers , which have no eligibility criteria ; programs targeted by circumstances of job loss , which provide services to workers whose job loss and work history meet certain conditions ; and programs targeted by jobseeker characteristics , which provide services to workers based on their personal characteristics ( such as veteran status or disability ) rather than their work history or reason for unemployment .

table 2 at the end of this section summarizes the eligibility criteria for these primary partner programs .

the employment and training programs discussed in this section are funded by formula grants to states and do not have eligibility requirements .

funding levels are capped by annual appropriation levels .

in times of high demand for services , jobseekers may receive less intensive services or be placed on waiting lists due to limited resources .

this wioa - authorized formula grant program provides funds to states for employment and training services for individuals ages 18 and older .

it is a universal access system with no additional eligibility requirements other than age .

funds are allotted by formula grants to states ( which in turn allocate funds to local entities ) to provide training and related services to unemployed or underemployed individuals .

services include job search assistance , skill assessment , career planning , case management , and training ( including occupational skills training and on - the - job training ) .

training is conducted through a voucher system that allows individuals to attend training at eligible training providers ( eg , community colleges ) .

the wagner - peyser act established the employment service ( es ) as a system jointly operated by dol and the state employment security agencies .

the central mission of the es is to facilitate the match between individuals seeking employment and employers seeking workers .

es funds are allotted from dol to the states through a formula grant .

typically , ui recipients must register with the es .

jobseekers who are not eligible for ui may also register with the es .

es offers an array of services to job seekers and employers , including career counseling , job search workshops , labor market information , job listings , applicant screening , and referrals to job openings .

states provide es services through three tiers of service delivery: self - service , facilitated self - help , and staff - assisted .

as the names of the tiers imply , progressively more active staff involvement is required as services range from internet job postings to career counseling .

upon the establishment of the unemployment compensation ( uc ) program in 1935 , es offices also began to administer the uc "work test" requirements .

these offices monitor uc claimants to ensure that they are able to work , available for work , and actively seeking work .

for the recently unemployed , the es processes uc income support claims while helping the individual find new employment .

education activities under the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) are a mandatory ajc partner .

aefla provides formula grants to states to fund basic educational services at the high school level and below , as well as english language courses .

states typically subgrant federal funds to local providers ( such as school districts or community colleges ) that provide the actual classes .

the programs discussed in this section are available to workers who are involuntarily separated from their jobs and meet other criteria .

in some cases , workers who have been notified of a layoff but have not yet been separated from their jobs may also be eligible for these programs .

this program provides formula grants to states for services to dislocated workers .

to qualify as a dislocated worker , an individual must have been laid off from employment , sufficiently attached to the workforce ( eg , eligible for unemployment benefits ) , and unlikely to return to the occupation or industry from which the worker was laid off .

services available under the dislocated worker program include job search assistance , skill assessment , career planning , case management , and training ( including occupational skills training and on - the - job training ) .

approximately 80% of dislocated worker funds are allotted by formula grants to states ( which in turn allocate funds to local entities ) to provide training and related services to qualified unemployed individuals .

the remainder of the appropriation is reserved by dol for national dislocated worker grants , which , in part , provide funds to states or entities that are affected by major economic dislocations , such as plant closures or mass layoffs .

workers whose job loss is attributable to outsourcing or increased imports may be eligible for the taa program .

to be eligible for taa benefits , a group of workers must petition dol to certify that foreign trade "contributed importantly" to their job loss .

once a group is certified , individual workers may receive benefits through the ajc system .

taa provides reemployment services , training subsidies , and income support while in training .

taa - certified workers age 50 and over who pursue reemployment at a lower wage may participate in a wage insurance program .

the programs discussed in this section determine eligibility by workers' personal characteristics .

these eligibility requirements may or may not include economic characteristics such as individual or household income .

state vr agencies provide employment - related services to individuals with disabilities .

these agencies are funded by a combination of federal formula grants and state funds .

to be eligible for vr services , an applicant must establish that ( 1 ) he or she has a physical or mental impairment that results in a barrier to employment and ( 2 ) that the applicant would benefit from vr services .

vr services are customized to each client and may vary .

services include ( but are not limited to ) counseling , job search assistance , training , and support services in the workplace .

this primarily residential job training program provides a range of services to low - income individuals between the ages of 16 and 24 .

the purpose of the job corps program is to provide disadvantaged youth with the skills needed to obtain and hold a job , enter the armed forces , or enroll in advanced training or higher education .

in addition to receiving academic and employment training , youth also engage in social and other services to promote their overall well - being .

services include educational support , work - based learning , counseling , and other support services .

this wioa - authorized state formula grant program provides funding for training and related services to certain youth who are in school or out of school .

a youth is eligible for services funded by this program if the individual is between the ages of 14 and 21 ( or 24 for out - of - school youth ) and meets other statutory criteria regarding income ( primarily for in - school youth only ) and / or barriers to employment .

eligible participants in a program funded by these grants receive services that provide assistance in achieving academic and employment success through activities that improve educational and skill competencies and foster effective connections to employers .

such services include those involving educational achievement , employment services , linkages between educational achievement and employment , and additional support services .

cseoa ( title v of the older americans act ) is a formula grant program , also known as the senior community service employment program ( scsep ) , which provides funding to promote part - time employment opportunities for unemployed low - income individuals who are age 55 or older .

in addition to the age and income requirements to participate , individuals must generally have limited prospects of securing unsubsidized employment .

the cseoa provides funding to states and national sponsor organizations for subsidized employment in a variety of community - service activities , such as working at community centers , libraries , or schools .

participants in the program may receive training , counseling , transportation , and placement assistance into unsubsidized employment .

jvsg provides grants to states to fund state personnel positions that provide employment services to and on behalf of veterans .

jvsg - funded personnel are divided into disabled veteran outreach program ( dvop ) personnel and local veterans' employment representative ( lver ) personnel .

dvop personnel provide direct employment services to disabled and other high - need veterans .

lver personnel perform outreach to local employers , conduct employment workshops for veterans , and work with other ajc personnel to provide employment - related services to veterans .

jvsg does not provide funding for training , though dvop and lver personnel may refer veteran jobseekers to programs administered by the department of veterans affairs that provide funding for education and training .

veterans also receive priority of service in all dol - administered employment and training programs for which they qualify .

several competitive grant programs are mandatory ajc partners .

unlike the programs discussed in the prior section , these funding streams may not have a presence in every state .

authorized by section 171 of wioa , this competitive grant program funds projects that provide education and construction skills training for disadvantaged youth .

participating youth gain work experience , job training , education ( a ged or preparation for secondary education ) , and leadership development by working to rehabilitate and construct housing for homeless and low - income families .

authorized by section 166 of wioa , this competitive grant program provides training and related services to low - income indians , alaska natives , and native hawaiians through grants to indian tribes and reservations and other native american groups .

authorized by section 167 of wioa , this competitive grant program provides training and related services , including technical assistance , to disadvantaged migrant and seasonal farmworkers and their dependents through discretionary grants awarded to public , private , and nonprofit organizations .

authorized by section 212 of the second chance act of 2007 , this competitive grant program supports employment and training services for persons who have been incarcerated or are preparing for reentry .

in addition to the previously discussed grant programs , several other federally funded programs are required ajc partners under section 121 of wioa .

while these programs can support employment and training activities , they may also support activities with other purposes and may have accountability measures that are related to non - employment outcomes .

this report does not include funding figures for these programs since only a portion of funding for these programs support employment and training activities .

the csbg provides federal funds to states , territories , and tribes for distribution to local agencies to support a wide range of community - based activities to reduce poverty .

in some cases , csbg funds may support employment and training activities .

wioa specifies that employment and training activities carried out with csbg funds must partner with ajcs .

csbg is administered by the department of health and human services .

the carl d. perkins career and technical education act provides funds to states to support vocational and technical career programs at secondary and postsecondary institutions .

postsecondary providers that receive perkins funds can include ( but are not limited to ) community and technical colleges , vocational schools , adult workforce education centers , and correctional facilities .

perkins act programs are administered by the department of education .

postsecondary activities supported under this act are a mandatory ajc partner .

unlike some other grant programs that are ajc partners , perkins funds support institutions and do not provide direct funding to individual students .

tanf block grants are federal grants to states to provide benefits and services to low - income families .

the tanf block grant's overall purpose is to "increase the flexibility of states to meet four statutory goals: ( 1 )  provide assistance to needy families so that children may remain in their homes ; ( 2 ) reduce dependency of needy parents on government benefits through work , job preparation , and marriage ; ( 3 ) reduce out - of - wedlock pregnancies ; and ( 4 ) promote the formation and maintenance of two - parent families. .

states may use these funds for a variety of activities to meet these goals .

tanf programs are administered by the department of health and human services .

