originally , indian tribes exercised sovereign authority over their territory and the all people within it , including non - indians .

however , indian tribes lost some of that authority by "ceding their lands to the united states and announcing their dependence on the federal government. .

"indian tribes are prohibited from exercising both those powers of autonomous states that are expressly terminated by congress and those powers inconsistent with their status . .

express termination of a tribe's sovereign authority may be found in treaties and statutes .

as to sovereign authority lost by virtue of the tribes' status , the supreme court has explained , "[t]he areas in which such implicit divestiture of sovereignty has been held to have occurred are those involving the relations between an indian tribe and nonmembers of the tribe. .

by virtue of their "dependent status," therefore , tribes have lost the sovereign authority to determine their relations with nonmembers .

accordingly , in oliphant v. suquamish , the supreme court held that indian tribes do not have inherent sovereign authority to try non - indian criminal defendants , and in montana v. united states , the supreme court announced the general rule for civil jurisdiction that "the inherent sovereign powers of an indian tribe do not extend to the activities of nonmembers of the tribe. .

immediately after announcing this rule for civil jurisdiction in montana , however , the court identified two exceptions , known as the montana exceptions: to be sure , indian tribes retain inherent sovereign power to exercise some forms of civil jurisdiction over non - indians on their reservations , even on non - indian fee lands .

a tribe may regulate , through taxation , licensing , or other means , the activities of nonmembers who enter consensual relationships with the tribe or its members , through commercial dealing , contracts , leases , or other arrangements .

a tribe may also retain inherent power to exercise civil authority over the conduct of non - indians on fee land within its reservation when that conduct threatens or has some direct effect on the political integrity , the economic security , or the health or welfare of the tribe .

in order to fit within one of these exceptions , nonmember conduct must somehow impinge on a tribe's inherent authority to govern itself and its members .

the supreme court has identified the tribes' right as landowners to exclude nonmembers from tribal land as one of the bases for upholding tribal taxes against nonmembers' activities on tribal land .

it is unclear , however whether the power to exclude is independent of the montana exceptions .

tribes may also exercise jurisdiction over nonmembers when congress authorizes them to do so .

congress has provided for tribal authority over nonmembers related to the sale of alcohol on reservations , enforcement of tribal hunting and fishing ordinances on reservations , and enforcement of certain environmental statutes .

although tribal jurisdiction over nonmembers is fairly limited , if a nonmember defendant in tribal court believes the court lacks jurisdiction , he or she must first challenge the jurisdiction in tribal court .

only after exhausting the tribal court remedies may the nonmember get relief in federal court .

in most cases , tribal criminal jurisdiction over non - indian offenders is clear — as a general rule , indian tribes do not have it .

however , there is an exception for non - indians who commit domestic and dating violence against tribal members or indians residing within the tribes' jurisdiction , provided the defendants have certain ties to the tribes and the tribes provide defendant with rights that are not required in other tribal court criminal proceedings .

tribal criminal jurisdiction over nonmember indians is more difficult to discern .

such jurisdiction depends on whether the nonmember indian is recognized as an indian by the federal government or the tribal community .

this determination turns on factors such as enrollment in a tribe ; the degree to which the nonmember indian has received federal services and benefits for indians ; benefited from tribal rights or services ; and participated in tribal ceremonies and social life .

the general rule that tribes lack civil jurisdiction over nonmembers is deceptively simple .

tribal civil jurisdiction over nonmembers is complicated for several reasons .

first , the two montana exceptions to the general rule for consensual relationships and threats to the tribe do not provide bright line rules .

courts must decide cases involving tribal civil jurisdiction over nonmembers based on the unique facts of each case .

second , there are two types of civil jurisdiction: legislative and adjudicatory .

the court has held that tribal adjudicatory jurisdiction is no broader than tribal legislative jurisdiction .

it has not determined whether tribal adjudicatory jurisdiction is as broad as tribal legislative jurisdiction .

to answer the question whether a tribal court may adjudicate a case involving nonmember conduct , therefore , the court inquires whether the tribe would be able to regulate that conduct .

again , there are no bright line rules .

however , the supreme court may soon provide some clarity .

the court decided to hear a case in october 2015 that may clarify the extent of tribal adjudicatory jurisdiction .

third , the court has refused to draw a bright line based on the ownership of the land on which the nonmember conduct takes place .

in nevada v. hicks , the court held that the montana rule applied to indian and non - indian land .

the status of the land is one factor — perhaps in some cases even a determinative factor — to consider in determining whether a tribe has jurisdiction over non - indian conduct .

finally , it is unclear whether tribes generally have civil jurisdiction over indians who are not members of the tribe .

although congress re - vested tribes with jurisdiction to try nonmember indians for criminal conduct , it did not take any action regarding civil jurisdiction over nonmember indians .

the leading commentator on indian law , however , believes that because oliphant 's analysis focused on the understanding of congress and the executive branch , in addition to that of the courts , congress's decision to re - vest tribes with criminal jurisdiction over nonmember indians alters the court's analysis of congress's understanding of tribal jurisdiction over nonmember indians such that the court might find that tribes have civil jurisdiction over nonmember indians even though congress has not provided for it .

as a general rule , indian tribes lack criminal and civil jurisdiction over nonmembers .

however , there are exceptions .

first , congress re - vested indian tribes with inherent authority to exercise criminal jurisdiction over nonmember indians , as well as non - indians who commit dating and domestic violence against indians within the tribes' jurisdictions , provided the non - indian has certain enumerated ties to the tribes .

second , under the first montana exception , tribes may exercise civil jurisdiction over nonmembers when the nonmembers have entered private consensual relationships with the tribe or its members , provided the conduct at issue relates to the consensual relationship .

third , under the second montana exception , indian tribes may exercise civil jurisdiction over nonmembers when the nonmembers' conduct threatens the integrity of the tribe .

fourth , tribes may exercise jurisdiction over nonmembers when congress authorizes them to do so .

although the supreme court has recognized the tribal right to exclude nonmembers from tribal land as a basis for regulatory authority , it is not clear whether the right to exclude is independent of the montana exceptions .

while the supreme court has drawn tribal jurisdiction over nonmembers narrowly , it has also held that defendants in tribal court who challenge the tribal court's jurisdiction must exhaust their tribal court remedies before seeking relief in federal court .

