this report discusses institutional features that make federal financial regulators ( and other independent agencies ) relatively independent from the president and congress .

these characteristics are diverse , their relationship to independence sometimes subtle , and they are not always applied uniformly — certain regulators that have been given relatively more independence in one area have been given relatively less independence in other areas .

table 1 lists the federal financial regulators that are discussed in this report , together with their respective responsibilities .

the financial regulators were created between 1863 ( office of the comptroller of the currency [occ] ) and 2010 ( consumer financial protection bureau [cfpb] ) .

financial regulators set policy , conduct rulemaking to implement law , and supervise financial institutions .

some of these agencies have other responsibilities in addition to their regulatory responsibilities , and some features influencing their independence may have been motivated by those other responsibilities .

for example , the federal reserve system ( fed ) is responsible for monetary policy and the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) and national credit union administration ( ncua ) provide deposit insurance .

recent congresses have considered legislation that would alter the structure and design of some of the federal financial regulators .

congress has debated structural changes such as whether those agencies should be subject to appropriations and should be led by a single leader or a multi - member board .

congress also has debated oversight changes such as whether it should be easier for congress to reverse agency rulemaking and whether to subject agencies to the same cost - benefit analysis requirements as executive agencies .

the issues raised in this report highlight the importance of how those agencies would be structured .

this report provides a history and overview of the rationale for making financial regulators independent and a discussion of what structural characteristics contribute toward independence and how those characteristics vary among regulators .

public administration scholars and observers of federal government functioning have long studied structural characteristics that endow certain agencies with greater independence from the president and congress than is typical for such organizations .

existing typologies of independent federal agencies and their characteristics are idealized models that describe such organizations in general terms .

in reality , although independent agencies share many characteristics , individual independent agencies often have features that might be considered atypical for the category .

as one scholar observed with regard to governmental organization more generally: there are no general laws defining the structure , powers , and immunities of the various institutional types .

each possesses only those powers enumerated in its enabling act , or in the case of organizations created by executive action , set forth by executive order or in a contract .

whatever special attributes may have been acquired by the various organizational types are entirely the product of precedent , as reflected in successive enactments by the congress ; judicial interpretations ; and public , agency , and congressional attitudes .

according to one law review article , "there is no general , all - purpose statutory or judicial definition of 'independent agency' ... notions of what constitutes independence expand easily.... " a list of independent regulatory agencies is provided in the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) , but only for purposes of that act ; the act does not provide a definition of independent .

however , the literature identifies a few key traits that distinguish independent agencies from executive agencies .

organizational features that might affect the functional independence of a federal agency include those related to agency location ; selection , appointment , and tenure of its leadership ; presidential oversight ; the authority to issue rules and collect information ; and congressional oversight and funding .

leadership characteristics include leadership structure ( collegial , eg , board , or singular , eg , director ) , the term of office , level of protection from at - will removal by the president , holdover provisions , and qualifications for office - holding .

p residential oversight characteristics include the organization's ability submit reports , testimony , and budget requests to relevant congressional committees independently and without the administration's review .

with regard to rulemaking and information collection , many rules developed by most agencies and departments are reviewed by the office of management and budget's ( omb's ) office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) .

rules developed by regulatory agencies specified as independent in the pra , however , are not reviewed by oira and not subject to executive order requirements that their "economically significant" rules be subject to cost - benefit analysis .

in contrast , the pra requires that oira review the information collection activities of all agencies , including independent regulatory agencies .

congressional oversight of independent agencies takes the form of statutory requirements to submit semi - annual or annual reports to congress ; testimony before congress by agency officials ( some are statutorily required to do so periodically ) ; gao audits and investigations , subject to some statutory limitations ; and senate confirmation of presidential nominees for top agency leadership .

an agency's functional independence may also be influenced by whether it is funded through the appropriations process or through dedicated funding or fees .

the following sections discuss these traits in more detail with regard to financial regulators , noting variation among regulators where it exists .

in the late 19 th century , congress began to establish certain federal agencies with organizational characteristics that gave them a greater degree of independence from presidential direction than would otherwise have been the case .

some of the earliest agencies structured in this way were those with financial regulatory responsibilities , including the fed ( 1913 ) , the fdic ( 1933 ) , and the sec ( 1934 ) .

over time , congress has , in certain cases , given agencies organizational characteristics that resulted in a greater degree of independence from congress , as well .

several rationales for doing so have been identified , and these include the perceived need to insulate officials carrying out quasi - legislative or quasi - judicial functions from the direction of the president ; the perception that insulation from partisan politics might yield better decisionmaking and policymaking based on technical expertise ; and institutional rivalries between congress and the president over control of the federal bureaucracy .

congress has continued to establish independent financial regulatory agencies into the 21 st century .

for example , fhfa was established in 2008 , and cfpb was established in 2010 .

the continuing use of the independent regulatory agency model , in one form or another , suggests that congress continues to find agency independence to be appropriate under certain circumstances .

legislative proposals in recent congresses indicate that congress is still deliberating over the right regulatory structure to balance independence and accountability .

in view of the use of the independent regulatory model for the design of federal financial regulatory agencies , several questions might arise .

first , what is the relative level of independence among these agencies ? .

second , what is the effect of independence on the functioning of these agencies ? .

relatedly , what are the positive and negative consequences , in practice , of giving these agencies greater independence from the president and from congress ? .

congress has granted federal financial regulators independence in ways obvious ( "for cause" removal , self - financing ) and subtle ( exemption of agency testimony and budget requests from omb review ) .

no two independent agencies have exactly the same structure .

it might be impractical to assess the relative levels of independence among agencies on the basis of the number or type of characteristics of independence an agency has .

as congress has established additional agencies with these kinds of independence , it has used various combinations of organizational features to address a variety of policy contexts and preferences , and this makes comparisons difficult .

these differences could reflect the differences in the roles and responsibilities of the various regulators , or simply reflect historical accident .

federal financial regulators that are relatively more independent in some areas are relatively less independent in others .

for example , the occ is located within the department of the treasury and the comptroller does not have for cause protection , but has greater budgetary independence than the sec or cftc .

that said , the fed has been given the most independence of any financial regulator on all the measures considered in this report ( where differences exist ) , presumably in deference to its monetary policy responsibilities .

besides structural characteristics , the culture and traditions of an agency and the relationships between its leadership and the president can also influence the relative independence of the agency during a particular period .

arguably , a more relevant assessment might evaluate the degree to which specific features of independence at particular agencies serve current policy contexts and preferences .

congress might , as part of its oversight of federal regulators , choose to investigate the impact of these features on the relationships between the agency and the president , the agency and congress , and the agency and the regulated industry .

it might also assess the character of the policymaking that such independence allows .

finally , congress could elect to assess the degree to which the agency's operations are subject to governmental checks and balances .

an assessment of a financial regulator , like that of any independent regulatory agency , might examine not only the level of independence accorded to that organization , but also the responsibilities and authorities that have been vested in its leadership .

arguably , the degree of autonomy and power together might have the greatest impact on the integrity of the policymaking process and policy outcomes , as well as the preservation of democratic accountability .

agency independence is traditionally viewed relative to the president , but the structural features discussed in this report can also increase or decrease independence from congress .

agencies that are more independent from the president can sometimes become more congressionally dependent for resources and power .

in contrast , where congress is successful in limiting the president's authority over an agency , this might indirectly reduce the influence of members over that agency .

some agency characteristics that more directly shield an agency from congressional control and presidential direction , such as funding the agency outside of the appropriations process , might further insulate the agency from partisan political influence .

although the agency would be constrained by a statutory framework and institutionalized oversight mechanisms , such insulation from partisan influence might lead to more limited accountability by the agency to , as well as less control of agency activities by , elected officials .

in short , decisions about the degree of independence to accord an agency might involve tradeoffs among various values and goals .

