a pension is a voluntary benefit offered by employers to assist employees in providing for their financial security in retirement .

department of labor ( dol ) data in 2017 indicated that 65% of full - time workers in the united states participated in a retirement plan sponsored by their employer .

the two types of pension plans are defined contribution ( dc ) plans , in which participants have individual accounts that are the basis of income in retirement ; and defined benefit ( db ) plans , in which participants receive regular monthly benefit payments in retirement ( which some refer to as a "traditional" type of pension ) .

pension plans are also classified by whether they are sponsored by one employer ( single employer plans ) or by more than one employer ( multiemployer and multiple employer plans ) .

multiemployer pension plans are sponsored by employers in the same industry and maintained as part of a collective bargaining agreement .

multiple employer plans are sponsored by more than one employer but are not maintained as part of a collective bargaining agreement .

multiple employer pension plans are not common .

nearly all private - sector pension plans are governed by the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ; p.l .

93-406 ) , which is enforced by the department of the treasury , the dol , and the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) .

because of differences in the structure of the plans , single and multiemployer db pension plans have different rules under some sections of erisa .

examples include the existence of separate funding rules for each type of plan and pension insurance program .

multiemployer db plans are of current concern to congress for several reasons: about 10% to 15% of multiemployer participants are in plans that are projected to have insufficient plan assets within the next 20 years to pay 100% of the benefits promised to plan participants ; because the liabilities of the pension plans that are projected to become insolvent are so great , pbgc would likely be unable to continue to guarantee participants' benefits if one or two of these plans became insolvent ; legislation enacted in december 2014 provides options to stave off insolvency for some multiemployer db pension plans ; one very large plan's application to reduce benefits to stave off insolvency was denied by the u.s. treasury ; and the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) , enacted february 9 , 2018 , created the joint select committee on solvency of multiemployer pension plans to address the impending insolvencies of several large multiemployer db pension plans and pbgc .

possible solutions to plan underfunding could involve some combination of increased contributions from the employers that sponsor pension plans , cuts in future benefits to plan participants who are currently working , cuts in current benefits to retired participants , or financial assistance from the u.s. government .

for a number of years , some members of congress have expressed a desire to address the challenges faced by the sponsors of multiemployer db pension plans and by pbgc's multiemployer insurance program .

policymakers have been giving increased attention to issues concerning multiemployer db pension plans and pbgc's multiemployer insurance program .

the multiemployer pension reform act of 2014 , enacted as division o in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( mpra ; p.l .

113-235 ) , among other provisions , ( 1 ) made permanent certain funding rules that were scheduled to sunset and ( 2 ) allowed some plans to stave off insolvency by reducing benefits for some participants .

some members of congress subsequently expressed interest in additional proposals that would create new multiemployer pension plan structures that the creators of the proposals say would eliminate some of the problems currently faced by some multiemployer db pension plans .

although many multiemployer db pension plans are underfunded , some can expect their funding position to improve with modest changes to the plan , such as increased employer contributions .

however , about 10% to 15% of participants are in multiemployer plans that are projected to become insolvent within 20 years .

insolvent db multiemployer pension plans are eligible for financial assistance from pbgc .

pbgc has sufficient assets from which to provide financial assistance to currently insolvent plans and to smaller multiemployer plans that may become insolvent in the future .

however , if one or more large multiemployer plans become insolvent , pbgc would likely have insufficient resources from which to pay 100% of the benefits owed to plan participants .

pbgc has indicated that once it has exhausted the assets in the multiemployer insurance program revolving funds , it would be able to pay total benefits equal to total premium income .

this would likely mean that participants' benefits would be cut to levels below the current maximum benefit .

most participants would receive less than $2,000 per year because pbgc would be able to provide annual financial assistance equal only to its annual premium revenue , which was $291 million in fy2017 .

for participants' benefits to be paid at the guaranteed amount , then either ( 1 ) premiums would have to rise to levels that many plan sponsors , plan participants , and policymakers would find unreasonable or ( 2 ) federal financial assistance to pbgc would be required .

pbgc estimated that premium levels would need to increase in the range of 59% to 85% to ensure solvency over the next 10 years and in the range of 363% to 552% to ensure solvency over the next 20 years .

in december 2014 , congress enacted mpra , which ( 1 ) increased the premiums that multiemployer db pension plans pay to pbgc , ( 2 ) modified certain multiemployer db pension funding rules , ( 3 ) facilitated mergers and partitions of multiemployer db pension plans , and ( 4 ) allowed certain multiemployer db pension plans to reduce benefits to stave off insolvency .

many of the provisions were in a 2013 proposal put forward by the national coordinating committee for multiemployer plans ( nccmp ) , which is an organization that represents a number of multiemployer pension plans .

nccmp created a retirement security review commission ( the commission ) to gather input from a coalition of employers and labor groups for multiemployer db pension reform proposals .

in february 2013 , the commission issued a report to advance a proposal that it indicated would reform and strengthen the multiemployer pension system .

the commission proposed the following: ( 1 ) reforms to existing funding rules for multiemployer pension plans ; ( 2 ) solutions to address deeply troubled multiemployer db pension plans ( plans that are expected to become insolvent in the next 10 years ) ; and ( 3 ) new plan designs to encourage the creation of new multiemployer plans .

mpra contained provisions that reformed some existing funding rules and addressed the problems of deeply troubled plans .

mpra did not contain any provisions related to new plan designs .

details of the provisions of mpra are in appendix b .

as of september 21 , 2018 , the u.s. treasury has received 32 applications to reduce benefits under mpra .

five applications , including the application by the central states , southeast and southwest areas pension plan ( a very large plan with 400,000 participants ) , have been denied .

ten applications have been withdrawn , and seven applications have been approved .

decisions are still pending on the remaining 10 applications .

the central states , southeast and southwest areas pension plan ( central states ) was the first plan to submit an application to the u.s. treasury .

the application received a considerable amount of attention because the plan has more than 400,000 participants and was proposing to reduce benefits to approximately two - thirds of plan participants .

it is the largest multiemployer db pension in critical and declining status .

as noted above , because of the size of its benefit obligations , and absent any federal financial assistance , the insolvency of central states would likely lead to the insolvency of pbgc .

on may 6 , 2016 , the u.s. treasury denied central states' application .

it cited three instances in which the application failed to meet the criteria in mpra for the approval of benefit suspensions: ( 1 ) the actuarial projections in the application failed to show that the proposed benefit reductions would avoid insolvency , ( 2 ) the proposed benefit reductions were not distributed equitably , and ( 3 ) the participant notices were not written so as to be understood by the average plan participant .

central states indicated that it would not resubmit its application to reduce benefits .

the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-123 ) , enacted february 9 , 2018 , created the joint select committee on solvency of multiemployer pension plans to author a report and prepare legislative language to address the impending insolvencies of several large multiemployer defined benefit ( db ) pension plans and pbgc .

the committee consists of 16 members of congress , including four house and senate leaders from each party .

the joint committee must hold five or more public meetings and three or more public hearings , which may include field hearings .

as of september 14 , 2018 , the committee has held six hearings .

each cochair ( senators orrin hatch and sherrod brown ) will be able to select an equal number of witnesses for each hearing .

the committee must provide to congress no later than november 30 , 2018 , a report and proposed legislative language to improve the solvency of multiemployer db plans and the pbgc .

the report and proposed legislative language must be approved by ( 1 ) a majority of committee members appointed by the speaker of the house and majority leader of the senate and ( 2 ) a majority of committee members appointed by the minority leader of the house and minority leader of the senate .

the provisions that establish the joint committee contain provisions that provide procedures for the consideration of the joint committee's bill by the senate committee on finance and the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) .

the bill also provides aspects of senate procedures for consideration of the joint committee's bill by the full senate .

there are no provisions that require consideration of the bill by any committees in the house or by the full house .

appendix a .

defined benefit plan funding this appendix provides background on basic concepts related to the funding of db pension plans .

defined benefit plan balance sheet figure a - 1 depicts a typical db pension plan's balance sheet .

it consists of plan assets , which are the value of the investments made with accrued employer ( and employee , if any ) contributions to the plan , and plan liabilities , which are the value of participants' benefits earned under the terms of the plan .

plan assets are invested in equities ( such as publicly traded stock ) , debt ( such as the u.s. treasury and corporate bonds ) , private equity , hedge funds , and real estate .

defined benefit plan funding ratio the funding ratio measures the adequacy of a db pension plan's ability to pay for promised benefits .

the funding ratio is calculated as a funding ratio of 100% indicates that the db plan has set aside enough funds , if the invested funds grow at the expected rate of return or better , to pay all of the plan's benefit obligations .

funding ratios that are less than 100% indicate that the db plan will not be able to meet all of its future benefit obligations .

because benefit obligations are paid out over a period of 20 years to 30 years , participants in an underfunded plan will likely receive their promised benefits in the near term .

however , if the underfunding persists without additional contributions , plan participants might not receive 100% of their promised benefits in the future .

in response to strong investment returns in the 1990s , many multiemployer db pension plans increased benefits to participants .

many of these plans then became underfunded during the early 2000s as financial markets weakened .

their financial position worsened as a result of ( 1 ) stricter funding rules put in place in the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-280 ) , ( 2 ) the decline in equity markets in 2008 , ( 3 ) low interest rates as a result of weak economic conditions , and ( 4 ) the bankruptcy of some of the firms participating in the plans .

the value of plan assets pension plans report the value of plan assets using two methods: market values ( the value at which each asset can be sold on a particular date ) or smoothed values ( the average of the past , and sometimes expected future , market values of each asset ) .

the smoothing of asset values prevents large swings in asset values and creates a more predictable funding environment for plan sponsors .

one of the drawbacks of smoothing is that smoothed asset values may be substantially different from market values .

some advocates of reporting market values note that smoothed values are often higher than market values ( particularly during periods of market declines ) , which could overstate the financial health of some pension plans .

some advocates of smoothing argue that market values are useful only if a plan needs to know its liquidated value ( eg , if the plan had to pay all of its benefit obligations at one point in time ) , which is unlikely to be the case as most pension plans are likely to be ongoing concerns .

plan liabilities a pension plan's benefits are a plan liability spread out over many years in the future .

these future benefits are calculated and reported as current dollar values ( also called present value ) .

figure a - 2 shows the process by which future benefits are discounted .

using a formula , benefits that are expected to be paid in a particular year in the future are calculated so they can be expressed as a current value .

the process is called discounting , and it is the reverse of the process of compounding , which projects how much a dollar amount will be worth at a point in the future .

the formula by which future values are calculated as current values is in figure a - 3 .

for example , assuming a discount rate of 10% , $121 in two years' time is worth $121 ( 1.1 ) 2=$100 today .

the present value of a dollar amount is inversely related to both the discount rate and the number of years in the future .

as the discount rate or number of years in the future increases , present value decreases ; as the discount rate or number of years decreases , present value increases .

in the above example , if the discount rate is 15% , then $121 in two years' time is worth $121 ( 1.15 ) 2=$91.49 today , and $121 in three years' time is worth $121 ( 1.1 ) 3=$79.56 .

discount rate used to value future benefits in the context of db pension plans , plan actuaries calculate the present value of future benefit obligations by estimating ( 1 ) the dollar amount of the benefits accrued by plan participants and ( 2 ) the years in the future in which the benefits are expected to be paid .

the internal revenue code does not require multiemployer pension plans to use a specific discount rate to value their future benefit obligation .

the assumptions a plan uses must be reasonable and offer the best estimate of the plan's expected experience .

in practice , multiemployer plans generally discount plan liabilities using the expected rate of return on the plan's assets .

however , multiemployer plans are required to value plan liabilities using rates of returns to bonds , as well .

on schedule mb of form 5500 , multiemployer plans report the present value of future benefits discounted by the expected return on plan assets ( listed as the ac crued l iability u nder u nit c redit c ost m ethod ) and by long - term bond yields ( listed as the c urrent l iability under the "rpa '94" information ) .

the rpa '94 discount rate is generally lower than a plan's expected return on assets .

pension policy experts have several viewpoints on the appropriate discount rate that pension plans should use to value plan liabilities .

broadly speaking , some actuaries recommend that pension plans discount future benefits using the expected rate of return on plan investments ( the current practice for multiemployer db pension plans ) .

some financial economists , by contrast , recommend that plans discount the liabilities using a discount rate that reflects the likelihood that the benefit obligation will be paid .

the rationale for the actuaries' approach is as follows: because funds are to be set aside to pay an obligation in the future , the amount that has to be set aside should consider the rate of the return on the investment .

for example , given an expected return of 10% , a $100 obligation payable in one year would be valued at $90.91 in today's dollars ( $100 รท 1.1 = $90.91 ) , and $90.91 could be set aside today to pay the $100 future obligation .

the rationale for the approach favored by financial economists is that pension obligations should be discounted based on the likelihood that they will be received by plan participants .

because participants are very likely to receive most of their pension benefits ( for example , because of vesting provisions in erisa and pbgc guaranties ) , their pension benefits should be discounted using a discount rate close to the risk - free rate .

financial economists say that the actuaries' approach may make an inappropriate connection between the value of liabilities and the rate of return on assets .

for example , the value of the obligation can be increased or decreased by changing the assumption on the rate of return , which suggests that a pension plan could eliminate some of its underfunding by investing the plan's assets in riskier investments .

the approach suggested by some actuaries results in discount rates that are generally higher than the rates that result by using the approach suggested by some financial economists .

one effect of this divergence of opinion is that the value of pension plan benefit obligations is higher ( and funding ratios are lower ) using the approach favored by some financial economists .

for example , in march 2012 , a credit suisse study estimated the underfunding of multiemployer db pension plans at $101 billion under the actuaries' approach and $428 billion under the financial economists' approach .

appendix b .

summary of the provisions in the multiemployer pension reform act the national coordinating committee for multiemployer plans ( nccmp ) is an organization that represents a number of multiemployer pension plans .

in 2013 , it created a retirement security review commission ( the commission ) to gather input from a coalition of employers and labor groups for multiemployer db pension reform proposals .

many of the commission proposals were included in the multiemployer pension reform act of 2014 , enacted as division o in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( mpra ; p.l .

113-235 ) .

increases to pbgc premiums mpra increased the premiums that the sponsors of multiemployer db pension plans pay to pbgc .

the premium increased from $12 per participant to $26 per participant .

in addition , beginning in 2016 , the premium is increased annually for changes in the average national wage .

changes to funding rules sections 101 to 111 of mpra made the following changes to the funding rules for multiemployer db plans: eliminates the sunset of provisions related to the zone certification status ; permits plans to enter critical status if they anticipate being in that status in the next five years .

under prior law , multiemployer plans were required to make changes to the plan structure when they entered critical status .

however , plans could not make changes if they anticipated entering that status ( they had to wait until they entered that status ) ; allows plans that emerge from critical status not to reenter critical status for at least one year following their emergence .

under prior law , because different criteria existed in the funding status tests for plans emerging from critical status , some plans emerged from and then immediately reentered critical status ; authorizes plans that meet the criteria for endangered status but have funding improvement plans that do not require additional contributions or benefit changes not to be certified as in endangered status .

some plans that entered endangered status did not have to make any changes to contributions or benefit levels to emerge from that status .

under prior law , these plans continued to be classified as being in endangered status ; permits plan actuaries for plans in endangered status , when developing funding improvement plans , to use the funding status as of the date of certification of the status rather than having to calculate the plan's funding status as of the beginning of the funding improvement plan .

under prior law , plan actuaries had to calculate the funding status at date of certification of endangered status and make a projection of the funding status at the beginning of the funding improvement period ; allows plans in endangered status to adopt some of the rules that previously had been available only to plans in critical status , including contribution decreases and the waiver of excise taxes .

some plans that were in endangered status actively sought to be placed in critical status because a number of the restrictions placed on plans in endangered status were more onerous than those placed on plans in critical status ; enables funding improvement plans and rehabilitation plans to specify the course of action if the collective bargaining agreement expires and the parties cannot agree on a schedule .

prior law provided no guidance as to the course of action a plan must take if a collective bargaining agreement expired when a plan was in endangered or critical status ; allows rules for plans in critical status to take priority over rules for plans in reorganization when both occur simultaneously .

the multiemployer pension plan amendments act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-364 ) required plans in weak financial condition to undergo reorganization and established rules for plans in reorganization to improve funding .

there potentially were conflicts between some of the rules for plans that were both in reorganization and in endangered or critical status ; permits contribution increases as part of a funding improvement plan or a rehabilitation plan to be disregarded in determining withdrawal liability .

plans that are in critical or endangered status could inadvertently make changes that could have increased plans' withdrawal liability ; and provides preretirement survivor annuities to plan participants who die after the date of plan insolvency or termination .

plan participants in multiemployer plans that are insolvent or that have been terminated were ineligible for preretirement survivor annuities .

this provision is in contrast to participants in single employer plans , who remain eligible for survivor annuities after plan termination .

assistance for deeply troubled plans some multiemployer db pension plans are in very poor financial condition and are likely to become insolvent .

if one or two of the largest plans become insolvent , pbgc would likely have insufficient resources from which to guarantee participants' benefits .

if pbgc is unable to pay participants' guaranteed benefits , it is unclear whether pbgc would receive financial assistance from the federal government .

pbgc was established to be self - financing , and erisa states that the "united states is not liable for any obligation or liability incurred by the corporation. .

some members of congress have expressed a reluctance to consider providing financial assistance to pbgc .

deeply troubled multiemployer db plans have limited options to avoid insolvency .

increased contributions and cuts to adjustable benefits to active plan participants are likely to be insufficient to return these plans to solvency .

participants' benefits in insolvent plans would be reduced to the pbgc guaranteed levels , or possibly lower , if pbgc has insufficient resources from which to pay 100% of the benefits guaranteed to participants .

facilitate mergers and partitions sections 121 and 122 of mpra provide pbgc with greater authority to facilitate mergers and partitions of multiemployer pension plans .

in a plan merger , the assets and liabilities of one plan are transferred to another plan .

mpra allows pbgc to promote and facilitate mergers between multiemployer plans , provided the merger is in the interests of the participants of at least one of the plans and is not reasonably expected to be adverse to the overall interests of the participants in any of the plans .

actions by pbgc to facilitate mergers include providing training and technical assistance , mediation , and communication with stakeholders .

pbgc also may provide financial assistance to the merged plan if , among other provisions , ( 1 ) one of the plans in the merger is in critical and declining status , ( 2 ) financial assistance will reduce pbgc's expected long - term loss , and ( 3 ) financial assistance is necessary for the merged plan to remain solvent .

in a partition , pbgc gives approval to divide a plan that meets specified criteria into two plans .

the goal of the partition is to restore the original plan to financial health .

some key features of the plan partition process include the following: the original plan must be in critical and declining status and must have taken all reasonable measures to avoid insolvency , including reducing participants' benefits to 110% of pbgc maximum guarantee benefit level ; pbgc must expect that a partition of the plan would reduce pbgc's long - term loss with respect to the plan and that the partition would not impair pbgc's ability to provide financial assistance to other plans ; some or all orphan participants and their liabilities from the original plan are transferred to a newly created plan ( also called a successor plan ) ; the successor plan is administered by the original plan ; no assets from the original plan are transferred to the successor plan .

the successor plan receives financial assistance from pbgc to pay benefits to the participants in that plan ; and participants' benefits in the successor plan are reduced to pbgc maximum benefit levels ; the original plan provides participants the difference between ( 1 ) the reduced benefit in the original plan and ( 2 ) the pbgc maximum benefit provided in the successor plan .

benefit reductions section 201 of mpra allows certain multiemployer db plans to reduce benefits for participants .

the following are features of the provisions for benefit reductions: only plans that are in critical and declining status may cut benefits .

the treasury secretary , in consultation with the pbgc and the labor secretary , may reject a plan's application to reduce benefits if the plan sponsor's determination of the need for benefit reductions is "clearly erroneous. .

participants in most plans are able to reject the reduction of benefits , if a majority of all participants and beneficiaries vote to do so .

however , plans deemed to be systematically important are able to reduce participants' benefits without a vote .

a systemically important plan is one in which pbgc would pay $1 billion or more in benefit payments if the benefit reductions were not implemented .

there are likely only a handful of plans that are systematically important .

individuals cannot have their benefits cut below 110% of the pbgc maximum guarantee .

because the maximum guarantee in 2015 is $12,870 per year , a participant whose benefit is suspended would have to receive a benefit of at least $14,157 .

disabled individuals and retirees aged 80 or older may not have their benefits reduced .

individuals between the ages of 75 and 80 may not receive the maximum benefit reduction .

benefit reductions must be distributed equitably .

mpra lists a number of factors that a plan sponsor may consider in making determinations .

these factors include the age and life expectancy of participants ; the length of time an individual has been receiving benefits from the plan ; and the years to retirement for participants who are currently working .

benefit reductions in certain plans are to be ordered , first , among participants who worked for an employer that withdrew and failed to pay , in full , the required payments to exit the plan ( known as withdrawal liability ) ; and second , among other participants except those who worked for an employer that ( 1 ) withdrew from the plan , ( 2 ) fully paid its withdrawal liability , and ( 3 ) established a separate plan to provide benefits in an amount equal to benefits reduced as a result of the financial condition of the original plan .

for example , this third exclusion applies to participants who worked for united parcel service and are in a trucking industry multiemployer plan .

reducing retirees' benefits was a contentious issue .

for example , some feared that retirees could be asked to shoulder a burden that otherwise could be fixed by increased employer contributions .

another concern was that retirees , particularly the most vulnerable , might not have adequate representation in discussions of changes to deeply troubled multiemployer db pensions .

mpra addressed some of these issues .

for example , individuals who are disabled or who are aged 80 and older may not have their benefits reduced and , except for several systematically important multiemployer plans , plan participants must vote on whether to reject any proposed benefit suspensions .

recommendations not included in mpra the following 4 of the 13 recommendations from the retirement security commission for changes to the funding rules for multiemployer db pensions were not in mpra .

these changes would have provided for automatic triggers for funding relief when dramatic declines occur in financial markets .

under current law , changes in funding rules must be authorized in statute , which can result in a delay between the onset of financial difficulties for pension plans and the implementation of funding relief ; allowed plans to pay certain additional benefits ( a 13 th check ) that would not have been considered a part of a participant's accrued benefit .

plans that experience favorable investment returns sometimes provide participants an additional benefit .

if the 13 th check is offered on a regular basis , then the benefit is considered a regular benefit , which cannot be reduced or eliminated ; eliminated the potential exposure to an internal revenue service ( irs ) excise tax for plans that were granted amortization extensions under ppa .

prior to ppa , in exchange for a schedule of funding improvements , the irs allowed some plans to extend the length of time to make up for investment losses .

as a result of the 2008 market downturn , many plans failed to meet the requirements for the schedule of funding improvements and potentially are subject to an irs excise tax .

ppa provided for amortization extensions that made the pre - ppa extensions unnecessary ; and permitted plan participants to convert dc accounts into annuities payable from their db pension plans , whi ch would have allowed participants who have dc accounts to receive lifetime income from their dc plans .

