while public - private partnerships ( ppps ) have long been used to manage real property , congressional interest in ppps has recently increased due to the large number of underutilized and excess buildings owned by federal agencies , as well as sequestration and other spending constraints .

according to a report on federal real property holdings in fy2010 , the government's portfolio included 71,000 underutilized buildings and 6,700 excess buildings , which cost a combined $1.66 billion to operate and maintain .

disposing of these buildings through the "standard" processes , described below , imposes its own costs — and can take years — as agencies must comply with various statutory mandates pertaining to environmental remediation , historic preservation , and "public benefit" conveyances .

moreover , these costs in operating , maintaining , or disposing of property are currently being incurred at a time when agencies generally have fewer appropriated funds at their disposal due to sequestration and tightening budgets .

annual appropriations for real property activities at the general services administration ( gsa ) , for example , have decreased by more than half a billion dollars from fy2010 ( $8.54 billion ) to fy2012 ( $8.02 billion ) .

taken together , these factors have prompted increased interest in ppps , which generally rely upon nonfederal entities to finance redevelopment and , in some cases , disposal of federal real property .

there is no single , accepted definition of public - private partnership , and ppps can be structured in many ways .

however , for purposes of this report , a ppp is an agreement whereby a nonfederal entity acquires the right to use real property owned or controlled by a federal agency — typically through a long - term lease — in exchange for redeveloping or renovating that property ( or other property ) .

in many cases , the agency and the nonfederal entity share the net cash flow or savings that result from the agreement .

the term real property is defined by the federal management regulation as any interest in land , together with any fixtures thereon , under the control of a federal agency except: ( 1 ) the public domain ; ( 2 ) lands reserved or dedicated for national forest or park purposes ; ( 3 ) minerals in lands withdrawn or reserved from the public domain that are suitable for disposition under the public land mining and mineral leasing laws ; ( 4 ) certain other lands withdrawn or reserved from the public domain ; and ( 5 ) any crops designated for disposition by severance and removal from the land .

this report provides an overview of key policy and legal issues pertaining to ppps for purposes of federal real property management .

it begins by discussing the current processes whereby federal agencies maintain and dispose of real property , as these processes help explain the appeal of ppps .

the report then discusses how ppps are commonly structured , agencies' authority to enter ppps , and the legal requirements to which ppps may be subject .

it concludes with considerations for congress , such as agencies' capabilities to enter into and oversee performance of these arguably complicated arrangements .

other crs reports address the use of ppps in other contexts , including crs report r43410 , highway and public transportation infrastructure provision using public - private partnerships ( p3s ) , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43308 , infrastructure banks and debt finance to support surface transportation investment , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r41880 , foreign assistance: public - private partnerships ( ppps ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

current interest in ppps arises , in part , as a result of the "standard" processes agencies use to dispose of real property that they no longer need due to changes in their functions and missions .

as a general rule , when agencies no longer need particular properties , they must dispose of these properties through statutorily prescribed processes , described below , that can be cumbersome and costly .

agencies frequently must spend appropriated funds to operate and maintain properties they no longer need , and pay costs associated with their disposal .

ppps potentially enable federal agencies to rely upon nonfederal entities to finance the operation and maintenance of such properties , or to exchange these properties for other real property or services .

ppps can be structured in many ways , depending , in part , upon the legal authorities under which agencies enter and perform such agreements .

however , despite this variability , ppps — and particularly ppps formed pursuant to agencies' authority to enter long - term leases of real property — generally share certain key elements .

these elements , and examples of common ppp structures , are discussed below , as a way of illustrating the types of actions that agencies may wish to take in entering or performing a ppp and , thus , paving the way for a discussion of the " legal framework as to ppps . .

while many ppps share the same key elements , discussed above ( see " key elements of a ppp " ) , there is considerable variation in the legal authorities under which federal agencies enter and perform ppps .

this is largely because federal law is generally silent as to ppps , per se , particularly ppps for purposes of improving or disposing of federal real property .

absent a statute that generally authorizes the formation of ppps , agencies seeking to enter such agreements rely upon their authority to take the specific actions necessary to form and perform the contemplated agreement ( eg , lease property for a specific period of time , receive consideration in - kind ) .

however , because individual agencies have differing authority to take such actions , the nature of the ppps they enter can vary .

relatedly , because agencies must rely on other authorities — such as their authority to enter certain long - term procurement contracts — in forming ppps , it can sometimes be unclear whether particular legal requirements that generally pertain to agencies' exercise of these authorities apply to their ppps .

in considering whether to expand federal agencies' ability to enter ppps , or overseeing the use of existing ppp authorities , congress may want to pay particular attention to certain topics , such as ( 1 ) the limited information currently available regarding agencies' ppp authorities and their use thereof ; ( 2 ) the degree to which legal uncertainties may deter agency use , or public acceptance , of ppps ; ( 3 ) agencies' capabilities to enter and perform ppps ; ( 4 ) whether agencies should be required to develop business plans for their partnership activities ; ( 5 ) whether agencies should be required to notify congress , or obtain its approval , when entering into ppps ; ( 6 ) agencies' ability to retain and use net proceeds from ppp agreements ; and ( 7 ) the interplay between ppps and the current disposal process .

other issues could potentially arise in specific contexts , depending upon the nature of the partnership and the authorities under which it is entered and performed .

however , the foregoing seven issues would appear to be common regardless of the context .

congressional interest in ppps for purposes of federal real property management seems likely to persist — and may increase — given the constraints of the current real property disposal process and of the fiscal climate .

a number of potential benefits of ppps have been identified , and the common elements of such partnerships are widely recognized .

the legal framework governing federal agencies' use of ppps , in contrast , is less clear .

federal law does not define the term public - private partnership ; nor , with certain narrow exceptions , does it authorize agencies to enter ppps , per se .

instead , federal agencies have historically relied upon their authority to lease , otherwise convey , or permit the use of federal real property , or their authority to enter certain long - term procurement contracts , when forming ppps .

however , because individual agencies have different authority to lease real property or take other actions in forming ppps , there is often considerable variability in the types of ppps they may enter .

in addition , there can also be uncertainty as to the legal requirements governing agencies' use of leasing and related authorities in the ppp context .

in legislating to expand agencies' authority to enter ppps , or in overseeing their use of existing ppp authorities , congress may wish to consider , among other things , agencies' capabilities to enter and perform ppps ; whether agencies should be required to develop business plans for ppps ; and the relationship between ppps and the current real property disposal process .

