the administration's proposal to reduce the size of the marine corps has national security implications that congress may consider as part of its oversight and authorizations and appropriations roles .

in terms of size of the force , congress sets the endstrength for both the active marine corps and the marine corps reserve .

congress also authorizes and appropriates funds needed for marine force structure initiatives , training exercises , equipment , basing , and infrastructure , as well as the various manpower management tools that could be used to drawdown the force .

administration decisions about the recommended size and basing of the marine corps can have a significant impact on marine bases in a member's district or state , which can also have economic ramifications for communities near affected bases .

the administration's downsizing and force structure proposals also can have a significant impact on local and state defense - related industries .

lastly , marines and their families who might be affected by the administration's decisions constitute a unique element of members' constituencies .

reportedly , marine officials believe they can achieve active duty cuts without having to force marines out of service before their contracts expire .

to date , the drawdown has reportedly been achieved through normal attrition and early out incentives ; including premature retirements and cash buyouts which have permitted the service reduce active endstrength by about 5,000 personnel per year .

in order to retain key capabilities such as special operations and cyber operations , cuts would primarily come from infantry and artillery battalions and aviation squadrons .

marine officials suggest , however , if force cuts are accelerated or if the marines are required to cut to a 150,000 active endstrength , that involuntary measures would need to be taken in addition to voluntary programs currently being used .

some involuntary measures include ending a "de facto" guarantee of 20 years of service for all enlisted marines who reach the grade of staff sergeant ; convening an early retirement board for senior enlisted marines ; using enlisted retention boards to cut marines before their contracts expired ; ending a 20 year service promise to all marine officers who make the grade of major ; and selective early retirement board for lieutenant colonels and colonels .

as the marines drawdown , a number of force structure - related initiatives are underway or under consideration .

these initiatives are seen as a means to address both a post - afghanistan world and reduced force levels resulting from budgetary constraints .

while there has been a great deal of marines corps introspection as to future roles , missions , and how the force should be structured , other institutions are also examining these very same questions .

far from a purely academic exercise , this examination is bounded by the budgetary constraints facing the marine corps and its sister services .

a sample of some proposals that might merit future discussion include .

historically , eras of declining or constrained defense budgets have served as "forcing functions" ushering in changes in service's roles and missions and force structure .

perhaps in the current era of sequestration , redundancies between the marines and the army are an issue worth examination .

the administration's 2012 strategic shift to the pacific region could present an opportunity to both focus resources and eliminate redundancies .

the u.s .

naval institute notes: former marine corps deputy commandant for aviation lt. gen. george trautman agreed that the service will return to its traditional role in the vast stretches of the pacific .

"the presence of strength breeds prosperity and peace," he said .

the marines have been in the pacific theater continuously over the past 70 years to keep the peace , he said , and that presence will continue to grow as the united states rebalances its forces to the region .

anytime a crisis emerges , the marines are usually the first to respond , be it a humanitarian disaster or some kind of unanticipated military crisis .

the service plans to keep a force of marines deployed to darwin , australia , as part of the renewed interest the region , for example , trautman says .

additionally , forces are being redistributed from okinawa , japan , to both guam and hawaii .

meanwhile , the doors are being reopened to training in thailand and the philippines , he added .

"marines will be used all over the pacific in small packets," work said .

those units will respond to any number of different types of contingencies .

moreover , the marine corps has strong ties with partners in the region .

one example is the island nation of singapore .

"the partnership between marine aviation and singapore air force is as solid as can be," trautman said .

meanwhile , the service also has historic ties with the south korea's marine corps , which is closely modeled on its american counterpart .

in a similar effort , the u.s. army is seeking to assert itself in the region , with some analysts suggesting that in a post iraq and afghanistan world — where few foresee the u.s. getting involved costly , long term land operations — the army is in search of a mission and has decided to make engagement in the asia - pacific region a priority .

other than a significant presence in south korea , the army does not have the history or presence that marines enjoy in the pacific .

one recent report suggests army efforts to reassert itself in the pacific are being undertaken to develop a strategic narrative and an argument to prevent future army personnel cuts .

while some have asserted the army is trying to create a second marine corps in the pacific and building a force that the nation doesn't need , the army claims that it has a long , unbroken history in the pacific .

this situation has evolved into what has been described as a "turf war" in the pacific , a not uncommon occurrence between the army and marines , particularly during post - war periods when forces are reduced and defense budgets decline .

perhaps , instead of competing for missions in the pacific where the marines are currently established , the marines could be allocated the lead role in the pacific region and the army could be assigned the lead in another region better suited to the army's land - centric focus .

such an allocation might help to avoid redundancy and associated costs and perhaps help the army reallocate resources that it would use to expand its pacific presence to other areas such as training and maintenance that are suffering due to decreased funding .

assigning the leading role of crisis response to the marines could help to decrease redundancy and also achieve a level of cost savings for both the army and marine corps .

as previously noted , in addition to meus stationed at sea around the world , the marines have created a spmagtf - cr for the usafricom region and could possibly create additional units to support other geographic combatant commanders .

in a similar move , the chief of staff of the army has reportedly directed the creation of company - sized unit quick - response forces for each geographic combatant commander to perform essentially the same tasks as the marines spmagt - crs .

these army units , formed around a conventional infantry company , would be required to respond within 18 to 24 hours , but such a response could prove to be difficult as the vast majority of the active army will be based in the continental united states after 2014 .

in contrast , in addition to the meus afloat , the marines envision stationing their crisis response units forward in theater where they would likely have a better response time than army units and would also have the benefit of their own organic cv - 22 and kc - 130 aircraft to self - deploy their forces .

if the marines are to focus primarily on crisis response , this could provide them with the opportunity to perhaps "slim down" the force by focusing instead on what types of force structure and equipment would be required for response to natural disasters , enhanced protection of u.s. diplomatic facilities and personnel , and limited raid - like combat operations .

a clear delineation of who has the lead responsibility for crisis response might also permit the army to eliminate some of its crisis response force structure and instead focus its limited budget resources on post - crisis follow - on operations and traditional land combat .

for example , the army reportedly has a requirement for 49,000 paratroopers according to the 2012 defense planning guidance , with one entire division — the 82 nd airborne division from ft. bragg , n.c. — devoted primarily to crisis response .

while a need for an army airborne assault capability exists from a joint perspective , perhaps a large scale , "ready to deploy at a moment's notice" capability might no longer be appropriate given anticipated future security challenges .

if the marines were designated the lead service for crisis response , both services might be presented with an opportunity to better focus their resources and training and thereby increase overall effectiveness .

while some defense officials might argue that the marines and army must have separate and distinct crisis response capabilities and associated forces , an argument might be made that a degree of specialization could actually be more effective and cost efficient over time .

according to the 2010 report of the marine corps force structure review group , the marines require the forces , ships , and equipment to accommodate the assault echelons of two mebs .

in april 2012 , the marine corps published the results of an amphibious capabilities working group study on naval amphibious capability .

the study , naval amphibious capability in the 21 st century: strategic opportunity and a vision for change , states the united states is a maritime nation with critical maritime interests , noting 90% of global commerce that travels by sea is most vulnerable where sea meets land in the littorals .

the study further finds "for a maritime nation with global interests , a minimal two brigade amphibious force represents a sound investment in ensuring access for the rest of the joint force. .

while u.s. code , title 10 , section 5063 sets out the requirements for the marines and navy to maintain an amphibious assault capability , there is discretion as to "how much" of this capability is required .

if the marines choose to focus on smaller , battalion and company - level operations based on analysis of likely future threats , then there might be an opportunity to look at this requirement for two meb's worth of capability which could have an impact on marine corps force structure and equipment programs and navy shipbuilding .

if the marine corps draws down to a 182,000 or lower active endstrength , there might be opportunities to modify force structure to reflect both a smaller marine corps and the types of future threats that it might face .

as previously discussed , the marines maintain two to three meus at sea to respond to crises as well as other military operations as directed .

as the marine corps adapts to accommodate a smaller active force , a strategic shift to the pacific , and an emerging security environment where smaller , localized threats to u.s. security interests are more likely than major theater conflicts , a reexamination of the traditional meu might be in order .

marine leadership may have already taken the first step by creating forward - deployed , land - based spmagtf - crs .

to provide a ship - based complement , perhaps littoral operations magtf consisting of a reinforced marine rifle company embarked on a lpd - 17 accompanied by a couple of lcss as previously proposed might be appropriate in some circumstances .

while the littoral magtf might not be the marines chosen solution , a smaller meu construct might permit the marines and navy to provide more global coverage than the existing two to three embarked meus .

in order to fill the "sweet spot" between special forces and an army bct , the marines might choose to make company and battalion - sized units the focus of its force structure initiatives .

this force level could prove to be appropriate for the types of crisis response missions the marines could be asked to respond to as well as any engagement or security assistance operations they might be asked to perform .

a potential benefit of this focus could be the elimination or reduction of higher echelon headquarters and support units ( possibly regimental - level ) which could also greatly facilitate both decentralized and distributed operations .

this emphasis also recognizes the claim that military technological innovations over the past decade such as information technology , unmanned systems , and precision weaponry have given smaller units of action significantly more capability than their predecessors .

if the marines are determined to return to their expeditionary roots and avoid becoming a de facto "second land army" perhaps one course of action might be to place an increased portion of forces and weapons systems that are more suited for major regional conflicts into the marine corps reserve .

such realignment could permit the marines to pursue material solutions better suited for crisis response operations .

more expensive systems such as tanks , artillery , and high performance aircraft - which would probably be of little use in embassy security or humanitarian support missions - might prove to be better suited for placement in the marine corps reserves .

a number of dod and civilian studies suggest that reserve forces when not deployed are a more affordable alternative than maintaining these forces on active duty , particularly those types of units that do not have a great deal of utility except in certain scenarios , such as armor units .

in this regard , such a rebalancing of the marine corps active and reserve components might enable the marine to avoid additional cuts in infantry and aviation units if the decision is made to reduce the marines active endstrength below 182,000 .

