the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) , as amended , authorizes a broad array of federal student aid programs that assist students and their families with financing the cost of a postsecondary education , as well as programs that provide federal support to postsecondary institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

programs authorized by the hea provide support for higher education in several ways , including providing support to students in financing a postsecondary education , with additional support and services given to less - advantaged students ; providing support to students pursing international education and certain graduate and professional degrees ; and providing support to ihes in improving their capacity and ability to offer postsecondary education programs .

the department of education ( ed ) administers the programs authorized by the hea .

the most prominent programs under the hea are the title iv programs that provide financial assistance to students and their families .

in fy2017 , approximately $122.5 billion in financial assistance was made available to 12.9 million students under these programs .

in the same year , ed provided approximately $2.3 billion in federal support to institutions of higher education under the hea .

the hea was first enacted in 1965 and has since been amended and extended numerous times , and it has been comprehensively reauthorized eight times .

the most recent comprehensive reauthorization of the hea occurred in 2008 under the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ; p.l .

110-315 ) , which authorized most hea programs through fy2014 .

following the passage of the heoa , the safra act , as part of the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ; p.l .

111-152 ) , made several notable changes to the hea .

authorization for the appropriations for many hea programs expired at the end of fy2014 and was automatically extended through the end of fy2015 under section 422 of the general education provisions act ( gepa ) .

additionally , congress provided appropriations beyond 2015 under a variety of appropriations legislation and continuing resolutions , most recently under the department of defense and labor , health and human services , and education appropriations act , 2019 and continuing appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l .

115-245 ) .the hea is organized into eight titles: title i , general provisions ; title ii , teacher quality enhancement ; title iii , strengthening institutions ; title iv , student assistance ; title v , developing institutions ; title vi , international education programs ; title vii , graduate and postsecondary improvement programs ; and title viii , additional programs .

this report provides a brief overview of the major provisions of the hea , organized by title and part .

appendix a of this report provides detailed appropriations figures for hea programs , from fy2015 through fy2018 .

appendix b gives a brief overview of the general education provisions act , which applies to the majority of federal education programs administered by ed , including those programs authorized by the hea .

finally , appendix c provides information related to the eight comprehensive reauthorizations that the hea has undergone .

other crs reports provide more detailed discussions and analyses of the major hea provisions .

title i of the hea is divided into four parts and lays out definitions and provisions that generally apply to most of the programs authorized by the hea .

title ii of the hea authorizes grants for improving teacher education programs , strengthening teacher recruitment efforts , and providing training for prospective teachers .

this title also includes reporting requirements for states and ihes regarding the quality of teacher education programs .

title iii is one of the primary sources of institutional support authorized by the hea .

most of the programs authorized in title iii provide grants or other financial support to institutions that serve high concentrations of minority and / or needy students to help strengthen the institutions' academic , financial , and administrative capabilities .

typically , the institutions served by title iii are called minority - serving institutions .

title iv of the hea contains nine parts that authorize a broad array of programs and provisions to assist students and their families in gaining access to and financing a postsecondary education .

the programs authorized under this title are the primary sources of federal aid to support postsecondary education .

title v is one of the primary sources of institutional support to hispanic - serving institutions ( hsis ) under the hea .

in general , title v programs are similar in scope to the title iii - a and title iii - b programs authorized to support other types of minority - serving institutions .

title vi authorizes a variety of grants to ihes and related entities to enhance instruction in foreign language and area and international studies .

title vii authorizes several programs related to supporting graduate education programs .

other programs authorized under title vii encourage innovation in postsecondary education , enable ihes to better serve disabled students , and support state - level postsecondary education improvements .

title viii of the hea includes 27 parts , each of which establishes one or more new programs focusing on an array of topics .

all of the programs in title viii were newly added to the hea by the higher education opportunity act of 2008 .

most of these programs have not been funded .

several programs authorized under title viii support the goals of improving access to postsecondary education and improving enrollment , persistence , and completion rates .

generally , these programs seek to address the postsecondary education needs of specific groups of prospective or current postsecondary students .

for instance , part t , centers of excellence for veteran student success , authorizes competitive grants to ihes to support the academic , financial , physical , and social needs of students who are veterans of the armed forces .

many other programs in title viii are directed at enhancing programs in certain areas of study to meet workforce needs .

for instance , part s , training for realtime writers , authorizes the secretary to award grants to postsecondary court reporting programs to promote training and placement of realtime writers .

finally , title viii , part aa provides annual mandatory appropriations through fy2014 to masters degree programs at historically black colleges and universities and predominantly black institutions and the ppoha program , which are found under hea title vii - a - 4 and title v - b , respectively .

the mandatory appropriations for these programs expired at the end of fy2014 and were not reauthorized .

thus , these programs have not received mandatory appropriations since fy2015 .

appendix a .

history of funding for hea programs: fy2015-fy2019 table a - 1 of this appendix lists the sections of the hea that provide discretionary or mandatory authorization of appropriations or budget authority for hea programs and presents the funding amounts provided for these programs for fy2015 through fy2019 .

the programs are presented in the order in which they appear in the hea .

for each program , the section authorizing the appropriation of funds or providing budget authority is identified , as is the indicator of whether funding is considered discretionary ( d ) or mandatory ( m ) .

appendix b .

general education provisions act the general education provisions act ( gepa ) contains a broad array of statutory provisions that are applicable to the majority of federal education programs administered by the department of education ( ed ) , as well as provisions related to the powers and responsibilities of ed .

these provisions cover topics as varied as appropriations , evaluations , privacy , and enforcement .

this appendix briefly discusses several of the gepa provisions that apply to programs authorized by the higher education act ( hea ) .

part a: functions of the department of education gepa , part a includes provisions related to the authority and responsibility of ed to administer education programs .

it confers regulatory authority on the secretary of education and specifies that any regulation affecting an institution of higher education shall only become effective if the regulation is published in the federal register with an educational impact assessment statement .

part b: appropriations and evaluations gepa , part b includes provisions that address , among other issues , authorizing forward funding for programs ( eg , appropriated funds that are to be obligated in fy2011 may be appropriated in the fy2010 appropriations act ) .

section 422 of gepa provides that if congress , in the regular session that ends prior to the beginning of the terminal fiscal year of authorization of appropriations of an applicable program , does not pass legislation extending the program , the program is automatically extended for one additional fiscal year .

this provision does not apply to the authorization of appropriations for commissions , councils , or committees that have statutorily specified termination dates .

part c: general requirements and conditions concerning the operation and administration of education programs gepa , part c addresses the general authority of the secretary , administrative requirements and limitations , the administration of education programs and projects by states , and records and limitations on withholding federal funds .

part c also contains the family educational rights and privacy act , which provides privacy protections for student records .

part c clarifies that no provision of any applicable programs is intended to authorize federal control over educational curriculum , administration , or personnel of any educational institutions .

part d: enforcement gepa , part d addresses the enforcement of laws and regulations administered by ed , including the establishment of ed's office of administrative law judges , procedures for recovering federal funds from recipients , and remedies for violations of ed laws and programs .

appendix c. previous hea reauthorizations although congress may amend the hea at any point in time , in general , reauthorizations are comprehensive and amend , extend , delete , and establish new programs .

the hea was first enacted in 1965 and has been comprehensively reauthorized eight times , in 1968 , 1972 , 1976 , 1980 , 1986 , 1992 , 1998 , and 2008 .

authorization for most hea programs expired at the end of fy2014 .

gepa authorized the appropriation of funds for one additional year through fy2015 , and additional funds for many of the expired programs have been appropriated since fy2015 .

table c - 1 lists the previous reauthorization , their public law numbers , and additional resources about each reauthorization , when available .

