this report provides a description and status report on brazil's challenge to certain aspects of the u.s. cotton program under the rules of the world trade organization's ( wto's ) dispute settlement process in case ds267 .

the "brazil - u.s. cotton case" had its wto origins in 2002 and evolved into a sprawling legal dispute that reached an apparent final resolution on october 1 , 2014 .

for a detailed description of the case's origin and progress through the wto dispute settlement process to the point in april 2011 when brazil and the united states reached a temporary agreement to avoid trade retaliation ( referred to as the u.s. - brazil framework agreement ) , readers may refer to archived crs report rl32571 , brazil's wto case against the u.s. cotton program .

although a brief summary of the dispute is included , this report focuses on developments in the cotton case since 2011 ; in particular , on two aspects of the wto cotton case: the current status of efforts to resolve the wto trade dispute including the final resolution ; and changes to u.s. agricultural policy that have occurred as a direct result of the wto cotton case .

each of these case aspects remains highly germane to u.s. farm policy and programs — at one point in the case , brazil had the wto - granted authority to impose millions of dollars of trade retaliation against u.s. goods and services .

in addition , with the world closely watching the resolution of the brazil - u.s. cotton case , the final terms and circumstances of the resolution could serve either as catalyst or as precedent for future trade disputes related to the agricultural sector , and / or as progenitor of new , more restrictive wto rules for domestic commodity support programs .

the so - called "brazil - u.s. cotton case" is a long - running wto dispute settlement case ( ds267 ) initiated by brazil — a major cotton export competitor — in 2002 against specific provisions of the u.s. cotton program .

brazil charged that u.s. cotton programs were depressing international cotton prices and thus artificially and unfairly reducing the quantity and value of brazil's cotton exports , causing economic harm to brazil's domestic cotton sector .

since 2005 , the united states has made several changes to both its cotton and export credit guarantee programs in an attempt to bring them into compliance with wto recommendations .

this includes both changes made prior to the 2014 farm bill , changes made as part of the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) , and changes made to conform with the final mou of october 1 , 2014 .

in the end , the successful resolution of the wto cotton dispute avoided a trade war between two of the world's major agricultural trading nations , the united states and brazil , while resulting in substantial and substantive changes in u.s. domestic support programs for upland cotton and the u.s. export credit guarantee program in general .

the resolution to the cotton case could have an important bearing on how domestic support programs are treated in future wto trade negotiations or in future dispute settlement cases .

in addition to the implications for domestic support policy , the heightened attention surrounding the wto brazil - u.s. cotton case has set precedent by singling out cotton for special treatment within ongoing wto trade negotiations .

whether this case becomes a role model for future domestic support - related trade disputes remains to be seen .

however , the inability of the wto to move forward with its multilateral trade negotiations ( i.e. , the doha round ) or to successfully implement the december 2013 bali agreement suggests that the wto may not rapidly achieve the global trade goals of its members .

as a result , the wto's dispute settlement mechanism — which remains a primary forum for allowing members to resolve trade grievances — could likely serve as the primary mechanism for effecting future change in domestic support policies .

