the united states has a strong economic interest in ensuring energy security , bolstering exports , and reducing barriers to u.s. trade and investment .

the united states also has a national security and an economic interest in ensuring that mexico , a key ally and top trade partner with which the united states shares a nearly 2,000 mile border , is economically vibrant and politically stable .

u.s. - mexico energy trade and cooperation plays an important role in achieving those goals .

energy cooperation has become a priority of bilateral economic cooperation under the u.s. - mexico high level economic dialogue as well as a focus of trilateral research , planning , and coordination among the energy secretaries of the united states , canada , and mexico .

u.s. policymakers are closely monitoring the implementation of the december 2013 constitutional reforms and august 2014 implementing laws that , among other things , allow mexico's petroleos mexicanos ( pemex ) to partner with international companies and other industry entrants to boost mexican production .

hailed by many analysts as the most significant economic reform undertaken by mexico since its entrance into the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) in 1994 , the energy reforms are expected to boost investment , growth , and eventually oil and gas production in the country .

the reforms also opened mexico's electricity sector to private generators , although that is not addressed in this report .

if power sector reforms can help reduce mexico's high electricity costs , then mexico's manufacturing sector — a dynamic sector that is highly integrated with u.s. industry — should become more competitive .

there is a danger , however , that the mexican government may have oversold the benefits of the reforms .

investors initially appeared to have maintained interest in mexico's energy sector despite declines in oil prices , but the results of mexico's first round of public bidding announced in july 2015 proved disappointing .

at a house hearing held on july 23 , 2015 , witnesses cited the limited size and production potential of the blocks offered , the high minimum bid required , and investors' concerns about corruption and insecurity as possible reasons for the lack of interest in the tender .

mexico has sought to assuage those concerns prior to the september 30 bidding round that will include nine large shallow - water production blocks .

this report provides an overview of pemex and the content and prospects for mexico's energy reforms , before discussing specific issues facing mexico's oil and gas industry .

it then examines the u.s. - mexico energy relationship through the lenses of trade and energy cooperation .

it concludes by suggesting several oversight issues for congress related to what the enactment of energy reform might portend for mexico's economic development , the u.s. energy matrix , and bilateral or north american energy cooperation .

foreign investment in mexico's oil industry has had a tumultuous history .

after oil was discovered in mexico at the turn of the 20 th century , foreign investors — primarily from britain and the united states — played a significant role in helping the country become the world's second - largest oil producer by the early 1920s .

however , political unrest during and after mexico's bloody revolution ( 1910-1920 ) and the country's 1917 constitution , which established national ownership of all hydrocarbons resources , caused investment in mexico's oil and natural gas sectors to gradually decline .

by the 1930s , reduced foreign investment had resulted in dramatic declines in production levels , and fraught relations between u.s. oil companies and successive post - revolutionary presidents had damaged u.s. - mexican relations .

tensions culminated in president lázaro cárdenas' historic 1938 decision to abandon efforts to mediate a bitter labor dispute between mexican oil workers and foreign companies and instead follow through on his threat to expropriate all u.s. and other foreign oil assets in mexico .

upon its creation in 1938 , pemex became a symbol of national pride and a rallying point around which cárdenas and what became the institutional revolutionary party ( pri ) — the party of president enrique peña nieto — united a disparate mexican society against foreign intervention .

oil remains deeply tied to mexican nationalism .

nevertheless , pemex continued to pursue service contracts with some u.s. oil companies until the practice was definitively outlawed by a 1958 regulatory law implementing article 27 of the constitution .

from then on , pemex retained a monopoly over mexico's oil and natural gas sector and the mexican finance ministry kept tight control over the company's finances and management .

in 2013 , 75 years after its founding , pemex found itself facing significant challenges .

pemex had its heyday in the late 1970s following the discovery of the huge shallow water cantarell oil field , but the company's long - term performance had been hindered by a number of factors .

for years , pemex sustained itself on the revenue produced from its relatively easy - to - exploit shallow water fields without investing the capital necessary to replace those reserves with new fields or even maintain its infrastructure .

pemex had a high percentage of losses , low worker productivity , and facilities that are in significant need of repair ; 37 people were killed in january 2013 after an explosion occurred at one of the company's offices in mexico city .

in part because of the mexican government's heavy tax demands , pemex had operated at a loss since 1998 and significantly increased its debt burden .

until recently , the government had also prevented the company from reinvesting its profits into maintenance and new exploration .

pemex's pension liabilities , negotiated by the company's powerful and , for some observers , corrupt workers union , had become an unsustainable drain on its finances .

each year , pemex had been losing hundreds of millions of dollars due to criminal groups illegally tapping into its pipelines .

pemex's inability to partner with other companies arguably inhibited it from benefitting from new expertise and techniques , particularly in deep water drilling and hydraulic fracturing ( fracking ) .

the bilateral economic relationship with mexico is of key interest to the united states because of mexico's proximity , the high volume of trade with mexico , and the strong economic ties between the two countries .

the united states is , by far , mexico's leading partner in merchandise trade , while mexico is the united states' third - largest trade partner in total trade after china and canada .

mexico is the united states' second - largest export market after canada and ranks third as a supplier of u.s. imports .

since nafta took effect in 1994 , the united states and mexico have become more economically integrated with strong trade and supply chain linkages .

u.s. exports to mexico increased rapidly since nafta , increasing from $41.6 billion in 1993 to $240.3 billion in 2014 , an increase of 478% .

u.s. imports from mexico increased from $39.9 billion in 1993 to $294.2 billion in 2014 , an increase of 637% .

in most sectors , nafta removed significant trade and investment barriers , ensured basic protections for nafta investors , and provided a mechanism for the settlement of disputes between investors and a nafta country .

the agreement , however , included explicit country - specific exceptions and reservations .

under chapter 6 of nafta , the mexican government reserved to itself strategic activities , including investment and provisions in such activities , related to the exploration and exploitation of crude oil and natural gas .

despite these exclusions from nafta , energy remains a central component of u.s. - mexico trade , as discussed below .

in addition to the burgeoning energy trade between the united states and mexico , energy cooperation has gradually risen to the top of the u.s. - mexican political agenda as well .

the united states and mexico have been working on geothermal energy projects since the 1970s , but the possibility of expanding joint efforts to produce renewable energy sources , as well as conventional and unconventional hydrocarbons resources , has also entered the bilateral agenda .

since taking office , president peña nieto has shepherded a number of significant constitutional reforms through the fractious mexican congress that had eluded the past two pan administrations .

the most important of those reforms may be the energy reforms promulgated on december 20 , 2013 , and implemented by secondary laws signed on august 11 , 2014 , that allow for private participation in mexico's oil and gas sector in ways not possible since the sector was nationalized in 1938 .

the recently enacted energy reforms have the potential to boost energy production and improve economic competitiveness in mexico , but implementing them in a meaningful way may prove difficult .

the next six months could prove critical for the success or failure of mexico's energy reforms .

amid strong opposition from the political left , the mexican government will have to manage popular expectations about the benefits of the reforms , many of which may not be felt immediately .

pemex will need to restructure its workforce and investment priorities as it seeks to become a productive state enterprise that can compete with other companies .

the national hydrocarbons commission ( cnh ) will need to complete the first rounds of public bidding in an efficient and transparent fashion and to offer contracts with terms that are attractive to international companies .

at the same time , the executive will need to create strong regulators to oversee the hydrocarbons sector in a time of budget austerity .

this report will be updated periodically to inform the u.s. congress on the implementation of oil and gas reforms in mexico and to analyze how the reforms may impact mexico's economic performance , the u.s. oil and natural gas sector , and bilateral energy relations .

