article iii , section i , of the constitution provides , in part , that the "judicial power of the united states , shall be vested in one supreme court , and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish. .

it further provides that justices on the supreme court and judges on lower courts established by congress under article iii have what effectively has come to mean life tenure , holding office "during good behaviour. .

along with the supreme court , the courts that constitute the article iii courts in the federal system are the u.s. circuit courts of appeals , the u.s. district courts , and the u.s. court of international trade .

this report concerns nominations made by president obama and other recent presidents to the u.s. circuit courts of appeals and the u.s. district courts .

outside the report's scope are the occasional nominations that these presidents made to the supreme court and the u.s. court of international trade .

in recent congresses , there has been ongoing interest in the process by which u.s. circuit and district court judges are nominated by the president and approved by the senate .

during senate debates over judicial nominations , differing perspectives have been expressed about the relative degree of success of a president's nominees in gaining senate confirmation , compared with the nominees of other recent presidents .

additionally , senate debate often has concerned whether a president's judicial nominees , relative to the nominees of other recent presidents , had to wait longer before receiving consideration by the senate judiciary committee or "up - or - down" floor votes on confirmation .

of related concern to congress has been increases in recent years in the number of vacant judgeships in the federal judiciary , the frequency with which vacant judgeships are considered "judicial emergencies," and the effect of delays in the processing of judicial nominations on filling vacancies .

perhaps in response to some of the issues described above , the senate , on november 21 , 2013 , reinterpreted the application of senate rule xxii to floor consideration of presidential nominations by overturning a ruling of the chair on appeal .

for nominations other than to the supreme court , the new precedent lowered the vote threshold by which cloture can be invoked — from three - fifths of the senate to a simple majority of those voting , thereby enabling a supportive majority to reach an 'up - or - down' vote on confirming a nomination .

reaching a confirmation vote , however , still requires either unanimous consent or a successful cloture process , .. .

in light of continued senate interest in the judicial selection and confirmation process , this report seeks to inform the ongoing debate in four ways: ( 1 ) by using various statistical measures to compare the progress of president obama's judicial nominees , during his first five years , in advancing through the senate confirmation process with that of the judicial nominees during the first five years of the three most recent preceding presidents who served two terms ( ronald reagan , george w. bush , and bill clinton ) ; ( 2 ) by providing statistics related to the length of time it has taken president obama and his three predecessors to nominate individuals to vacant circuit and district court judgeships ; and ( 3 ) by providing statistics related to judicial vacancies existing at the beginning of each president's fifth and sixth years in office .

for the purposes of this report , a president's first five years in office are defined as the period of time between january 20 , the date he assumed office during the first calendar year of his presidency , to december 31 of his fifth calendar year in office ( rather than to january 19 , which falls during his sixth calendar year in office ) .

operationalizing a president's fifth year in this manner allows for the analysis to coincide more closely with dates for which congressional action on judicial nominations might occur ( prior to the senate adjourning sine die ) .

this section of the report contains various statistical measures to compare the judicial nomination and confirmation process during the first five years of the obama presidency to the presidencies of his three immediate two - term predecessors ( presidents reagan , g.w .

bush , and clinton ) .

it first compares the number and percentage of u.s. circuit and district court nominees who were confirmed during the first five years of the reagan , clinton , g.w .

bush , and obama presidencies .

it then provides , for the same four presidents , a comparison of selected features of the judicial nomination and confirmation process during each president's first five years in office .

the section concludes by comparing the percentage of circuit and district court judgeships vacant at the beginning of each president's fifth and sixth years in office as well as the percentage of such vacancies considered "judicial emergencies. .

this report does not analyze or take a position on the number or percentage of a president's judicial nominees that would be appropriate for the senate to confirm or on the average ( or median ) length of time that would be appropriate for , or needed by , the senate judiciary committee to process judicial nominations or for the senate to take final action on them .

similarly , this report does not analyze or take a position on the appropriate amount of time for an administration to select nominees for circuit and district court judgeships .

like other parts of this report , the discussion under this heading is based upon nomination and confirmation statistics from each president's first five years in office .

for the discussion related specifically to the confirmation process in the senate , the statistics generally account only for those nominees who were confirmed by the senate during a president's first five years ( thus excluding from the analysis nominees who were never confirmed or who were later confirmed in a president's term , i.e. , during his sixth year or later , and , for president obama , those nominations for which final disposition cannot yet be discerned ) .

the percentage of vacant circuit and district court judgeships varies over the course of a presidency and is affected , in part , by the pace at which a president selects nominees for vacancies as well as the speed by which the senate considers the president's nominees .

table 5 compares for the four presidents: ( i ) the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships on january 1 of a president's fifth year in office ; ( ii ) the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships vacant on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office ; and ( iii ) the change in the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships from january 1 of a president fifth's year to january 1 of his sixth year in office .

 table 5 reveals that the percentage of circuit court judgeships that were vacant at the beginning of a president's fifth year in office was greatest during the reagan and clinton presidencies ( 14.9% and 12.8% , respectively ) while , at the beginning of a president's sixth year in office , the percentage of circuit court judgeships that were vacant was greatest during the clinton and obama presidencies ( 12.8% and 9.5% , respectively ) .

of the four presidents , president obama is the only one for whom the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships increased , albeit slightly , from the beginning of his fifth year to sixth year in office ( +0.6% ) .

the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships declined by 9.5% and 1.1% from the beginning of the fifth to the sixth years of the reagan and g.w .

bush presidencies , respectively .

the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships on january 1 of president clinton's sixth year in office was the same as the percentage of such judgeships that were vacant on january 1 of his fifth year in office .

as with circuit court vacancies , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships on january 1 of a president's fifth year in office was greatest during the reagan and clinton presidencies ( 13.1% and 10.0% , respectively ) .

on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships was greatest during the clinton and obama presidencies ( 9.3% and 11.1% , respectively ) .

from the beginning of a president's fifth to sixth year in office , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships declined during the reagan presidency ( - 5.4% ) and , slightly , during the clinton presidency ( - 0.7% ) .

the percentage of vacant district court judgeships increased from the fifth to sixth years during the g.w .

bush ( +2.1% ) and obama ( +2.3% ) presidencies .

a vacancy is deemed a "judicial emergency" by the judicial conference by the united states if certain criteria are met regarding the number of case filings for that judgeship or court and , in some cases , the length of time a particular judicial vacancy has existed .

as with vacancies , generally , the percentage of vacant circuit and district court judgeships deemed judicial emergencies is affected by a combination of factors .

a full accounting is beyond the scope of this report , but such factors include , in part , the pace at which a president selects nominees for vacancies as well as the speed by which the senate considers the president's nominees .

for circuit court vacancies , a judicial emergency exists if adjusted case filings per appellate panel are in excess of 700 or , for any circuit court vacancy that is in existence for more than 18 months , where adjusted filings are between 500 to 700 per panel .

for district court vacancies , a judicial emergency exists when a district court has weighted case filings in excess of 600 per judgeship ; or a vacancy is in existence more than 18 months where weighted filings are between 430 to 600 per judgeship ; or any district court with more than one authorized judgeship and only one active judge .

table 6 compares , for president obama and two of his predecessors , ( i ) the percentage of circuit and district court vacancies considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of each president's fifth year in office ; ( ii ) the percentage of circuit and district court vacancies considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of each president's sixth year ; and ( iii ) the change in the percentage of judicial vacancies considered judicial emergencies from january 1 of a president's fifth to sixth year in office .

data on judicial emergencies is not available for the reagan presidency ; consequently , it is omitted from this part of the analysis .

 table 6 reveals that the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of a president's fifth year in office was greatest during the g.w .

bush presidency ( 80.0% ) , followed by the clinton and obama presidencies ( 42.1% and 37.5% , respectively ) .

the percentage of such vacancies considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office was also greatest during the g.w .

bush presidency ( 61.5% ) .

the percentage of circuit court vacancies considered judicial emergencies at the beginning of president obama's and clinton's sixth years was 58.8% and 39.1% , respectively .

of the three presidents , president obama is the only one for whom the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships deemed judicial emergencies increased from january 1 of his fifth year to january 1 of his sixth year ( increasing from 37.5% to 58.8% ) .

for presidents g.w .

bush and clinton the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships considered judicial emergencies decreased by 18.5% and 3.0% , respectively .

as shown by table 6 , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of a president's fifth year in office was greatest during the obama presidency ( 35.6% ) , followed by the g.w .

bush and clinton presidencies ( 28.6% and 25.5% , respectively ) .

the percentage of such vacancies considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office was also greatest during the obama presidency ( 36.0% ) .

the percentage of district court vacancies considered judicial emergencies at the beginning of president g.w .

bush's and clinton's sixth years was 22.9% and 33.3% , respectively .

president g.w .

bush is the only one of the three presidents for whom the percentage of vacant district court judgeships deemed judicial emergencies declined from january 1 of his fifth to sixth year in office ( i.e. , declining from 28.6% to 22.9% ) .

for presidents clinton and obama the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships considered judicial emergencies increased ( by 7.8% and 0.4% , respectively ) from january 1 of each president's fifth to sixth year .

