the federal government levies an excise tax , at the manufacturer and importer level , based on the per unit production or importation of alcoholic beverages ( eg , distilled spirits , wine , and beer ) for sale in the u.s. market .

alcohol excise taxes in the united states have a history almost as old as the federal government itself , as alcohol taxes were among some of the first federal revenue sources in the early republic .

for much of u.s. history , alcohol excise taxes have served as one means to help fund emergency levels of spending ( such as during wartime ) and to reduce rising budget deficits ( such as in 1990 ) .

the modern - day interest in alcohol taxes is broad , with arguments presented to either raise or decrease current alcohol excise tax rates .

various approaches could be taken , such as follows: increasing excise taxes could serve as a source of revenue as part of a larger budget deficit reduction package or as an offset , reducing excise taxes could benefit firms in the alcoholic beverage manufacturing industry , or increasing excise taxes could discourage the negative spillover effects associated with alcohol consumption ( health , safety , crime , etc. ) .

first , this report provides a recent history of alcohol excise tax rates and a description of current law .

second , this report provides a revenue analysis , with a particular focus on the effect of inflation on the real , inflation - adjusted value of alcohol excise tax revenue over time .

third , this report provides an overview of the u.s. alcoholic beverage manufacturing industry .

fourth , alcohol excise taxes are analyzed with a particular focus on market structure , the effects of alcohol excise taxes on negative spillover effects from alcohol consumption , and how the distribution of these excise taxes affect various measures of equity in the federal tax code .

lastly , this report briefly summarizes relevant bills introduced in the 114 th congress .

federal alcohol excise tax policy has largely been driven by periodic demand for additional revenue .

alcohol excise taxes were first introduced in 1791 by treasury secretary alexander hamilton as a means to fund the early republic , and they were reimposed , raised , and repealed over the next two centuries surrounding periods of wartime .

public sentiment and empirical research that often assert that higher alcohol taxes reduce the negative spillover effects of alcohol consumption on society .

however , this public health argument for increasing alcohol taxes has been less prominent in debates to increase taxes on alcohol compared with other "sin taxes" on tobacco .

shortly after the end of prohibition in december 1933 , congress enacted a comprehensive alcohol excise tax system in 1934 .

these taxes were re - enacted during an era of federal budget deficits brought on by the economic stagnation of the great depression and federal spending under the new deal .

although revenue was a major concern , congress initially sought to set excise tax rates at a level that would enable legal alcohol producers to be competitive with the underground , bootlegging economy that emerged during prohibition .

tax rates gradually increased from 1934 to 1951 and helped to fund spending associated with world war ii and the korean war .

the tax rates that went into effect in 1991 remain current law , as summarized in table 1 .

in addition to listing the tax per volume , as defined in statute , table 1 also shows the alcohol and tobacco tax and trade bureau's ( ttb , within the department of the treasury ) conversions of these tax rates into common package measures .

for example , the excise tax on a 12 oz .

can of beer is approximately $0.05 , or $0.30 for a six - pack of beer ( at the regular rate ) .

the alcohol content of beer and wine is taxed at a lower rate than the alcohol content of distilled spirits when converted to equivalent measures of alcoholic content , as shown in figure 1 .

the current excise tax levied on those spirits , $13.50 per proof gallon , translates to about 21 cents per ounce of pure alcoholic content .

beer is taxed at $18 per gallon , which translates to about 10 cents per ounce of alcohol ( assuming an alcohol content of 4.5% ) .

the current excise tax on wine is $1.07 per wine gallon , or about 8 cents per ounce of alcohol ( assuming an average alcohol content of 11% ) .

figure 1 also shows that consumers of different types of alcohol also face different tax rates per standard drink , depending on what type of alcohol they consume .

when converted to standard drink measures liquor drinks are generally subjected to a federal excise tax of approximately 13 cents per 1.5 ounce shot , wine is taxed at 4 cents per 5 ounce glass , and beer is taxed at 5 cents per 12 ounce can or bottle .

the excise tax is deductible as an ordinary cost of doing business for firms subject to an income tax .

in economic terms , a manufacturer or importer's effective tax rate is increased by less than the full magnitude of the tax because they can reduce the amount of their income that is subject to tax ( assuming they have income to tax ) .

in fy2015 , federal excise tax collections on distilled spirits , wine , and beer totaled approximately $10.4 billion .

as shown in figure 2 , distilled spirits accounted for 55.1% of fy2015 alcohol excise tax collections , beer accounted for 34.5% , and wine accounted for 10.3% .

the majority of alcohol excise taxes are collected on products that were manufactured in the united states , particularly beer .

as shown in the tables in the appendix , the historical share of taxes collected on imported alcohol products varies by the type of alcohol: 16% - 27% for distilled spirits , 18% - 32% for wine , and 5% - 16% for beer .

this section provides a brief overview of the u.s. alcoholic beverages industry both at the retail level and the manufacturing level , with the latter being the stage of production that is directly responsible for filing federal excise tax reports to ttb .

according to analysis conducted by s&p capital iq ( "s&p" ) , alcoholic beverage sales accounted for $211.6 billion in retail sales in 2014 — their highest annual levels to date .

as shown in table 3 , beer sales accounted for the largest share ( 48.7% ) of alcoholic beverage retail sales in 2014 .

the alcoholic beverage manufacturing industry can be summarized by two characteristics: ( 1 ) a large degree of market sales concentration either by firm ( as in the case of distilled spirits and beer ) or geography ( as in the case of wine ) ; and ( 2 ) a rapid rate of new entrants at the craft distilling / brewing / winemaking market .

data on the number of alcoholic beverage manufacturers is dynamic , given the flux in the craft market .

it is easier to count and estimate sales statistics in the alcoholic beverage manufacturing industry than it is to count or estimate the net growth of firms in the industry .

the department of the treasury's alcohol and tobacco tax and trade bureau ( ttb ) publishes the number of firms holding permits to manufacture , import , or wholesale alcoholic beverages , but much of this data is available only via a freedom of information act ( foia ) request .

quantifying the exact , economic scale of the alcoholic beverage manufacturing industry is further complicated by the rapid rise of craft manufacturers in addition to particular classification issues that arise within each category of alcohol .

given the limitations of government data sources , industry trade associations provide an alternative estimate of the number of firms operating in the industry , as their member rosters and directories are typically updated more frequently than publicly available government data .

table 4 illustrates the geographic concentration of alcoholic beverage manufacturers in the united states , by product category .

california tops each product category list , and has a particularly large concentration of u.s. wineries ( 47% ) .

by comparison , distilleries and beer breweries and brewpubs are more evenly distributed across the nation ( beer more than spirits ) .

in summary , alcoholic beverage production tends to be concentrated in some states more than others ( eg , california , washington , new york , oregon ) .

alcoholic beverage manufacturers are more dispersed across the states compared to cigarettes , which tends to be more geographically concentrated in states such as virginia and north carolina .

analysis of employment in the alcoholic beverage manufacturing industry is also limited by similar methodological issues that affect analysis of the number of manufacturers as well as a lack of data on alcoholic beverage importers .

figure 5 illustrates a simplified analysis of employment in the alcoholic beverage manufacturing industry , from 2002 to 2014 .

total employment in alcoholic beverage manufacturing categories was 75,247 in 2014 according to the u.s. census bureau's annual survey of manufactures ( asm ) .

in the aggregate , alcoholic beverage manufacturing accounted for less than 1% of total u.s. employment in manufacturing in 2014 .

figure 5 suggests that net employment in breweries and distilleries has been relatively flat ( or negative ) over the period observed , despite the rapid entry rate of craft manufacturers , and employment levels have increased among wineries .

in addition to the issue of revenue adequacy , discussed previously , efforts to increase or decrease alcohol excise taxes have generally involved the following three issues: 1 .

what effect , if any , do excise taxes have on supply and demand conditions in the alcoholic beverage manufacturing industry and the consumer market ? .

2 .

from an economist's perspective , is the current alcohol excise tax rate justified by the estimated social costs ( i.e. , spillover effects ) of alcohol consumption ? .

3 .

are taxpayers bearing a disproportionate share of the alcohol excise tax , based on their income level or their choice in the type of alcoholic beverages they purchase ( or don't purchase ) ? .

4 .

this section of the report analyzes each of these issues in detail .

most of the legislation introduced in the 114 th congress , described above , would reduce tax rates on alcoholic beverages .

however , if either raising revenue or reducing negative externalities is the main policy goal , then potential approaches to increase alcohol excise tax rates could be proposed .

this is not meant to be an exhaustive list of approaches and multiple options could also be combined .

this section of the report discusses these approaches in descending order , based on their respective magnitude of increases to current rates .

policymakers could also increase the tax rate commensurate with the estimated costs of alcohol consumption to society , and possibly increase economic efficiency .

based on estimates of the combined government tax rates at the federal , state , and local level are less than the level that could account for all external economic costs of alcohol consumption .

after adjusting for inflation and assuming that these costs remain constant over time , manning's 1986 estimate of 48 cents per ounce of alcohol would equal $1.02 in 2013 dollars .

a rough estimate in the appendix of this report measures the combined federal , state , and local taxes between 25 cents and 28 cents per ounce ( in 2013 dollars ) of alcohol compared with manning's inflation - adjusted rate of $1.02 per ounce ( in 2013 dollars ) .

in other words , current combined taxes on alcohol are roughly one - quarter of the manning study's calculations of the external costs of alcohol consumption ( adjusted for inflation ) .

as one option to raise revenue and address concerns over horizontal equity , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has regularly included an option to equalize alcohol tax rates in its periodically - published report on deficit reduction .

cbo estimated in 2013 that increasing all taxes on alcoholic beverages to a $16 per proof gallon equivalent ( or 25 cents per ounce of alcohol ) would raise $64 billion in revenue over 10 years .

table 5 illustrates how this option would affect per - unit prices , based on the type of alcoholic beverage .

the differences in tax rates on beer and wine under this option would be quite large , in percentage terms .

however , consumers could interpret these excise tax increases differently based on the product .

although there are bottles of wine that are priced comparatively to a six - pack of beer , many bottles of wine are priced much higher than a six - pack of beer .

put differently , a 48 cent - price increase ( 33 cents to 81 cents ) is generally a larger price markup on a six - pack of beer than a 49 cent - price increase ( 21 cents to 70 cents ) is on a bottle of wine .

alcohol excise tax collections , imports vs. exports , fy1990-fy2015 review of price elasticities of demand for alcohol the price elasticities are interpreted in the following manner ( using fogarty's findings ) : "a 1% increase in the price of spirits results in a 0.60% decrease in the demand for spirits , a 1% increase in the price of wine results in a 0.55% decrease in the demand for wine , and a 1% increase in the price of beer results in a 0.52% decrease in the demand for beer. .

these price elasticities do not control for changes in price of other categories of alcoholic beverages .

as shown in in table a - 1 , beer tends to be more inelastic than either wine or spirits , meaning that increases in beer prices tend to correspond with smaller changes in demand than either wine or spirits .

variations in elasticities depend on the number of studies analyzed in each meta - analysis , the countries studies ( if cross - national ) , and the time periods studied .

calculation of average , combined ( federal , state , and local ) tax rate on alcohol this section estimates current average combined excise tax rates on alcohol so that these levels can be compared with the level of taxation needed to correct for external costs of alcohol consumption , according to manning et al .

 ( 1991 ) .

first , the average federal tax rate weighted by product is equal to 15 cents per ounce of alcohol , as derived in table a - 2 .

next , the average state and local tax rate per ounce of alcohol can be calculated using the following census bureau data .

by multiplying the ratios of state and local tax collections to federal tax collections in table a - 3 by the average weighted federal tax rate per ounce of alcohol of $0.15 , the average state and local tax rate per ounce of alcohol can be calculated as 10 cents using only collections from state and local excise taxes , and 13 cents when adding the net revenue from state - run liquor stores .

the u.s. census bureau data does not disaggregate these collections based on the type of alcoholic beverage that they were collected from ( i.e. , ttb's revenue reports ) .

the methodology used , above , thus serves as an approximate estimate of the state and local average tax rate .

by combining the average weighted federal tax rate with the state and local rates , the combined , average tax rate per ounce of alcohol can be calculated as 25 cents when only using excise taxes , and 29 cents when incorporating net revenue from state - run liquor stores .

