the central african republic ( car ) has struggled to emerge from conflict and state collapse since 2013 , when a rebel movement known as the seleka seized control of the government .

seleka was led by muslim combatants with ties to car's northeastern border region .

"anti - balaka" ( "anti - machete" or "anti - bullet" ) militias were formed in response and fought the seleka and muslims in general .

the ensuing conflict featured widespread violence against civilians and the disintegration of already weak institutions .

violence has waned since 2013-2014 , but periodic flare - ups continue to undermine social cohesion , government stability , and the return of displaced populations .

car has never had an effective central government exercising authority over its full national territory , and there have been recurrent insurgencies and army mutinies since the 1990s .

in early 2016 , car completed national elections and a transition from an interim government that had led the country since 2014 .

faustin archange touadéra , a former prime minister who had cultivated a discreet public profile , was elected president .

his inauguration marked car's second democratic transfer of power since independence from france in 1960 , and the convening of a new national assembly in may 2016 formally brought the political transition period to a close .

donors are now attempting to support the new government while balancing policy concerns ( such as ties between the military and anti - balaka groups ) and competing global demands for humanitarian and peacekeeping resources .

as during past crises in car , international forces have deployed since 2013 in an effort to stabilize the country .

the u.n. multidimensional integrated stabilization mission in car ( minusca ) , established in 2014 , absorbed a previous african - led military force .

minusca is mandated to protect civilians , support reconciliation and the extension of state authority , assist security sector reform efforts , facilitate humanitarian aid , and in some situations implement "urgent temporary measures ... to arrest and detain in order to maintain basic law and order and fight impunity. .

starting in late 2013 , france deployed operation sangaris to disarm militias and secure the capital , bangui .

the mission , with over 2,000 troops at its peak , ended in october 2016 , but france is expected to maintain a rapid - reaction force and security cooperation program .

the european union ( eu ) deployed some 750 soldiers to help secure bangui in 2014-2015 , and subsequently established a military advisory mission ( "eumam" ) to support reforms .

car remains fragile , and president touadéra has been slow to advance initiatives that could bring greater stability .

state institutions remain absent from much of the country .

much of car's minority muslim community has fled to the northeast or to neighboring countries .

the seleka movement has split into factions that have fought each other — and targeted civilians from ethnic communities associated with rival factions .

all parties , including the military , have reportedly engaged in racketeering and extortion in their areas of influence .

the lord's resistance army ( lra ) , a small but brutal ugandan - led militia , is active in the east , where it appears to have benefitted from car's recent instability .

domestic opposition to minusca has been stoked by the mission's lack of capacity , by scandals involving alleged sexual abuse and exploitation by foreign troops , and by self - interested efforts by nativist politicians and activists .

u.n. agencies estimate that some 450,000 central africans are refugees in neighboring countries ( compared to 152,500 as of mid - 2012 ) , while 385,000 are internally displaced — out of a total pre - conflict population of roughly 5 million .

militia attacks on aid personnel have exacerbated an already dire humanitarian situation , in which some 2.4 million residents are reportedly in need of assistance .

economic activity has moderately improved since 2015 , but real gross domestic product ( gdp ) remains below pre - conflict levels , and continued violence threatens to reverse limited gains .

car was already one of the world's poorest countries before the conflict , and it ranked 187 out of 188 countries on the 2015 u.n. human development index .

the contours of the conflict in car reflect complex tensions over access to resources , control over trade and financial networks , and national identity .

prior to the conflict , car's population was estimated to be 15% muslim and 85% christian or followers of indigenous beliefs .

the seleka ( "alliance" in the local sangho language ) rebellion was founded in 2012 in northeastern car , and that region — home to many muslim communities with cross - border ties to chad and sudan — remains the primary stronghold of ex - seleka factions following the group's splintering in 2013-2014 .

at its inception , seleka leaders appeared united by little other than a desire for power , looting , and revenge .

still , the movement drew on grassroots grievances among muslims and northeasterners relating to perceived political exclusion , poor governance , and abuse under successive central administrations led by christians from the south or northwest .

for their part , the christian - and animist - led anti - balaka groups that first organized in bangui in late 2013 , in response to the seleka takeover , have drawn on popular anger at historic patterns of raiding ( including slave - raids ) by muslims from the northeastern border area , and on frustrations with contemporary muslim traders' prominence in commerce and the mineral sector .

politicization of religious identity rose under former president françois bozizé , who headed an evangelical church as president and has been implicated in supporting anti - balaka mobilization from exile .

 ( bozizé took power in a rebellion in 2003 and was deposed by the seleka in 2013. ) .

in a complex twist , bozizé's reliance on chadian combatants while in office may have further stoked nativist anger against residents with family ties to chad , many of whom are muslim .

although religious ideology does not appear to have been at the heart of the car conflict , one result of these tensions has been brutal collective punishment based on sectarian identity .

in 2013 , seleka commanders oversaw attacks on christian communities , including massacres in the northwest — bozizé's home region and political stronghold .

by mid - 2014 , after the seleka had been pushed out of power and the national military had effectively disbanded , anti - balaka groups gained the upper hand in much of the south and west , where they launched assaults on muslim communities in religiously mixed areas .

ultimately , hundreds of thousands of muslims fled their homes , muslim - owned properties and businesses were looted and seized , mosques were destroyed , and muslim religious practice was reportedly forcibly suppressed , including through forced conversions .

in mid - 2014 , thousands of muslims who had been forcibly confined to enclaves under international protection were evacuated , with international assistance , to the northeast or to neighboring countries .

a u.n. commission of inquiry concluded that abuses by anti - balaka groups amounted to "ethnic cleansing" of car's muslim community .

the pace of overtly sectarian killings has slowed since 2014 , but flare - ups continue to occur .

in some cases , violence appears to have been the product of spontaneous events , while in others it appears to have been orchestrated by militia leaders with political ties ( eg , anti - balaka leaders with ties to bozizé , sometimes with support from elements of the military ) .

in september 2015 , a wave of violence set off by the murder of a muslim man in bangui reportedly served as cover for an attempted overthrow of the transitional government by an "alliance of convenience" among ex - seleka and anti - balaka hardliners .

members of the national military ( faca ) — characterized in a subsequent u.n. investigation as "dominated by christians and… generally distrusted by muslims" — reportedly participated in the abuses .

clashes among ex - seleka factions have also increased since 2014 , pointing to divergent interests , ethnic identities , and constituencies represented within the movement .

recent sectarian and militia violence has been concentrated in bangui and in interior areas located at the seams of ex - seleka and anti - balaka control .

more broadly , cycles of violence in car are rooted in patterns in which successive governments have coopted rebel leaders by offering them government posts — thereby providing an incentive for rebellion , weakening civilian - led political movements , and contributing to a perception of impunity .

some analysts assert that these practices are , more broadly , linked to systems of patronage and nepotism that have allowed leaders to exercise "extended personal rule" over a vast , diverse , and sparsely populated country .

some posit that the recent conflict also reflects a tradition of armed resistance among car's rural communities .

overall , the dynamics of violence have rendered it difficult to distinguish between combatant and civilian , and between the stated and "genuine" motivations of armed group leaders .

observers warn that the recent conflict has calcified ethno - religious identities in car , further entrenching the societal cleavages that contributed to the emergence of the crisis .

according to the international crisis group , the conflict has led to the rise of "armed communities divided along religious lines," and has "reopened the dangerous question about who has the right to live in car. .

anti - muslim sentiment appears to remain widespread among christians , as does the notion that muslims are foreign invaders .

in 2016 , u.n. sanctions monitors have documented "acts of aggression targeting muslim internally displaced persons and refugees returning to their homes," while a minusca investigation reported that car's "complex ethno - political conflict… can increasingly be seen as sectarian or religious in nature. .

president touadéra assumed office in march 2016 , having won over 60% of the vote in a february 2016 run - off against anicet - georges dologuélé , following general elections in december 2015 .

african union ( au ) observers found both polls to be transparent and reported registered voter turnout of 78% and 63% in the first and second rounds , respectively .

 ( there were no western - funded independent national election observation missions. ) .

donors praised the election as a relatively open and peaceful contest .

touadéra previously served as prime minister under former president bozizé , and before that was a math professor .

he cultivated a low profile during the transitional period , ran as an independent , and was not generally seen as a front - runner for the presidency .

some observers have attributed touadéra's victory to his relative obscurity , which may have allowed him to avoid concerted opposition .

as the first president to come to office in a democratic transfer of power since 1993 , touadéra is well positioned to leverage international and domestic goodwill .

donors and car residents furthermore heralded the transition from the interim presidency of catherine samba - panza , whose administration , despite initial optimism , had come to be characterized by a lack of initiative and by persistent allegations of corruption and nepotism .

while touadéra has garnered praise for his quiet personal style and broad political coalition , however , his administration may well fall subject to similar pathologies and challenges ahead .

the contest between touadéra and dologuélé ( another former prime minister under bozizé ) involved a competition over supporters of the former president — who is designated for multilateral sanctions and was barred from running for reelection by car's constitutional court .

dologuélé was endorsed both by bozizé's formerly ruling kwa na kwa party and by the self - styled national coordinator of the anti - balaka militias , but these groups' membership may have split between the two candidates .

dologuélé decried "massive fraud" in the run - off , but ultimately conceded the election "for the sake of peace. .

he was , at the same time , elected to parliament , where he leads the opposition bloc .

touadéra's close ties to former president bozizé have raised concerns .

he has appointed several bozizé allies to his cabinet , possibly due to a desire to maintain support from individuals who continue to wield substantial political clout .

some observers warn that perceived under - representation of muslims in touadéra's government could stoke tensions: there is only one muslim in a prominent office , that of speaker of parliament , and only three , heading relatively low - power posts , in touadéra's 23-member cabinet .

according to u.n. sanctions monitors , this "represents a missed opportunity to send a strong signal of inclusion and reconciliation. .

observers have identified disarmament , national reconciliation , military reform , and job creation as key issues on which touadéra will need to make visible progress in order to retain popular legitimacy and momentum .

he arguably must also address car's legacy of poor governance , impunity , and corruption , which many see as the root causes of the country's instability .

to date , the president's approach to such policy challenges remains uncertain , despite ongoing talks with armed group leaders .

a so - called bangui forum , held in may 2015 with the participation of a wide range of civic actors and some ( but not all ) militia commanders , produced notional frameworks on disarmament , reforms , and reconciliation — but the status of these commitments is now uncertain .

the means and timeline for their implementation were uncertain from the start .

spoilers remain a potent threat .

the national government remains largely confined to the capital , while ex - seleka and anti - balaka factions remain active across swathes of the country .

despite shared ties to bozizé , powerful anti - balaka leaders in bangui have criticized touadéra's leadership since his inauguration , and are increasingly involved in fomenting violent anti - u.n. sentiment .

meanwhile , some ex - seleka leaders have engaged in an apparent effort to reconstitute the movement in the northeast .

some armed factions have rejected negotiations entirely .

a fractious parliament , comprising representatives from 17 parties in addition to 57 independent delegates , may further impede momentum and complicate decision - making .

given the scale of challenges , experts question whether the new government will have the political will and capacity to achieve meaningful progress on stabilization .

a constitutional referendum held in december 2015 was marred by violence , although the draft constitution was , in the end , backed by a majority of voters and thus adopted .

the text of the new constitution appears designed to increase checks on presidential power ( including via the creation of a new upper legislative chamber , the senate ) , introduce firmer wording on presidential term limits , and improve legislative oversight of natural resource extraction deals signed by the government .

it also prohibits from public service anyone found to have been complicit in a coup d'état , rebellion , or mutiny .

the u.n security council authorized the u.n. multidimensional integrated stabilization mission in car ( minusca ) in 2014 .

it replaced and largely absorbed an existing african union ( au ) stabilization force , along with a preexisting u.n. political mission .

u.n. security council resolution 2212 ( 2015 ) increased minusca's troop ceiling from 11,820 total uniformed personnel to 12,870 , including 10,750 military personnel and 2,080 police .

resolution 2301 ( 2016 ) subsequently extended the operation's mandate through november 2017 .

since its inception , minusca's effectiveness and conduct have been in question .

although it reached over 95% of its authorized military strength and 84% of its authorized police strength as of august 2016 , the mission's ability to deploy effectively in remote areas has been hindered by logistical hurdles ( including a lack of national transportation infrastructure and car's long rainy season ) as well as troop contributor equipment and capacity shortfalls .

according to a 2016 u.n. strategic review , air transport to eastern and northern zones is further constrained by "strong winds and high levels of dust , as well as the scarcity of properly refurbished airstrips , [which] make the majority of airports not fully functional after sunset. .

under its mandate to protect civilians , minusca has declared "weapons - free zones" in key conflict - affected areas , including bambari and kaga - bandoro , two heavily contested towns in central car .

the implementation of such initiatives remains in question , as anecdotal evidence suggests that armed actors continue to enter such zones unobstructed .

underscoring the challenge of disarmament in car , the killing of a muslim man in kaga - bandoro in october 2016 triggered a wave of violence by ex - seleka , anti - balaka , and armed civilians in the town that claimed nearly 40 lives and displaced thousands .

force protection has been a challenge: the u.n. reports that twelve minusca peacekeepers have been killed in "malicious acts" since operations began .

an internal review by minusca in october 2016 noted "rising discontent" with the mission .

continued violence has fueled local frustrations with minusca's perceived ineffectiveness , but public hostility may also be driven by "demagogic" rhetoric by some actors who seek to discredit international forces and destabilize the government for their own purposes .

in late october 2016 , anti - u.n. protests in bangui turned violent , leading to clashes between peacekeepers and armed demonstrators in which four civilians were reportedly killed and fourteen people injured , including five peacekeepers .

car is one of the world's least developed countries .

agriculture , forestry , and mining are the most important economic sectors , but all are in disarray .

population displacements have severely disrupted the farming cycle and other livelihoods , leading to "crisis" - level food insecurity throughout the country .

the exodus of persecuted muslim communities , who previously dominated trade networks in much of the country , may have contributed to economic collapse .

illicit economic networks have flourished in many areas , leading some to describe car as a "warlord" economy .

according to a 2015 report by the enough project , armed groups in car profit "from forceful taxation and illicit trade with gold and diamonds that are smuggled across international borders or sold to central african diamond companies .

moreover , armed groups use violence , attacks , and threats to collect revenue from civilians , businesses , and public institutions and to conduct widespread looting. .

poaching of elephant ivory is another reportedly lucrative source of revenue for armed groups , including the lra .

seleka fighters reportedly participated in several large elephant killings in 2013 , and while in control of bangui , seleka forces reportedly looted the ministry of water and forests for weapons and previously confiscated ivory tusks .

car produces diamonds , but in 2013 it was suspended from exporting them under the kimberley process — an international certification - based rough diamond regulation initiative aimed at preventing "conflict diamonds" from entering legitimate international trade .

armed groups reportedly control mining sites in central car , and u.n. sanctions monitors reported that over $24 million worth of diamonds were smuggled out of the country between may 2013 and october 2014 .

in july 2015 , citing "progress made to date" by car , the kimberley process established a framework for the resumption of rough diamond exports from certain designated "compliant zones" deemed free from the control of non - state armed groups .

in march 2016 , kimberley process monitors certified berbérati , a sub - prefecture of southwestern mambéré - kadéï prefecture ( figure 1 ) , as compliant , and exports from that area resumed in june .

three more sub - prefectures — carnot ( mambéré - kadéï ) , boda ( lobaye ) , and nola ( sangha - mbaéré ) — were declared compliant in september 2016 ; efforts to certify additional zones , particularly in the country's southwest , are underway .

however , observers have cautioned against premature certification of mining zones in areas where anti - balaka groups remain active , and an august 2016 u.n. panel of experts report documented ongoing violence and restrictions on freedom of movement , particularly of muslims , in berbérati and carnot , among other areas .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) approved a three - year , $115.8 million financial assistance package in 2016 that "aims to entrench macroeconomic stability and create the conditions for sustained and inclusive growth. .

an early assessment of the program , which is designed to build on previous imf assistance disbursed under the 2014-2015 interim government , concluded that structural reforms focused on revenue generation were "broadly on track. .

at the same time , in november 2016 , the imf lowered its gdp growth projections for car to 4.5% and 5.0% in 2016 and 2017 , respectively , down from july 2016 forecasts of 5.2% and 5.5% .

the imf also noted rising prices for staple goods , and raised its projection of average annual inflation to 5.1% , from 4.0% previously .

the imf staff team attributed the revised estimates to deteriorating security conditions .

the world bank has committed nearly $100 million in grants and concessional loans since 2013 to help restore key government services in car .

in the meantime , humanitarian organizations remain the country's primary providers of basic services .

separate in origin from the 2013-2015 conflict , the lord's resistance army ( lra ) , a small militia of ugandan origin founded and led by joseph kony , has operated in car's southeast since at least 2008 .

since 2014 , the group has expanded its area of influence into northeastern haute - kotto prefecture , though u.n. sanctions monitors report that the group's primary areas of operation remain along car's southeastern border with the democratic republic of congo ( drc ) .

lra attacks on rural communities have displaced hundreds of thousands of people in car , drc , and south sudan since 2008 .

car appears to have attracted lra commanders due to its remoteness , lack of an effective military , and location near territory previously familiar to the group .

further , according to non - government reports , the lra exploits car's porous southern and eastern borders to smuggle ivory poached from drc to kafia kingi , a sudanese enclave where the lra has reportedly established a presence , for trafficking onward to asia .

the ugandan military has conducted counter - lra operations in car since 2009 .

the united states has provided significant support , including logistical and intelligence assistance to ugandan troops and the deployment of u.s. military advisors to the field since late 2011 .

the ugandan - led operations have been re - hatted as an au regional task force ( au - rtf ) since 2012 .

the united states has also provided funding for assistance to communities in lra - affected areas , including humanitarian aid , early warning efforts , and reconciliation programs .

in 2016 , uganda began pulling back from its forward operating bases in car and announced its intentions to fully withdraw its troops from car by early 2017 at the latest .

the implications for the u.s. military advisory mission , defense department - funded logistical support , and civilian lra - related foreign aid programs remain to be seen .

lra fighters appear to have taken advantage of instability in car to evade regional military operations .

they have also reportedly leveraged opportunistic relationships with ex - seleka fighters to expand their involvement in illicit trafficking of gold and diamonds from car , though such relationships appear to reflect individual agreements , not broader ties between the groups .

in january 2015 , dominic ongwen , a top lra commander , surrendered to u.s. forces in car — reportedly after making contact with ex - seleka combatants .

he was then delivered to the international criminal court ( icc ) in the hague , where he faces seven counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity .

in april 2015 , remains exhumed from a grave in car were confirmed to be those of another top lra commander , okot odhiambo .

these developments appeared to confirm a gradual weakening of the group's leadership structure in recent years: of five top lra commanders sought by the icc since 2005 , only kony remains at large .

recent estimates put the lra's total strength at fewer than 200 fighters .

advocates of a continued u.s. role in countering the lra nevertheless warn that the group remains a threat and could rebound .

u.s. engagement in car has historically been limited .

the u.s. diplomatic presence prior to the recent conflict consisted of a tiny embassy staff , with no full - time u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) presence .

a small number of u.s. military advisors had deployed to car starting in 2011 in support of ugandan - led counter - lra operations ( discussed above ) .

in december 2012 , u.s. diplomatic personnel were evacuated from bangui as the seleka rebel movement advanced toward the capital .

the u.s. government resumed limited diplomatic operations in bangui in mid - 2014 , headed by a chargé d'affaires , along with a washington , dc - based special representative for car .

in october 2015 , a new u.s .

ambassador , jeffrey hawkins , took up his position in bangui , marking a return to full embassy operations .

as the crisis erupted in 2013 , the obama administration significantly scaled up u.s. aid and diplomatic efforts to stem the surge of violence .

the president issued executive order 13667 ( 2014 ) authorizing targeted sanctions against actors fueling the conflict ; the state department and defense department provided substantial support to african peacekeepers and french troops deploying to car ; the president and other administration officials engaged in public diplomacy outreach to the people of car ; the state department and usaid identified new funding for conflict mitigation , reconciliation , justice , and governance programs ; and in the u.n. security council , the administration supported the establishment of minusca .

top officials portrayed these actions as part of a broader administration effort to elevate the prevention of "mass atrocities" as a core tenet of u.s. foreign policy — and as the product of a related interagency process known as the atrocities prevention board .

visiting bangui in 2014 , u.s .

permanent representative to the u.n. samantha power stated that , "the rwandan genocide taught us the price of delay in responding to mass violence… we must do more ; and we must do it now. .

the administration has imposed targeted financial and travel sanctions on 13 individuals ( one of whom was subsequently removed from the list after his death ) , two private companies , and one armed group as a whole for contributing to the conflict in car .

those sanctioned include former presidents françois bozizé and michel djotodia ( the seleka leader who seized power in 2013 ) ; militia leaders affiliated with both the seleka movement and anti - balaka groups ; the lord's resistance army ( as a group ) along with lra founder joseph kony and two of his sons ; and two belgium - based diamond companies .

not all u.s. designees are on the u.n. sanctions list ; for example , the u.n. sanctions committee on car has not designated djotodia to date .

few , if any , designees are known to maintain assets in the united states or to have traveled to the united states .

several on the u.n. list , however , appear to travel relatively freely within the region , despite u.n. member states' purported obligations to implement a multilateral travel ban .

the united states has been the leading bilateral humanitarian donor to car since 2013 , providing over $404 million to help address needs both within car and among car refugees and host communities in neighboring countries .

the united states is also the top financial contributor to minusca's budget ( as with all u.n. peacekeeping operations ) , under the system of assessed contributions for u.n. peacekeeping .

u.s. funding for minusca is provided through the state department's contributions to international peacekeeping activities ( cipa ) account .

as of early 2016 , the anticipated u.s. allocation for minusca from fy2016 funds totaled $286.7 million , and the obama administration requested $285 million for fy2017 .

for fy2017 , the state department also requested $18.1 million in bilateral aid for car: $8 million in peacekeeping operations ( pko ) funds for continuing voluntary support to african troop contributors to minusca and for bilateral support to security sector reform ; $5.7 million in international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) funds to continue efforts to establish a functioning criminal justice system ; $4.3 million in economic support fund ( esf ) for peacebuilding programs ; and $150,000 in international military education and training ( imet ) for military professionalization and to promote bilateral military ties .

at a major donors' conference for car held in brussels in november 2016 , the administration pledged $11.7 million in u.s. funding to support the justice sector , law enforcement , and economic livelihoods , referring to already budgeted funds .

total donor pledges reached $2.2 billion .

the above bilateral aid figures do not include emergency humanitarian aid , which is allocated during the year according to need .

the car aid figures reported in the state department's annual congressional budget justification also do not include substantial funding that has been allocated through regionally - and centrally - managed programs , including for conflict - mitigation , security sector reform , and other special initiatives .

usaid and the state department allocated roughly $27 million for development and peacebuilding programs in car between fy2013 and fy2016 , much of which was not originally budgeted specifically for car .

due to such allocations , the state department - administered incle account has become a top source of u.s. aid funding for car since 2014 , with at least $25 million notified to congress in fy2015 alone ( constituted from reprogrammed funds ) , to help build , train , and equip car's police and judicial sector .

legal restrictions on certain aid to the government of car under the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 , due to car's poor ranking in the state department's trafficking in persons report , were waived by president obama , who asserted that the provision of otherwise - restricted programs "would promote the purposes of the act or is otherwise in the national interest of the united states. .

some observers assert that u.s. response to the conflict in car helped avert a much larger crisis .

the situation nonetheless remains extremely challenging , leading others to characterize it as an example of the limits of international commitments to protect civilians .

despite domestic political progress , international troop deployments , aid , and diplomatic engagement , residents of car continue to suffer armed attacks by militias .

few root causes of the conflict have been successfully addressed .

looking ahead , congress may influence the funding levels , duration , and mechanisms of u.s. humanitarian assistance and u.s. support for stabilization efforts .

congress may also weigh the relative priority of the car crisis in the context of competing priorities elsewhere in africa and beyond .

some observers have examined minusca's performance in the context of an ongoing debate regarding the relative merits of african union versus u.n. - conducted stabilization missions .

this debate has been at play in mali , somalia , and elsewhere .

in short , neighboring states may have greater political commitment to resolving a crisis in their backyard , but regional operations are often hampered by a lack of capacity and handicapped by political rivalries and competing interests .

on the other hand , u.n. peacekeeping operations , while more consistently funded and vetted , can be slow to fully deploy and , often , risk - averse to a point that can inhibit effectiveness .

they , too , may rely on troop contributors that exhibit limited capacity and accountability .

in the long term , the internal political and security arrangements that could allow for stability and improved governance in car may prove elusive .

international actors have repeatedly attempted military interventions , peace processes , state - building , and security sector reform efforts in car — with mixed results , at best .

despite agreements at the 2015 bangui forum and ongoing consultations with armed groups by the new government , the disarmament , demobilization , and reintegration ( ddr ) of combatants , the investigation and prosecution of human rights abusers , and the creation of functional and representative state security forces in car have not significantly advanced .

the conflict appears to have created new , harmful dynamics among communities at the grassroots level that may prove durable and difficult to contain .

the potential impact of the car crisis on regional stability is of concern to u.s. policymakers , particularly as conflicts and political crises in nearby countries , such as south sudan , burundi , and drc , persist .

to date , little violence has been reported among border communities in neighboring states , despite refugee flows from car and the fact that car's demographics are mirrored elsewhere in central africa .

still , car refugees have taxed scarce local resources , while insecurity has hindered cross - border trade and humanitarian aid delivery .

neighboring states have limited capacity to respond to these problems or to contain violence should it erupt .

regional crises also have the potential to spill in to car or otherwise affect stabilization efforts there .

for example , in january 2016 , u.n. headquarters officials decided not to renew the burundian police contingent in minusca when its current tour of duty ends , citing police abuses within burundi .

further turmoil in burundi , a top minusca troop contributor , could lead the country to withdraw its military personnel as well ( or the u.n. to reject them ) .

concerns about whether transnational violent extremist organizations could seek safe havens in car or radicalize local populations affected by the conflict are also likely to persist .

