the constitution grants congress the power to borrow money on the credit of the united states — one part of its power of the purs e — and thus mandates that congress exercise control over federal debt .

control of debt policy provides congress with one means of expressing views on appropriate fiscal policies .

before 1917 congress typically controlled individual issues of debt .

in september 1917 , while raising funds for the united states' entry into world war i , congress also imposed an aggregate limit on federal debt in addition to individual issuance limits .

over time , congress granted treasury secretaries more leeway in debt management .

in 1939 , congress agreed to impose an aggregate limit that gave the u.s. treasury authority to manage the structure of federal debt .

the statutory debt limit applies to almost all federal debt .

the limit applies to federal debt held by the public ( that is , debt held outside the federal government itself ) and to federal debt held by the government's own accounts .

federal trust funds , such as social security , medicare , transportation , and civil service retirement accounts , hold most of this internally held debt .

for most federal trust funds , net inflows by law must be invested in special federal government securities .

when holdings of those trust funds increase , federal debt subject to limit will therefore increase as well .

the government's on - budget fiscal balance , which excludes the net surplus or deficit of the u.s .

postal service and the social security program , does not directly affect debt held in government accounts .

the change in debt held by the public is mostly determined by the government's surpluses or deficits .

the net expansion of the federal government's balance sheet through loan programs also increases the government's borrowing requirements .

under federal budgetary rules , however , only the net subsidy cost of those loans is included in the calculation of deficits .

the 2011 debt limit episode attracted far more attention than other recent debt limit episodes .

in mid - 2011 several credit ratings agencies and investment banks expressed concerns about the consequences to the financial system and the economy if the u.s. treasury were unable to fund federal obligations .

many economists and financial institutions stated that if the market associated treasury securities with default risks , the effects on global capital markets could be significant .

debate during the 2011 debt limit episode reflected a growing concern with the fiscal sustainability of the federal government .

while projections issued in 2011 indicated that federal deficits would shrink over the next half decade , deficits later in the decade were expected to rise .

without major changes in federal policies , the amount of federal debt would increase substantially .

cbo has repeatedly warned that the current trajectory of federal borrowing is unsustainable and could lead to slower economic growth in the long run as debt rises as a percentage of gdp .

unless federal policies change , congress would repeatedly face demands to raise the debt limit to accommodate the growing federal debt in order to provide the government with the means to meet its financial obligations .

the next section provides a brief chronology of events from the 2011 debt limit episode .

the resolution of the debt limit episode and the ending of the federal shutdown in october 2013 set up a subsequent episode in early 2014 .

the debt limit , which had been suspended through march 15 , 2015 , was reestablished the following day at $18,113 billion .

the debt limit was raised , in essence , by the sum of payments made during the suspension period to meet federal obligations .

on march 7 , 2017 , cbo issued estimates that extraordinary measures could suffice to meet federal obligations until sometime in the fall of 2017 .

such estimates are subject to substantial uncertainty due to changes in economic conditions , federal revenue flows , changes in the amounts and timing of federal payments , and other factors .

on march 8 , 2017 , treasury secretary mnuchin notified congress that he would invoke authorities to use extraordinary measures after march 15 , 2017 , to ensure continued payment of federal obligations .

on march 16 , 2017 , secretary mnuchin notified congressional leaders that he had indeed exercised those authorities .

the debt limit on that date was reset at $19,809 billion .

in testimony before congress on may 24 , 2017 , administration officials urged congress to raise the debt limit before its summer recess .

office of management and budget ( omb ) director mick mulvaney stated that the federal receipts were coming in more slowly than projected , which could imply that treasury's capacity to meet federal obligations could be exhausted sooner than previously projected .

a goldman sachs analysis found , however , that some major categories of tax receipts had shown stronger growth .

on july 28 , 2017 , treasury secretary mnuchin sent a letter to congress stating that extraordinary measures would be used until september 29 , 2017 .

secretary mnuchin's letter did not state that treasury's cash reserves or borrowing capacity would be exhausted on that date , but he did describe the need for legislative action by that date as "critical. .

others had estimated that the u.s. treasury would likely be able to meet federal obligations until sometime in early october 2017 .

treasury cash balances and borrowing capacity in mid - september , however , were projected to fall well below levels the u.s. treasury has considered prudent to maintain operations in the face of significant adverse events .

on september 3 , 2017 , secretary mnuchin argued that a debt limit measure should be tied to legislation responding to hurricane harvey , which caused extensive damage in southeast texas .

on september 6 , 2017 , outlines of an agreement on the debt limit and a continuing resolution were announced between president trump and congressional leaders .

the following day , the senate , by an 80-17 vote , passed an amended version of h.r .

601 , which included an amendment ( s.amdt .

808 ) to suspend the debt limit and provide funding for government operations through december 8 , 2017 , as well as supplemental appropriations for disaster relief .

on september 8 , 2017 , the house agreed on a 316-90 vote to the amended measure , which the president signed the same day ( continuing appropriations act , 2018 and supplemental appropriations for disaster relief requirements act , 2017 ; p.l .

115-56 ) .

treasury secretary mnuchin invoked authorities to use extraordinary measures once that debt limit suspension lapsed after december 8 , 2017 .

he extended those authorities on january 30 , 2018 , through the end of february and urged congressional leaders to act on the debt limit before that time .

secretary mnuchin did not indicate that the u.s. treasury would exhaust its borrowing capacity or cash reserves by that date .

cbo estimates and independent analysts had suggested that those extraordinary measures would have lasted until sometime in early march .

in july 2018 , secretary mnuchin issued a report to congress detailing its use of extraordinary measures .

on february 9 , 2018 , enactment of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 ; p.l .

115-123 ) resolved the debt limit issue until 2019 .

bba 2018 employed a legislative vehicle , h.r .

1892 , which had passed in both the house and senate in different forms in 2017 .

on february 9 , 2018 , differences in the amended measure were resolved by a vote of 71 to 28 in the senate and a vote of 240 to 186 in the house .

bba 2018 also increased statutory caps on discretionary spending , extended funding of the government until march 23 , 2018 ( section 20101 ) , and funded certain disaster assistance programs , among other provisions .

section 30301 of bba 2018 suspended the debt limit through march 1 , 2019 , as noted above .

the limit was reset on march 2 , 2019 , at $21.988 trillion , a level that accommodates federal obligations during the suspension period .

on the following monday — march 4 , 2019 — treasury secretary steven mnuchin invoked extraordinary authorities by declaring a debt issuance suspension period , during which the u.s. treasury will then use its cash balances , incoming revenues , and extraordinary measures to meet federal obligations .

cbo estimated that treasury would have financial resources to meet federal obligations until just before or just after october 1 , 2019 .

some private forecasts have estimated treasury's resources would be exhausted around august 2019 .

