about 362 million travelers ( citizens and non - citizens ) entered the united states in fy2013 , including about 102 million air passengers and crew , 18 million sea passengers and crew , and 242 million incoming land travelers .

at the same time about 205,000 aliens were denied admission at ports of entry ( poes ) ; and about 24,000 persons were arrested at poes on outstanding criminal warrants .

within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , u.s. customs and border protection's ( cbp ) office of field operations ( ofo ) is responsible for conducting immigration inspections at america's 329 poes .

about 21,464 cbp officers inspect travelers , agricultural products , and cargo at u.s. ports and abroad .

most foreign nationals visiting the united states also are subject to some form of screening prior to their arrival at a poe , including when they apply for a nonimmigrant visa or to enter through the visa waiver program , and through cbp's screening of information provided by air and sea carriers .

cbp's primary immigration enforcement mission at ports of entry is to confirm that travelers are eligible to enter the united states and to exclude inadmissible aliens .

this mission is challenging because of the scope and complexity of immigration inflows: millions of travelers at hundreds of ports must be individually screened against dozens of rules governing who may or may not enter the country .

moreover , strict enforcement is in tension with a second core mission: to facilitate the flow of lawful travelers , who are the vast majority of persons seeking admission .

a fundamental question for congress and dhs is how to balance these competing concerns .

the answer to this question varies across diverse geographic regions , different modes of travel , and in response to a constantly shifting landscape of potential threats and legal immigration flows .

as part of this dual mission , and in support of its broader mandate to manage the u.s. immigration system , dhs also is responsible for implementing an electronic entry - exit system at poes .

congress required dhs' predecessor to develop an entry - exit system beginning in 1996 , but the implementation of a fully automated , biometric system has proven to be an elusive goal .

this report reviews the legislative history of immigration inspections requirements and the entry - exit system .

the report then describes the implementation of these provisions , including pre - travel screening , primary and secondary inspections , trusted traveler programs , outbound enforcement , and the entry - exit system .

the final section of the report identifies a number of issues for congress related to immigration admissions and enforcement at poes .

controlling admissions is a core element of state sovereignty ; but such control entails the opposing goals of: 1 ) preventing unlawful entries , while 2 ) facilitating legal flows .

these policy goals are inherently in tension , as efforts to identify and interdict illegal entrants inevitably challenges , and may delay , the smooth flow of legitimate travelers .

the supreme court has long held that congress has absolute authority to control immigration by establishing rules for the admission , exclusion , and deportation of non - citizens .

some of the first federal laws , the so - called aliens and seditions acts of 1798 , authorized the president to arrest and / or deport any alien who represented a danger to the united states .

and while congress during most of the 19 th century generally favored open admissions to the sparsely populated country , a series of laws beginning in 1875 excluded several classes of aliens , including criminals and prostitutes , aliens from certain countries and regions , anarchists , communists , and aliens engaged in espionage , among others .

thus , while the specific issues in u.s. immigration law have evolved over time , a core policy goal has always been to prevent the entry of aliens who threaten u.s. interests .

for the last several decades , these threats , or enforcement priorities , have fallen within three broad categories: unauthorized immigration .

since 1980 , the estimated unauthorized population in the united states has increased from about 2.5 million to about 11.7 million people .

between one - third and one - half of these aliens are believed to have entered lawfully through a poe and over - stayed their visas .

an unknown proportion of illegal entrants also passed through poes , either concealed in a vehicle or by using fraudulent documents .

one enforcement priority at poes , therefore , is to prevent these unlawful entries .

transnational crime .

cbp officers performing immigration inspections are the primary line of defense against certain illegal flows , including in particular most illegal drug flows other than marijuana .

immigration inspectors also seek to arrest known smugglers and other criminals at poes .

international terrorism .

national security concerns have loomed large in immigration policy in the years since the 2001 al qaeda attacks against the united states ( the 9 / 11 attacks ) .

all 19 of the 9 / 11 hijackers entered the united states legally through poes , and constraining terrorist travel is now recognized as a critical defense against terrorist attacks within the united states .

yet while most people would agree that terrorists , criminals , and immigration violators are appropriate enforcement targets , no consensus exists about how to prioritize these threats because the likelihood of each type of illegal entry is unknown , and because the potential consequences of these threats are subjective and difficult to measure .

the likelihood of each of these threats occurring also varies by geography and mode of entry .

for example , certain types of illegal migrants may be more likely to travel by bus or car across the southern border , smugglers may favor other distribution routes , and terrorists may be likely to reach the united states by air and / or at northern border poes .

threat actors also may seek to counter enforcement efforts by adapting their behavior to avoid such patterns .

enforcement must be balanced by a second overarching goal: the facilitation of legal flows .

with international tourism directly accounting for over $200 billion in 2012 ( almost 1% of u.s. gross domestic product ) , travel facilitation supports the u.s. economy .

smooth processing at poes also streamlines travel for the tens of millions of u.s citizens returning from international trips each year , and may improve americans' experiences abroad through reciprocal arrangements .

in addition , immigration agents at poes define visitors' first impressions of america and the u.s. government , and therefore play an important diplomatic role .

enforcement and travel facilitation are fundamentally in tension because efforts to identify and interdict unlawful travelers tend to impede the flow of the entire admissions queue , and efforts to expedite the line may increase the risk that an illicit traveler is overlooked .

thus , in addition to questions about how to prioritize diverse threats , congress and dhs must decide how to balance enforcement and the facilitation of legitimate travel .

is it better to admit one illegal actor , or to delay the admission of 1,000 lawful travelers ? .

how should congress and dhs weigh the benefits of more robust enforcement against the costs to commerce , privacy and civil liberties , and related concerns ? .

in an effort to reduce border wait times without compromising border security , cbp's response to these questions emphasizes "risk management. .

in general , risk management refers to a process for assessing the risks associated with potential threats and calibrating the enforcement response to the estimated gravity of the threat .

in the case of immigration inspections , risk management involves screening travelers at multiple points in the immigration process to distinguish between low - and high - risk travelers .

low - risk travelers may be eligible for expedited admissions processing through the visa waiver program and / or trusted traveler programs , while higher - risk travelers may be subject to more extensive secondary inspections .

unauthorized migrants at poes may be subject to expedited removal and other types of immigration enforcement ( see "the immigration inspections process" ) .

travelers seeking to enter the united states go through one to three steps in the immigration inspection process .

in the first step , prior to travel , most travelers who are not u.s. citizens or legal permanent residents ( lprs ) must apply for permission to enter the united states , by obtaining a visa at a u.s. consulate abroad or through the visa waiver program .

air travelers are subject to additional screening prior to arrival ( see "pre - travel screening" ) .

second , all arriving travelers are subject to inspection ( or preclearance ) by a cbp officer prior to entering the united states ( see "primary inspections" ) .

third , some passengers also may be selected through risk - based screening or at random for more intensive scrutiny ( see "secondary inspections and immigration enforcement" ) .

participants in cbp's trusted traveler programs volunteer for additional screening in advance and thereby become eligible for expedited processing at poes ( see "trusted traveler programs" ) .

at certain land ports on the southern border , travelers may be subject to screening and potential inspection as they depart the united states .

outbound enforcement is managed by the outbound programs division within the office of field operations .

the division's mandate focuses on addressing violence in mexico and the mexico - united states drug trade by interdicting illegal currency , arms , and ammunition outflows .

dhs reports that about 700 cbp officers participate in the outbound enforcement program .

table 5 describes annual seizures by the outbound programs division for fy2009-fy2013 .

as table 5 indicates , outbound enforcement seized a total of about 5,100 kilograms of illegal drugs during this period in 3,442 separate seizure incidents ; $221 million worth of illegal currency exports ; 8,210 illegal weapons , and about 12.1 million rounds of ammunition .

some experts view the number of southbound drug seizures — almost 3 per day in fy2013 — as an indicator of the global nature of the market for illegal drugs , and of the united states' emerging role as a transshipment country for illegal drugs .

at the same time , while seizure incidents have increased since fy2009 , the average seizure size fell sharply in fy2013 .

illegal currency and ammunition seizures are also down since fy2009 and fy2010 , respectively .

it is not clear whether the recent drop in illegal drug volume and the sustained drops in currency and ammunition seizures reflect changes in tactics by drug trafficking organizations or are statistical anomalies .

some people have argued that the united states should place greater emphasis on outbound enforcement to disrupt transnational criminal operations .

according to this view , preventing u.s. - mexico money and currency flows would eliminate the incentive for mexico - u.s. drug flows , while also reducing criminal organizations' firepower .

outbound enforcement efforts confront a number of challenges , however .

laws restricting international currency transfers are notoriously difficult to enforce .

outbound enforcement also takes resources away from inbound inspections , so that increasing outbound screening may add to inbound delays or compromise inbound security .

in addition , most outbound lanes are not equipped with inspection infrastructure , leaving officers exposed to the elements and to nearby traffic flows .

limited outbound lanes also mean that inspections may result in long waits for outbound travelers .

partly to address these concerns , outbound enforcement operations are normally short - term surges , followed by periods of reduced inspections .

yet some analysts have argued that sophisticated criminal organizations can defeat enforcement surges by monitoring outbound lanes , and by suspending high value outflows whenever a surge is underway .

as noted elsewhere , section 110 iirira , as amended , requires dhs to implement an automatic , biometric entry - exit system that covers all non - citizen travelers into and out of the united states and that identifies visa overstayers ( see "entry - exit system: legislative requirements" ) .

prior to 1997 , the ins collected entry - exit data manually by obtaining paper copies of traveler's i - 94 records ( see "i - 94 arrival / departure records" ) , and an ins contractor manually keyed in data from the forms .

this system was unreliable because paper forms were not consistently collected ( particularly departure forms ) ; forms were not timely provided to the contractor ; and data input errors were widespread .

ins initiated a pilot program in 1997 to further automate i - 94 data collection by having airlines provide magnetic stripe i - 94 arrival cards .

passengers passed the cards to ins agents at poes during primary inspection .

the automated system also proved problematic , however , because airlines were reluctant to participate , because departure cards still were not reliably collected , and because the system did not cover land travelers , among other shortcomings .

with the passage of new entry - exit mandates in 2000-2001 ( see "entry - exit system: legislative requirements" ) and the creation of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in 2002 , the u.s .

visitor and immigrant status indicator technology ( us - visit ) program was established within dhs in 2004 to manage the entry - exit system .

us - visit was renamed the office of biometric identity management ( obim ) in march 2013 .

cbp works with obim to collect and manage entry - exit data as described below .

news of humans infected with ebola in west africa has heightened concerns about the health screening of people arriving in the united states .

under current law , foreign nationals not already legally residing in the united states who wish to come to the united states generally must obtain a visa and submit to an inspection to be admitted .

they must first meet a set of criteria specified in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) that determine whether they are eligible for admission .

moreover , they must not be deemed inadmissible according to specified grounds in the ina .

one of the reasons why a foreign national might be deemed inadmissible is on health - related grounds .

from an immigration standpoint , an outbreak of an infectious disease places substantial procedural and resource pressures on cbp , which is charged with screening all travelers at land , sea , and air ports of entry for admission .

cbp works in conjunction with the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) in hhs to monitor travelers for health - related risks and attempt to contain any diseases that may be spread by travelers coming from abroad .

the cdc is the lead agency charged with protection against communicable diseases and is responsible for providing the technical instructions to cbp officers .

cdc officials are not present at the border on a day - to - day basis , but there are quarantine stations located in a number of international airports and near a few land ports of entry .

however , these stations constitute a small fraction of the 329 ports of entry operated by cbp .

even fully staffed quarantine stations are not in a position to perform routine health screening on all passengers crossing the border as a standard operating procedure .

rather than staffing all the poes , the cdc , through their division of global migration and quarantine ( dgmq ) , trains cbp inspectors to watch for ill persons and items of public health concern .

the cbp inspector's field manual states that cbp officers are responsible for observing all travelers for obvious signs and symptoms of quarantinable and communicable diseases , such as ( 1 ) fever , which could be detected by a flushed complexion , shivering , or profuse sweating ; ( 2 ) jaundice ( unusual yellowing of skin and eyes ) ; ( 3 ) respiratory problems , such as severe cough or difficulty breathing ; ( 4 ) bleeding from the eyes , nose , gums , or ears or from wounds ; and ( 5 ) unexplained weakness or paralysis .

however , cbp officers are not medically trained or qualified to physically examine or diagnose illness among arriving travelers .

the cdc also approves the physicians used at the poes , and tests are performed in consultation with and in accordance with cdc guidance .

cdc officials are to be stationed at the border during immigration emergencies and other periods when public health may be threatened .

in the current context of the ebola outbreak in west africa , the administration has established new screening procedures at five airports and requires all persons whose travel originated in guinea , liberia , and sierra leone to enter the united states through these five airports .

the airports were selected because reportedly they represent more than 94% of the travelers coming from those three countries .

when passengers arrive whose travel originated in one of the aforementioned countries — including u.s. citizens — they are escorted to a separate area for additional screening .

the travelers fill out an extensive questionnaire , and have their temperature taken .

staff from the cdc is present at these airports to assist with the screening .

travelers without febrile illness or symptoms of ebola will be monitored two times a day by state and local health departments for 21 days from their departure from west africa .

these travelers are also given a kit that contains a tracking log , a pictorial description of ebola symptoms , a thermometer , and a wallet card with information on whom to contact if they have symptoms that can be presented to a health care provider if necessary .

those that have a fever or have symptoms consistent with ebola will be immediately isolated .

the completion of a more comprehensive entry - exit system has been a persistent subject of congressional concern .

as discussed elsewhere , two limitations of the current system are that most people entering the united states by land poes only provide biographic data ( i.e. , do not provide biometric data ) , and that dhs may not have a fully reliable system for overstay analysis ( see "entry - exit system: implementation" ) .

dhs reportedly has made progress with respect to real - time overstay analysis , but did not publish estimated overstay rates that had been expected in 2013 .

in addition , even when dhs identifies potential visa overstayers in its dataset , the department has limited ability to track down and remove such overstayers .

arguably , the biggest questions about the entry - exit system concern the collection of exit data .

no exit data are collected from persons leaving through southern border land ports ; and data collection at other ports is limited to biographic data , is not always based on machine - readable data , and relies on information sharing with canada and with air and sea carriers .

dhs reportedly believes that the biographic information sharing generally meets its needs for purposes of exit tracking at an acceptable cost , and cbp has indicated , for purposes of immigration screening , that "[w]hile biometric information is growing in importance , the vast majority of data available for use at the poes is biographical. .

at the same time , dhs has also argued that strengthening biographic data collection is a necessary precursor to biometric data collection , and views a biographic system as a desirable long - term goal for the entry - exit system .

members of congress concerned with exit tracking may focus on the following questions: are biographic data adequate for entry - exit tracking , or should biometric exit data collection be viewed as a priority ? .

if biographic data are adequate , would an upgrade to machine - readable biographic data represent an improvement over the status quo ? .

is information - sharing using data provided by airlines and by canada an acceptable model for exit data , of should dhs collect exit data directly ? .

if information - sharing is acceptable , can a similar model be implemented on the u.s. - mexico border , or does the southern border require a different approach ? .

if information - sharing is not acceptable , what additional infrastructure and personnel are required ( and at what cost ) for cbp to collect universal exit data ? .

the 114 th congress is considering legislation that would require the completion of the entry - exit system .

the secure our borders first act of 2015 ( h.r .

399 ) would require the secretary of homeland security to submit an implementation plan to execute a biometric exit data system .

the bill would create a six - month pilot program to test the biometric exit system , which would precede the implementation of the roll out of the program .

the bill sets forth staggered deadlines for full implementation of the exit system but would require full implementation of the system within five years of enactment .

discussions of immigration control and border security often focus on unauthorized flows between ports of entry ; but unauthorized immigrants also enter through ports of entry , either illegally or by overstaying a nonimmigrant visa .

visa overstayers enter legally on temporary ( nonimmigrant ) visas but fail to depart before the visa expires .

unauthorized immigrants enter through ports of entry by using fraudulent documents ( including counterfeit or altered documents , and legitimate documents that do not belong to them ) or by evading inspection , for example by being hidden inside a vehicle .

a potentially important question for congress , particularly in light of the ongoing debate about immigration reform , is how much unauthorized immigration occurs through poes ? .

a 2006 study estimated that 40-50% of unauthorized immigrants in the country at the time were visa overstayers , and this study remains the most recent reliable public estimate .

in addition , interviews conducted with current and former unauthorized migrants in 2009 found that one out of four illegal entrants from mexico had entered illegally through a port , either hidden in a vehicle or using borrowed or fraudulent documents , and that aliens attempting illegal entry through a poe were half as likely to be apprehended as those crossing between the ports .

dhs has not published an estimate of the total number of visa overstayers in the united states or of the rate of illegal immigration through poes , though the department reportedly plans to report on visa overstayers , as noted elsewhere .

the department reportedly does not have plans to produce an estimate of illegal flows through poes , and the compex program is not currently designed to produce such an estimate ( see "random compliance examination ( compex ) program" ) .

the program likely could be modified — primarily by increasing sample size — to produce such an estimate if congress viewed such modifications as a priority , though cbp reportedly does not support such a change .

recent border security bills have targeted a greater share of resources to enforcement between ports of entry than to inspections and enforcement at poes ( see "port of entry infrastructure and personnel" ) .

some legislation in the 113 th congress focused on enforcement between the ports .

for example , s. 744 would require dhs to develop a strategy to achieve "effective control" of border patrol sectors between ports of entry , but does not establish goals or metrics for enforcement at the ports .

on the other hand , the border security results act of 2013 ( h.r .

1417 ) , as reported by the house homeland security committee , would establish poe enforcement metrics , though it would not authorize new enforcement measures .

one potential strategy for speeding migration flows while also enhancing border security is to add poe personnel and infrastructure .

for any given volume of incoming travelers , both the flow rate ( or "service level" ) and the time spent on inspections are a positive function of the number of cbp officers on duty and the number of active travel lanes .

conversely , according to a 2008 gao report , infrastructure weaknesses increased the risk that vehicles could enter the united states without inspection ; and staffing shortages contributed to morale problems , fatigue , lack of backup support , and safety issues , "increasing the potential that terrorists , inadmissible travelers , and illicit good could enter the country. .

gao revisited these concerns in 2011 and reported that dhs was taking steps to address gao's recommendations regarding staffing and infrastructure , but that cbp faced challenges in developing poe performance metrics .

cbp's workload staffing model identifies a need for 3,811 additional cbp officers at poes in fy2014 , and the administration's fy2014 budget proposal included a request for 3,477 additional officers .

to some extent , the office of field operations ( ofo ) competes for resources with cbp's border patrol and with u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) .

the border patrol has grown about three times faster than ofo in the post - 9 / 11 period .

similarly , s. 744 , would direct cbp to more than double the number of border patrol agents on the southwest border , while only authorizing a 16% increase in ofo officers .

other bills in the 113 th congress would augment poe staffing , however .

recent fiscal pressures have been a barrier to poe personnel increases .

as mentioned , during the fy2014 budget process , the administration proposed to hire 3,477 additional cbp officers ( about half through increased appropriations and half through fee increases ) , but congress approved a slower personnel growth , with half the proposed funding .

congress also authorized a pilot program in the fy2013 appropriations bill that permitted cbp to enter into public - private partnerships ( ppps ) with certain localities and permitted the private sector to fund improvements in border facilities and port services , including by funding additional cbp officers and underwriting overtime hours .

in its fy2014 budget , the administration proposed expanding the pilot program by permitting cbp to accept donations to expand port operations .

approving the administration's request , congress extended the pilot program in the fy2014 dhs appropriations bill .

the current pilot program permits cbp to accept donations to expand port operations , among other things .

as noted elsewhere , one of cbp's primary tools for risk management at poes is the use of trusted traveler programs , including global entry , nexus , and sentri ( see "trusted traveler programs" ) .

trusted traveler programs are designed to facilitate legal flows by allowing low - risk , known travelers to be exempted from certain screening and inspections and also to enhance security by allowing cbp officers to focus greater attention on higher - risk flows .

the benefits of trusted traveler programs should increase with scale because moving more travelers into expedited lanes speeds overall processing times , and fewer unknown travelers mitigates the "needle in the haystack" challenge of enforcement at poes .

thus , legislation in the 113 th congress would promote membership in trusted trade programs .

congress and cbp confront certain obstacles to expanding trusted traveler programs , however .

one of the main incentives cbp can offer trusted travelers is to reduce the likelihood of secondary inspections ; but doing so may encourage mala fide actors to enroll in these programs to game the system .

in addition , at land poes , travelers only benefit from an expedited inspections process if they are also able to take advantage of dedicated nexus or sentri lanes ( i.e. , so that the entire queue is subject to expedited processing ) .

but cbp has limited capacity to add and extend dedicated lanes because many ports are located in urban areas with limited space for expansion , though the agency has addressed this problem , to some extent , by using "active lane management" systems that adjust lane assignments based on real - time demand .

congress has enacted the following legislation concerning an entry - exit system: illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira , p.l .

104-208 , div .

c ) .

section 110 required the attorney general , within two years of enactment ( i.e. , by september 30 , 1998 ) , to develop an automated entry and exit control system that would collect records of alien arrivals and departures and allow the attorney general through online searches to match such arrivals and departures and thereby identify nonimmigrant aliens who remain in the united states beyond the periods of their visas ( i.e. , visa overstayers ) .

the bill also required the attorney general to annually report to congress on the number of visa overstayers and their countries of origin .

p.l .

105-259 and p.l .

105-277 .

these appropriations acts amended §110 of iirira to extend the deadline for implementing the entry - exit system to october 15 , 1998 for airports and seaports and to march 30 , 2001 for land poes .

immigration and naturalization service data management improvement act ( p.l .

106-215 ) .

the act amended iirira §110 to describe the entry - exit system in greater detail ; clarified that the system's mandate did not impose new documentary requirements on travelers to the united states ; and imposed new deadlines of december 2003 for implementation of the entry - exit system at all u.s. airports and seaports , december 2004 for implementation of the system as the 50 busiest land poes , and december 2005 for making data from the system available to immigration officers at all poes .

the act also authorized the attorney general to make entry - exit system data available to other law enforcement officials for law enforcement purposes .

visa waiver permanent program act ( p.l .

106-396 ) .

section 205 amended ina §217 to require the attorney general ( separate and apart from iirira §110 ) to develop and implement a fully automated entry and exit control system to collect arrival and departure records for aliens traveling in and out of the united states under the visa waiver program ( also see "visa waiver program" ) .

uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism act of 2001 ( usa patriot act , p.l .

107-56 ) .

section 411 encouraged the attorney general to implement the iirira entry - exit system "with all deliberate speed. .

the act directed the attorney general , in the development of the system , to focus on the utilization of biometric technology and tamper - resistant documents ; and it required that the system interface with law enforcement databases to identify individuals who pose a threat to national security .

in addition , section 403 required the departments of justice and state , working through the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , to develop and certify a technology standard that can be used to verify the identity and check the backgrounds of persons applying for a u.s. visa or seeking admission at a poe .

enhanced border security and visa entry reform act of 2001 ( ebsvera , p.l .

107-173 ) .

section 302 required the attorney general and dos to use the technology standard required to be developed under the patriot act at poes and at consular posts abroad ; to establish an arrival and departure database ; and to make all alien admissibility security databases interoperable .

intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( irtpa , p.l .

108-458 ) .

among other provisions , section 7208 reiterated congress's finding that a biometric entry - exit system should be implemented as expeditiously as possible and required dhs to develop and report on a plan to accelerate the full implementation of such a system .

the section also clarified that the entry - exit system shall include a requirement for the collection of biometric data for all categories of individuals required to provide such data , regardless of the poe .

and it imposed a two year deadline for the development of a fully interoperable data system among relevant agencies within dos , dhs , and doj .

implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( 9 / 11 act , p.l .

110-53 ) .

section 711 amended ina §217 ( as previously amended by p.l .

106-396 ) to require dhs within one year to establish an exit system to record the departure of all air travelers participating in the visa waiver program .

