sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) measures are laws , regulations , standards , and procedures that governments employ as "necessary to protect human , animal or plant life or health" from the risks associated with the spread of pests , diseases , or disease - carrying and causing organisms , or from additives , toxins , or contaminants in food , beverages , or feedstuffs .

sps measures are designed to protect animals and plants from diseases and pests , and to protect humans from animal - and plant - borne diseases and pests , and foodborne risks .

examples include specific product or processing standards , requirements for products to be produced in disease - free areas , quarantine and inspection procedures , sampling and testing requirements , residue limits for pesticides and drugs in foods , and prohibitions on certain food additives .

technical barriers to trade ( tbts ) cover both food and non - food traded products .

tbts in agriculture include sps measures , but also include other types of measures related to health and quality standards , testing , registration , and certification requirements , as well as packaging and labeling regulations .

tbt measures address technical characteristics of products , such as process and product standards , technical regulations , product environmental regulations , and voluntary procedures relating to health , sanitary , and animal welfare , but also inspection procedures , product specifications , and approval and marketing of biotechnology .

this report broadly refers to sps and other types of technical requirements , including tbts in food production , as "sps / tbt measures. .

sps / tbt measures span several broad categories ( see text box below ) , and may vary widely depending on the commodity and importing country .

overall , sps / tbt measures comprise a group of widely divergent standards and standards - based measures that countries use to regulate markets , protect their consumers , and preserve natural resources , but that can also be used to discriminate against imports in favor of domestic products .

specific examples in agriculture include meat and poultry processing standards to reduce pathogens , residue limits for pesticides in foods , fumigation requirements for grains and wood packaging materials to kill pests , labeling and marketing standards , food safety protocols , and regulation of agricultural biotechnology .

this has resulted in a variety of formal trade disputes as well as ongoing trade concerns between the united states and its trading partners .

the united states has initiated several formal trade disputes regarding sps / tbt measures that have been elevated for review and dispute resolution within the world trade organization ( wto ) .

some high - profile trade disputes include u.s. concerns about the european union's ( eu's ) ban on u.s. meats from livestock treated with growth - promoting hormones , the eu's restrictions on chemicals used to treat u.s. poultry , and the eu's moratorium on approvals of biotechnology products .

other disputes have involved u.s. complaints about testing and inspection requirements , among other sps / tbt measures , applied in other countries .

foreign countries also have objected to various u.s. trade measures .

this report describes formal challenges involving sps / tbt that the united states has brought against some u.s. trading partners , which have resulted in trade disputes that have been , or continue to be , reviewed by the wto .

not all u.s. trade concerns regarding sps / tbt measures rise to the level of a formal wto trade dispute .

a full summary of ongoing sps / tbt trade concerns based on the most recent annual compilation by the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) is provided in appendix a at the end of this report .

the sps agreement and the tbt agreement both encourage the international harmonization of food standards .

specifically , the sps agreement recognizes three international standard setting organizations for "facilitating international trade and protecting public health. .

these include the codex alimentarius commission ( codex ) ; the world organisation for animal health ( oie ) ; and the international plant protection convention ( ippc ) .

these organizations are often referred to as the "three sister" organizations of the wto .

each of these organizations is directly recognized in the sps agreement as the primary "relevant" ( or reference ) organizations for developing international standards , guidelines , and recommendations on animal health , food safety , and plant health .

as stated in the sps agreement ( article 3 ) : to harmonize sanitary and phytosanitary measures on as wide a basis as possible , members shall base their sanitary or phytosanitary measures on international standards , guidelines or recommendations , where they exist,.... members shall play a full part , within the limits of their resources , in the relevant international organizations and their subsidiary bodies , in particular the codex alimentarius commission , the international office of epizootics , and the international and regional organizations operating within the framework of the international plant protection convention , to promote within these organizations the development and periodic review of standards , guidelines and recommendations with respect to all aspects of sanitary and phytosanitary measures .

as such , codex , ippc , and oie directly and actively participate in and contribute to discussions of the sps committee .

the tbt agreement further encourages members to participate in the work of international bodies for the preparation of standards and other procedural guidelines ( articles 2.6 and 5.5 ) .

prior to the creation of the wto and negotiation of the sps and tbt agreements , the united nations general assembly stated as part of a 1985 resolution , guidelines for consumer protection : "governments should take into account the need of all consumers for food security and should support and , as far as possible , adopt standards from the food and agriculture organization of the united nations and the world health organization codex alimentarius or , in their absence , other generally accepted international food standards. .

arguably , however , there is no single and categorical obligation for wto member governments to adopt internationally recognized standards , guidelines , or recommendations .

the united states is a member of the wto and also a member of codex , oie , and ippc .

u.s. government scientists participate actively in these organizations , which meet periodically to discuss current and anticipated threats to human and agricultural health , evaluate sps - related disputes , and develop common , scientifically based sps standards .

such standards are voluntary and are intended to provide guidance for countries in formulating their own national sps measures and , ultimately , to help resolve trade disputes .

the "precautionary principle" ( or precautionary approach ) allows a country to take "protective action" — including restricting trade of products or processes — if they believe that scientific evidence is inconclusive regarding their potential impacts on human health and the environment .

no universally agreed upon definition of the precautionary principle exists , and many differently worded or conflicting definitions can be found in international law .

wto rules state: member countries are encouraged to use international standards , guidelines and recommendations where they exist .

when they do , they are unlikely to be challenged legally in a wto dispute .

however , members may use measures which result in higher standards if there is scientific justification .

they can also set higher standards based on appropriate assessment of risks so long as the approach is consistent , not arbitrary .

and they can to some extent apply the "precautionary principle" , a kind of "safety first" approach to deal with scientific uncertainty .

more specifically , the precautionary principle suggests that if scientific evidence is insufficient or inconclusive regarding potential dangers to human , environmental , animal , or plant health of a product or practice , that product or practice should be prohibited if reasonable grounds for concern exist .

the wto acknowledges that "the need to take precautionary actions in the face of scientific uncertainty has long been widely accepted," particularly in the fields of food safety , and plant and animal health protection .

examples might include a sudden outbreak of an animal disease that is suspected of being linked to imports , which may require a country to impose certain trade restrictions while further information about the source and extent of the outbreak is assessed .

the wto also acknowledges that the sps agreement allows countries to use different standards and methods of inspecting products .

 ( for other information see text box below. ) .

the precautionary principle remains central to the eu's risk management policy regarding food safety and animal and plant health , among other concerns .

it was reportedly referenced as part of the 1992 treaty establishing the eu , and its use was further outlined in a 2000 communication and then formally established in eu food legislation in 2002 ( regulation ec no 178 / 2002 ) .

the eu's regulatory definition ( article 7 ) states: in specific circumstances where , following an assessment of available information , the possibility of harmful effects on health is identified but scientific uncertainty persists , provisional risk management measures necessary to ensure the high level of health protection chosen in the community may be adopted , pending further scientific information for a more comprehensive risk assessment .

the eu's 2000 communication outlines guidelines for applying the precautionary principle , including implementation , the basis for triggering a decision to invoke the precautionary principle , and the general principles of application .

in international trade , under eu law , application of the precautionary principle provides for "rapid response" to address "possible danger to human , animal , or plant health , or to protect the environment" and can be used to "stop distribution or order withdrawal from the market of products likely to be hazardous. .

although its application may not be used as a pretext for protectionist measures , many countries have challenged as "protectionist" some eu actions that have invoked the precautionary principle .

several u.s. agricultural and manufacturing groups oppose the eu's application of the principle and argue it allows eu regulations to disregard scientific evidence demonstrating that certain food products and processes are safe , based on evidence from available scientific risk assessments , allowing the eu and other importing countries to engage in disguised protectionism .

on the other hand , some advocates believe that the sps agreement too severely limits use of the principle .

application of the precautionary principle by some countries remains an ongoing source of contention in international trade , particularly by the united states , and is often cited as a reason why some countries may restrict imports of some food products and processes .

a 2013 paper authored by researchers at several u.s. land grant universities and usda cites the following criticisms of the precautionary principle: ( 1 ) the ambiguity and lack of definition of the precautionary principle ; ( 2 ) the arbitrariness in its use and unprincipled ways in which the precautionary principle has been applied ; and ( 3 ) application of the precautionary principle is biased against new technologies , such as biotechnology and nanotechnology .

the authors conclude that the precautionary principle has become "unworkable and counterproductive. .

many u.s. agricultural and food organizations contend the precautionary principle undermines "sound science" and results in "unjustifiable restrictions" on u.s. exports .

the stated policy of the u.s. chamber of commerce also is to support a "science - based approach to risk management , where risk is assessed based on scientifically sound and technically rigorous standards," and "oppose the domestic and international adoption of the precautionary principle as a basis for regulatory decision making. .

its strategy aims to "educate consumers , businesses , and federal policymakers about the implications of the precautionary principle. .

a 2005 study by the united nations university recognizes that despite "fundamental differences in perception as to the appropriate role of science and technology in society , ... there must be a mutually acceptable , rational basis for concern that is based on available information when invoking precaution. .

the report further states: "while science has an important role to play in assessing risk and in informing decision makers on possible approaches to health and environmental concerns , the management of the risks involved invariably falls into the realm of political choice , where determining an acceptable level of risk must take into account a multitude of different considerations. .

the study encourages the need for increased bilateral , regional , and multilateral discussion , and notes that unilateral measures adopted by countries without the support of "international standards , multilateral agreements or rigorous risk assessment" are both "economically damaging" and "create skepticism" for other actions where precaution may be truly warranted .

the intended purpose of most sps / tbt measures is to protect the safety and the integrity of the domestic and imported food supply .

however , there are concerns that sps / tbt measures have the potential to restrict international trade .

in some cases , this may be an unintentional outcome by an importing country in its efforts to ensure food safety .

in other cases , sps / tbt measures may be used as a form of disguised protectionism by an importing country .

the potential of sps / tbt measures to become non - tariff barriers to trade has increased as monetary tariffs on traded goods have been reduced under multilateral trade agreements and various free trade agreements .

in some cases , sps barriers and agriculture - related tbts can impose significant economic costs on agricultural and food exporters , by forcing them to make often costly changes in production or marketing in order to comply .

a foreign sps or tbt action can halt all imports of a product , resulting in market or other types of economic losses for the exporting industry .

alternatively , the imposition of technical standards and guidelines may result in certain economic and societal benefits and offset other types of unaccounted for welfare costs that may be associated with trade , such as protection against public health risks from food safety outbreaks or foodborne illness , and also protection against plant and animal pests and disease , and / or degradation of environmental and natural resources .

given the importance of agricultural trade to the u.s. economy , the united states is pursuing ways to reduce and / or remove both tariff and nontariff barriers through multilateral and bilateral negotiations .

u.s. government and wto reports and press releases frequently cite the benefits of the sps and tbt agreements and progress made , under these agreements , in resolving disputes and facilitating trade between countries .

however , some , among them food safety and environmental advocacy organizations , and groups that have more broadly opposed efforts toward globalization and harmonization of world trading rules , have long expressed skepticism .

they have argued that implementation of the agreements can result in "downward harmonization" rather than upgraded health and safety standards .

this can happen when , for example , a wto dispute settlement panel questions the scientific underpinnings of a u.s. safeguard , and / or the united states agrees to an effectively lower standard to bring negotiations with another country to a successful conclusion .

others counter that the current trade agreements explicitly recognize the right of individual nations , as well as states and localities , to enact stronger protections than international guidelines if they believe they are appropriate .

the united states is especially well - positioned against challenges , because its health and safety policies are scientifically defensible , u.s. officials have argued .

many believe that the sps and tbt agreements provide the foundation for developing transparent , science - based trade guidelines , as well as an effective framework for resolving disputes in these areas .

others have argued that ongoing free trade agreements , such as the tpp and ttip , should revisit aspects of these agreements more closely .

the effectiveness and flexibility of the sps and tbt rules also continues to be tested by rapidly emerging changes in food production technology , such as biotechnology and nanotechnology , which were not imminent concerns when the agreements were finalized in 1994 .

many members of congress are following closely a number of ongoing sps - related trade disputes that , they believe , have negatively affected agricultural producers in their states and districts .

the most recent farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 , p.l .

113-79 ) reauthorized the technical assistance for specialty crops ( tasc ) to address sps and technical barriers to u.s. exports , and also established an agency position to coordinate sps matters and address agricultural non - tariff trade barriers across agencies .

the u.s. congress has held a number of hearings to discuss the ongoing fta negotiations , and some of these have addressed regulatory matters including sps and tbt .

for example , at a house ways and means trade subcommittee hearing on ttip in may 2013 , chairman devin nunes stated that any agreement must be "ambitious and comprehensive" and should "identify and eliminate unnecessary regulatory barriers , including sanitary and phytosanitary barriers to u.s. agriculture exports. .

a july 2013 hearing on ttip by the house energy and commerce committee's subcommittee on commerce , manufacturing , and trade discussed in broader terms existing regulatory barriers and the need "greater openness , transparency and convergence in regulatory approaches and standards while reducing unnecessarily redundant requirements. .

previous introduced legislation regarding sps issues in agricultural trade has included h.r .

2707 ( 112 th congress ) by representative devin nunes .

h.r .

2707 sought to establish trade negotiating objectives of the united states with respect to the application of sps measures to agricultural products to facilitate trade in agriculture .

some lawmakers also have expressed concern that as additional ftas further lower agricultural tariffs , countries may turn more and more to sps and tbt measures to protect their farmers from import competition .

these members have stated that sps matters will be among the factors they will consider in voting for new ftas .

the president must submit all ftas to congress , which in turn must pass implementing legislation if the united states is to participate .

meanwhile , international sps and tbt rights and obligations could come into play if the u.s. congress considers legislation placing new restrictions and requirements on food imports .

as noted , such bills are being proposed in the wake of a number of highly publicized adulteration incidents related to food and agricultural imports .

any new measures are likely to be closely scrutinized by u.s. trading partners for their adherence to international trade rules .

appendix a. ustr - reported concerns involving sps / tbt measures , 2013 appendix b .

key principles and provisions of the sps agreement basic rights and obligations : ( articles 1 and 2 , annex a ) members have the right to take sps measures "necessary for the protection of human , animal , or plant life or health," as long as they are not inconsistent with the language of the sps agreement , are "based on scientific principles," "not maintained without sufficient scientific evidence," "do not arbitrarily or unjustifiably discriminate ... ," and are "not applied in a manner which would constitute a disguised restriction on international trade" ( excerpts from article 2 ) .

members could have sps measures that result in a higher level of protection than relevant international standards , but only if based on scientific justification ( article 3.3 ) or a risk assessment ( articles 2.3 and 5 ) .

harmonization : ( article 3 ) to facilitate trade , countries are encouraged ( but not required ) to use relevant international standards and work toward harmonization — that is , the adoption of common sps measures .

to promote harmonization , the agreement cites , as sources of scientific expertise and globally recognized standards including codex alimentarius commission for food safety ; world organization for animal health ( oie ) for animal health and diseases ; and international plant protection convention ( ippc ) for plant health .

equivalence : ( article 4 ) equivalence means that each importing country must accept the sps measures of another country as equivalent to its own ( even if they are not exactly the same ) , as long as the exporting country objectively demonstrates to the importing country that its measures achieve the same level of protection .

risk assessment : ( articles 2 and 5 ) sps measures must be based on a risk assessment taking into account internationally recognized risk assessment techniques , scientific principles and sufficient scientific evidence , while also minimizing trade distortions .

sps measures must be no more trade restrictive than necessary to achieve a country's appropriate level of sps protection , and "shall avoid arbitrary or unjustifiable distinctions in the levels" considered to be appropriate , if such distinctions result in "discrimination or a disguised restriction on international trade. .

countries may adopt a provisional measure to avoid risk , but must seek information and conduct a risk assessment to justify permanent use of a measure that might restrict trade .

notification and transparency : ( article 7 , annex b ) requires countries to publish its regulations related to sps controls and to notify its trading partners in advance about measures that could affect trade .

countries must also provide an "enquiry point" to respond to questions about , and provide comments on , new or existing sps measures .

member governments must report trade measures to the relevant wto body if the measures might have an effect on other members .

within the wto , the sps information management system ( sps ims , http: / / spsims.wto.org / ) provides access to documents and records relevant under the sps agreement , and allows users to track: information on sps measures that member governments have notified to the wto ; specific trade concerns raised in the sps committee ; sps - related documents circulated at the wto ; member governments' sps enquiry points and notification authorities ; and the membership of the wto , codex , ippc , and the oie .

regionalization : ( article 6 ) provides for adaptation to regional conditions , including pest or disease free areas and areas of low pest or disease prevalence .

previously , a country tended to ban an entire country's exports ( of a product ) from entry , if that product was associated with an unwanted pest or disease in the exporting country .

dispute settlement : ( article 11 ) provides for formal consultations and the settlement of disputes involving scientific or technical issues , as well as adjudication by a wto dispute settlement panel , if required .

when a dispute arises , a panel seeks advice from experts , an advisory technical experts group , or relevant international organizations , at the request of either party to the dispute or on its own initiative .

decisions by a wto panel may be appealed to the wto appellate body .

implementation and oversight : ( articles 12 and 13 , annex c ) establishes a committee on sanitary and phytosanitary measures to provide a regular forum for consultations and information exchange , to periodically review implementation of the agreement and governments' compliance with it , to monitor progress in global harmonization of standards , and to work closely with the appropriate technical organizations on sps matters .

the sps committee meets 3-4 times per year to discuss trade disputes related to sps measures on an ongoing basis .

appendix c. key principles and provisions of the tbt agreement non - discrimination and avoiding unnecessary obstacles to trade : ( articles 2 , 5.1 , and 5.2 ) products imported from a member country shall "be accorded treatment no less favorable than that accorded to like products of national origin and to like products originating in any other country. .

 ( article 2.1 ) members must ensure that "conformity assessment procedures are prepared , adopted and applied so as to grant access for suppliers of like products originating in the territories of other members under conditions no less favorable than those accorded to suppliers of like products of national origin or originating in any other country , in a comparable situation" ( article 5.1.1 ) .

related fees must be equitable ( article 5.2.5 ) and also respect the confidentiality of information about the results of conformity assessment procedures for imported products in the same way they do for domestic products ( article 5.2.4 ) .

member countries must ensure that the technical regulation is not more trade - restrictive than necessary to fulfill the member's legitimate objective .

 ( article 2.2 ) the obligation to avoid unnecessary obstacles to trade applies also to conformity assessment procedures , which must not be stricter than necessary to provide adequate confidence that products conform to the applicable requirements .

 ( article 5.1.2 ) alignment and equivalency : ( articles 2.4 , 2.6 , and 2.7 ; also 5.4 and 5.5 ) members should use relevant international standards , or the relevant parts of them , as a basis for their technical regulations , as well as relevant international recommendations and guides , or relevant portions of them , as the basis for their conformity assessment procedures ( unless they would be ineffective or inappropriate to fulfill the member's "legitimate objectives" ) ( articles 2.4 and 5.4 ) .

members should also participate "within the limits of their resources" in the preparation by international standardization bodies , of international standards for products for which they either have adopted , or expect to adopt , technical regulation , and in the elaboration of international guides and recommendations for conformity assessment procedures ( articles 2.6 and 5.5 ) .

members are encouraged to accept technical regulations that other members adopt as "equivalent" to their own if these regulations adequately fulfill the objectives of their own regulations .

 ( article 2.7 ) performance - based requirements : ( article 2.8 ) whenever appropriate , product requirements should be set in terms of performance rather than design or descriptive characteristics .

conformity assessments : ( articles 9.1 , 6.1 and 6.3 ) members shall , whenever practicable , formulate and adopt international systems for conformity assessment ( article 9.1 ) .

members must recognize "whenever possible" the results of conformity assessment procedures ( eg , test results or certifications ) , provided the member is satisfied that those procedures offer an assurance of conformity that is equivalent as its own , which may require consultation ( article 6.1 ) .

members are encouraged to enter into "mutual recognition agreements" or mra providing for the mutual recognition of each other's conformity assessment results ( article 6.3 ) .

transparency : ( articles 2.9 and 2.11 ; 5.6 and 5.8 , 10.1 , annex 3 ) members must notify other members through the wto secretariat when it proposes to adopt a technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure and to include in the notification a brief indication of the purpose of the proposed measure ( regarding international standard , guide , or recommendation that does not exist or the technical content of a proposed technical regulation or conformity assessment procedure that is not in accordance with the technical content of relevant international standards , guides , or recommendations ) .

certain requirements apply regarding "reasonable time," codes of practice , and addressing all reasonable questions , among other things .

technical assistance : ( article 11 ) members should provide technical assistance to other members with respect to such matters as preparing technical regulations , establishing national standardizing bodies , participating in international standardization bodies , and establishing bodies to assess conformity with technical regulations .

enforcement and dispute settlement : ( article 13 and 14 ) establishes the committee on tbt as the major forum for wto members to consult on matters relating to the operation of the agreement , including specific trade concerns about measures that members have proposed or adopted ( article 13 ) and provides for dispute resolution under the wto and in accordance with the wto's dispute settlement understanding ( article 14 ) .

