congress is again debating how to promote work in the context of programs to aid poor and low - income people and families , including the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly known as food stamps ) and federal rental housing assistance programs ( public housing and the section 8 housing choice voucher program ) .

a number of factors have combined to heighten congress's interest in this topic .

concerns have been expressed about continued "dependency" of families on government assistance as well as the amount of federal spending on these programs , work disincentives inherent in program design , and the effectiveness of our current social safety net in adequately addressing poverty .

the last major debate over the role of work in social assistance programs culminated in the 1996 welfare reform law ( the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 , p.l .

104-193 ) , which created the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant .

policies enacted in the 1990s , including those in the welfare reform law , focused on assistance for low - income families with children , particularly those headed by single mothers , and reduced the availability of assistance for families without workers , but expanded aid to low - income families with wage earners .

following enactment of the 1996 welfare reform law , the number of families with children receiving cash assistance declined dramatically , employment of single mothers increased , and poverty among children declined .

however , in the 2000s — even before the onset of the 2007-2009 recession — some of these gains were eroded and even reversed .

overall , household incomes were relatively stagnant during the decade , and the economic circumstances of some populations ( eg , poor men with low levels of educational attainment ) continued to deteriorate .

the house budget committee , in reporting the concurrent resolution on the budget ( h.con.res .

25 ) for fy2014 , called for creating work participation standards in snap .

it also called for reforms of need - tested assistance programs in general , by devolving them to the states and with the goal of building on the welfare reforms of the 1990s .

work requirements for snap were part of the 2014 "farm bill" debate ( p.l .

113-79 , agricultural act of 2014 ) ; ultimately congress retained existing snap work rules but required and funded up to 10 pilot projects to test alternative employment and training strategies , including some features similar to those of tanf work programs .

this report focuses on work requirement , time limit , and work incentive policies in three programs: the tanf block grant , snap , and housing assistance programs .

tanf is sometimes touted as a model program with work requirements and time limits that can be applied to other low - income aid programs .

however , as will be explored in this report , its policies and lessons are complicated and may not be fully applicable to other social assistance programs .

thus , policy makers considering expanding these policies face a number of considerations , which are discussed later in this report .

government benefit programs help families and individuals avoid destitution and provide a measure of economic security for them .

the generosity of such benefits , and the terms and conditions placed on their receipt , can also affect labor markets , by potentially affecting participation in the labor force as well as the wages for which workers are willing to accept employment .

work is a central feature of government benefit programs in the united states .

the largest benefit programs are social insurance programs , such as social security , medicare , and unemployment insurance , which provide benefits earned through work in covered employment .

low - income assistance programs — with benefits based on financial need , not past work — also can affect participation in the workforce , particularly for those who can command only low wages .

this report examines the work - related policies of tanf , snap , and housing assistance .

as noted in the previous section , these programs have different purposes and different histories .

though there is overlap in populations served by the three programs , there are also differences in the populations they serve .

this section provides a series of program comparison tables to illustrate the similarities and differences at - a - glance .

tanf is a broad - based block grant that helps fund public assistance benefits to families with children who have little in the way of financial resources at application .

benefits are restricted to the very poor , with income thresholds typically low enough so that cash assistance programs admit mostly the nonworking poor .

benefit amounts are a fraction of poverty - level income in all states .

its work requirements generally apply only to those who receive "assistance" ( on - going , monthly cash aid ) .

snap and housing assistance are programs designed to help individuals and households afford economic necessities ( food and housing , respectively ) .

their premise is that low - income households should not have to spend more than a specified percentage of their income for their food or for their housing ( 30% in each case ) .

these programs serve low - income households who do not work , as well as those who do and they serve a more heterogeneous population than tanf , including elderly and disabled individuals , singles and couples without children , as well as families with children .

additionally , the income eligibility thresholds for these programs are generally higher than those for tanf .

table 1 provides an overview comparison of the basic features of each of the programs .

the work - related policies in tanf , snap and federal housing assistance fall into three categories: 1 .

work requirements .

this approach makes the engagement in work or work activities ( such as training or job search ) a condition of eligibility for , or ongoing receipt of , benefits .

tanf requires state governments to engage participants in work and requires states to sanction — reduce or end benefits — families that fail to comply with work requirements .

federal law requires most able - bodied adults receiving snap benefits to engage in work activities ( eg , register for work ) .

federal housing law has an 8-hour per month community service or economic self - sufficiency requirement for public housing residents not otherwise exempted or engaged in work ; no such requirement exists for recipients of section 8 housing choice vouchers .

2 .

time limits .

this approach limits the eligibility for benefits to a specific duration , in some cases dependent on whether or not the program participant is working .

a time limit alone does not necessarily directly help participants enter or re - enter the labor market , but it may provide incentive for them to do so .

tanf limits federally - funded cash assistance to five years .

snap has a time limit for able - bodied adults without dependents ; these participants are limited to three months of snap benefits in a 36-month period if they are not working or engaged in work activities for 20-hours per week .

the law governing federal housing assistance contains no time limit policy .

3 .

work incentives in benefit design .

while means - tested programs generally reduce the level of assistance as household income rises , which may be construed as a disincentive to work , benefit programs may be designed to lessen that disincentive or to reward employment .

in tanf , states can determine whether to disregard any participant earnings .

snap has an earned income deduction that results in slightly higher benefits for snap participants with wages .

public housing has an earned income disregard for two years ; the section 8 housing choice voucher program has the same disregard , but only for households with disabilities .

certain families in the section 8 voucher program may also participate in a work incentive program that provides for escrowed savings accounts .

these policies may differ significantly in their implementation .

in some cases , federal policy may apply directly to individual program participants .

for example , the 8-hour per month community service requirement applies to each nonexempt individual residing in public housing .

however , in other cases , the federal policy may set performance standards for states or other program administrators based on the work engagement profile of their caseload .

in tanf , for example , a state's "work participation rate" can lead to a "caseload reduction credit" reward or a financial penalty levied on the state .

the following tables review the work - related policies that are in place for the tanf , snap , and housing assistance programs , providing comparisons of the ways in which these concepts are included in the respective programs .

as described in the previous section of this report , the tanf program has a more robust set of work requirement and time limit policies than either snap or housing assistance .

those tanf policies are often cited as a model of effective program reforms .

therefore , it may be useful to look a little more closely at tanf's policies and their outcomes , as presented in the next section of this report .

as noted at the beginning of this report , work requirement , time limit , and work incentive policies are designed to meet any or all of several objectives , including offsetting work disincentives inherent in the benefit design of social programs ; promoting a culture of work rather than a culture of dependency ; prioritizing limited federal resources ; and increasing the anti - poverty effectiveness of social assistance programs .

concern about all of these objectives helped drive the 1996 reform of cash assistance and the creation of tanf .

as discussed at the beginning of this report , the same concerns remain for other social assistance programs , which has led some policy makers to consider expanding these policies , including to snap and housing assistance .

when deciding whether or how to extend new work requirement , time limits , and work incentive policies modeled after those used in tanf to snap and housing assistance , policymakers may wish to take several considerations into account .

they include program - specific considerations , such as the different populations served by the programs , the different missions of the programs , and the different administrative structures .

there are also technical considerations , such as how the policies should be applied , including how much flexibility to provide program administrators and the consequences for a family's failure to comply .

finally , there are a set of broader considerations , such as the relevance of research findings on the effectiveness of such policies , as well as the current state of the economy .

the following section of this report explores some of those considerations .

the creation of tanf , with work requirements and time limits , marked a visible , major change in social policy .

the record of tanf , particularly the sharply reduced caseloads following welfare reform , has sparked interest in extending tanf policies of work requirements and time - limited aid to other social assistance programs , including snap and housing assistance .

tanf's experience may have some useful lessons for policymakers considering expanding tanf's policies to other programs .

it appears that the tanf caseload reduction generally resulted from fewer eligible families actually receiving benefits .

is this a desired goal for snap ? .

in the case of housing assistance , which is only funded at levels sufficient to serve a portion of the caseload , a time limit or work requirement policy could allow the program to serve more families , albeit for shorter periods of time .

further , it appears that the enactment of tanf policies , along with other income supplement policies and the strong economy of the 1990s , led to increased work for a population ( single mothers ) who were not previously engaged in the labor force .

whether these same policies , in the absence of new income supplement policies and in a less robust economy , would have the same effect for the subpopulation of snap and housing assistance recipients who are not working and are expected to work , is an outstanding question .

additional research , either as a part of any reforms or in advance of any reforms , might prove helpful in answering that question .

