there are two primary ways for a household to receive broadcast television signals: ( 1 ) by using an individual antenna that receives broadcast signals directly over the air from a television station , or ( 2 ) by subscribing to a multichannel video programming distributor ( mvpd ) , which brings the retransmitted signals of broadcast stations to homes through a copper wire , a fiber optic cable , or a satellite dish installed on the premises .

in 2014 , approximately 86% of the 116.4 million u.s. television households subscribed to mvpd services ( table 1 ) .

currently two direct broadcast satellite ( dbs ) companies — directv and dish network — offer video service to most of the land area and population of the united states .

as of september 2014 , directv had approximately 20.2 million u.s. subscribers , while dish network had approximately 14.0 million u.s. subscribers .

with the rise of cable and satellite television since the 1970s , congress and the federal communications commission ( fcc ) constructed a regulatory framework for the retransmission of broadcast television signals by both cable and satellite television operators .

the satellite and cable regulatory frameworks attempt to balance a number of long - standing , but potentially conflicting , public policy goals — most notably , competitive provision of video services , competitive provision of devices used to access video services , support of property rights considerations in copyright law , preservation of free over - the - air broadcast television , localism , and the provision of "lifeline" network television services via satellite to homes unable to receive them over the air .

the regulatory frameworks also attempt to balance the interests of the satellite , cable , broadcast , program content , and device manufacturing industries , as well as the interests of small businesses and consumers .

mvpd operators typically offer their customers broadcast stations ( eg , sinclair broadcasting's wjla or nbc universal's wrc in washington , dc ) as well as cable networks ( such as the walt disney corporation's espn or viacom inc.'s mtv ) .

in order to provide their customers with the entertainment , news , sports , and other programming on broadcast channels , mvpds must retransmit local and , in limited cases , distant broadcast stations .

retransmission of broadcast signals by satellite and cable operators is subject to two different legal regimes: sections 325 , 338 , and 339 of the communications act of 1934 ( title 47 u.s.c .

§§325 , 338 , 339 ) , as amended , specify procedures and rules for "retransmission consent , " the process of how mvpds may or may not be required to obtain the consent of the broadcaster to retransmit their signals .

the provisions addressing retransmission consent are administered by the fcc .

while the communications act has provisions related to satellite operators' carriage of distant television signals , it does not have similar provisions for cable operators .

the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation and the house committee on energy and commerce oversee the communications act and the other statutes related to telecommunications in title 47 .

sections 111 , 119 , and 122 of the copyright act of 1976 ( title 17 u.s.c .

§§111 , 119 , 122 ) , as amended , specify procedures for licensing the public performance of copyrighted music and programming on retransmitted broadcast signals .

cable and satellite operators can take advantage of special no - royalty or low - royalty rates if they meet certain requirements set out in those sections .

these statutory licenses allow cable and satellite operators to avoid negotiating with every copyright holder ( eg , television studios , sports leagues , and music publishers ) of every broadcast program .

while the provisions enabling cable operators to retransmit distant broadcast television signals and superstations are permanent , those applying to satellite operators are subject to five - year sunset clauses .

the provisions addressing the payment of royalties are administered by the u.s .

copyright office , while the copyright royalty board distributes royalty fees and adjudicates disputes .

the senate committee on the judiciary and the house committee on the judiciary oversee the copyright act provisions in title 17 .

through a series of laws , beginning with the 1988 satellite home viewer act ( shva ; p.l .

100-667 ) and most recently amended by the 2014 satellite television extension and localism act reauthorization act ( 2014 stela reauthorization act ; p.l .

113-200 ) , congress created new sections or modified existing sections of the copyright act and the communications act to regulate the satellite retransmission of broadcast television and to encourage competition between satellite and cable operators ( table 2 ) .

in order to retransmit a broadcaster's signals to subscribers , a satellite operator , with certain exceptions , must have the legal rights to retransmit the copyrighted content contained in the broadcast , and must obtain the consent of the broadcaster for retransmission of the broadcast signal .

the law specifies distinct copyright license and retransmission requirements for signals transmitted by various categories of broadcast television stations , including local commercial and noncommercial stations , distant network - affiliated and noncommercial stations , non - network stations , nationally distributed superstations , and "significantly viewed" stations .

the law governing satellite transmission makes a fundamental distinction between local signals and distant signals .

local signals are transmitted over the air by local broadcasters to households within the local market of the subscriber ( "local - into - local service" ) .

the fcc uses designated market areas ( dmas ) constructed by the nielsen company to define local television markets for the purposes of retransmission consent .

nielsen has constructed 210 dmas by assigning each county in the united states to a specific dma , based on the predominance of viewing of broadcast television stations licensed to operate in a given standard metropolitan statistical area .

some households that subscribe to satellite television service in rural or remote areas may not be able to receive over - the - air local broadcast signals and therefore rely on dbs to watch local broadcast channels .

dbs operators are allowed , but not required , to provide local - into - local service .

if they choose to provide any local signal they must also carry the signals of all other full - power television broadcast stations located within the local area that request carriage .

however , if a local broadcast station and a satellite operator fail to reach a retransmission consent agreement , the satellite operator may not include that station's signal in its local - into - local offering .

the statutory provisions within the copyright act ( 17 u.s.c .

§122 ) and communications act ( 47 u.s.c .

§338 ) enabling satellite operators to retransmit local broadcast television signals are permanent .

distant signals are broadcast signals imported by the dbs operator from outside a subscriber's local area .

a satellite operator is allowed , but not required , to retransmit the signals of up to two distant stations affiliated with a network ( abc , cbs , fox , nbc , or pbs ) , to that subset of subscribing households that are deemed "unserved" with respect to that network ; the signals of significantly viewed stations to subscribers located in the markets for which those stations qualify as significantly viewed ; and the signals of superstations and other independent stations to all of its subscribers .

a household is considered "unserved" if it cannot receive the signals of a local network - affiliated station because either the satellite operator does not offer local - into - local service in the local market and the household is located too far from the transmitter to receive signals of a certain quality using a rooftop antenna ; the network does not have a local network - affiliated station in the household's local market ( referred to as a "short" market ) ; or the subscriber falls under a small number of grandfathered situations in which subscribers who do have access to local - into - local service continue to be eligible to receive distant signals from their satellite operator .

to retransmit the signals of a distant network station to unserved subscribers , a satellite operator need not obtain the consent of that distant network station nor comply with the fcc's network nonduplication and syndicated exclusivity rules .

certain provisions in stela are set to expire on december 31 , 2019 .

the provisions are: section 119 of the copyright act ( 17 u.s.c .

§119 ) .

this section enables satellite operators to obtain rights to copyrighted programming carried by distant broadcast network affiliates , superstations , and other independent stations .

under this regime , the satellite operators submit a statement of account and pay a statutorily determined royalty fee to the u.s .

copyright office on a semiannual basis , avoiding the transactions costs of negotiating with each individual copyright holder .

furthermore , section 119 enables satellite operators , similar to cable operators , to transmit superstations to commercial establishments as well as distant independent stations to households ( whether or not they are "unserved" ) .

section 119 also grandfathers through december 31 , 2019 certain distant signal subscribers who retain eligibility to receive distant signals .

section 339 of the communications act ( 47 u.s.c .

§339 ) , which permits carriage of distant television stations by satellite operators .

several portions of this section cross reference section 119 of the copyright act ( 47 u.s.c .

§119 ) .

therefore , although the stela reauthorization does not specifically reference section 339 , portions of this section would become ineffective after december 31 , 2019 , if congress does not renew section 119 .

section 325 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( c ) of the communications act .

this section allows a satellite operator to retransmit the signals of distant network stations , without first obtaining the retransmission consent of those distant stations , to those subscribing households that cannot receive the signals of local broadcast television network affiliates .

absent this provision , a satellite operator would have to negotiate compensation terms with those distant network stations whose signals it retransmits to those "unserved" subscribers .

this provision is similar to the permanent compulsory licensing scheme for cable operators , which dates back to 1976 .

section 325 ( b ) ( 3 ) ( c ) ( ii ) of the communications act , which prohibits a television broadcast station that provides retransmission consent from engaging in exclusive contracts for carriage or failing to negotiate in good faith .

section 325 ( b ) ( 3 ) ( c ) ( iii ) also prohibits a satellite or cable operator from failing to negotiate in good faith for retransmission consent .

consequently , the fcc's rules related to violations of good faith standards , including its prohibition on joint retransmission consent negotiations between two separately owned top - four stations within the same market , would become moot if congress does not extend this section beyond december 31 , 2019 .

expiration of these provisions would increase the likelihood of impasses in retransmission consent negotiations , leading to subscribers losing access to broadcast programming .

the 113 th congress reauthorized stela , including five - year extensions of expiring provisions of the copyright act and the communications act .

during consideration of the stela reauthorization act , senator thune and then - senator rockefeller proposed a provision they called "local choice. .

their proposal would have removed the statutory requirement that cable operators who carry broadcast stations pursuant to retransmission consent agreements carry those stations on the entry - level basic tier of programming .

instead , only noncommercial stations and commercial stations that elect must - carry would automatically be carried by cable operators on the basic tier .

a station that elected to be carried pursuant to retransmission consent would set a price for subscribers to receive it on an a la carte basis .

this proposal was not enacted , but the 114 th congress may revisit the issue if it pursues a comprehensive revision of communications and copyright laws .

