online service providers ( osps ) and internet service providers ( isps ) provide critical infrastructure support to the internet , allowing millions of people to access online content and electronically communicate and interact with each other .

the potential for computer users to infringe intellectual property rights using the internet , specifically copyrights , could expose "intermediary" service providers to claims of secondary liability , such as contributory and vicarious copyright infringement .

concerned about this significant legal vulnerability of service providers , congress passed the "online copyright infringement liability limitation act," title ii of the digital millennium copyright act ( dmca ) of 1998 , in an effort to adapt copyright law to an evolving digital environment .

the act added a new section 512 to the copyright act ( title 17 of the u.s. code ) , which provides limitations on the liability of osps and isps against claims of copyright infringement arising from their users' activities on their digital networks .

the act's legislative history indicates that congress wanted to provide service providers with "more certainty ... in order to attract the substantial investments necessary to continue the expansion and upgrading of the internet. .

at the same time , congress desired to preserve "strong incentives for service providers and copyright owners to cooperate to detect and deal with copyright infringements that take place in the digital networked environment. .

the dmca therefore includes several conditions that the service provider must satisfy in order to qualify for § 512 "safe harbor" protection from most infringement liability , and requires that the service providers' activities be encompassed within one of four specified categories of conduct .

the safe harbors correspond to the following four functional operations that might otherwise constitute copyright infringement: ( 1 ) transitory digital network communications , ( 2 ) system caching , ( 3 ) storage of information on systems or networks at direction of users , and ( 4 ) information location tools .

one federal district court assessed the "dual purpose and balance" of § 512 in the following manner: congress created tradeoffs within the dmca: service providers would receive liability protections in exchange for assisting copyright owners in identifying and dealing with infringers who misuse the service providers' systems .

at the same time , copyright owners would forgo pursuing service providers for the copyright infringement of their users , in exchange for assistance in identifying and acting against those infringers .

a public interest group has praised the importance of the dmca's safe harbor provisions to the development of the internet: without these protections , the risk of potential copyright liability would prevent many online intermediaries from providing services such as hosting and transmitting user - generated content .

thus the safe harbors have been essential to the growth of the internet as an engine for innovation and free expression .

although all four safe harbors will be described at the beginning of this report , the primary focus for the rest of the report will be on the third category that encompasses the function of many popular internet businesses today: "storage of information on systems or networks at direction of users. .

this safe harbor is essential to the business model of most isps and osps that permit user generated content ( ugc ) to be stored or shared using their networks .

copyright is a federal grant of legal protection available to the creator or owner of certain original works of creative expression , including books , movies , photography , art , and music .

a copyright holder possesses several exclusive legal entitlements under the copyright act , which together provide the holder with the right to determine whether and under what circumstances the protected work may be used by third parties .

the grant of copyright permits the copyright holder to authorize or refuse to authorize others to exercise the following exclusive rights: the reproduction of the copyrighted work ; the preparation of derivative works based on the copyrighted work ; the distribution of copies of the copyrighted work ; the public performance of the copyrighted work ; and the public display of the copyrighted work , including the individual images of a motion picture .

therefore , a party desiring to reproduce , adapt , distribute , publicly display , or publicly perform a copyrighted work must either ( 1 ) obtain the permission of the copyright holder ( usually granted in the form of a license agreement that establishes conditions of use and an amount of monetary compensation known as a royalty fee ) ; ( 2 ) comply with the terms of compulsory licenses established by law ; or ( 3 ) assert that such use falls within the scope of certain statutory limitations on the exclusive rights such as the "fair use" doctrine — but the validity of such claim may be subject to the judgment of a federal court .

each exclusive right of a copyright holder is potentially subject to licensing ; for example , a third party wishing to reproduce a copyrighted work as well as publicly perform the work must negotiate separate licenses from the copyright holder to engage in the different activities .

unauthorized use of a copyrighted work by a third party in a manner that implicates one of the copyright holder's exclusive rights constitutes infringement .

the copyright holder may file a lawsuit in federal court against an alleged infringer for a violation of any of the exclusive rights conferred by copyright .

the copyright act provides several civil remedies to the copyright holder that is harmed by infringement , including the possibility of obtaining injunctive relief , actual damages suffered by the copyright owner due to the infringement , statutory damages , and costs and attorney fees .

the rights conferred by a copyright do not last forever .

copyrights are limited in the number of years a copyright holder may exercise his / her exclusive rights .

in general , an author of a creative work may enjoy copyright protection for the work for a term lasting the entirety of his / her life plus 70 additional years .

at the expiration of a term , the copyrighted work becomes part of the public domain .

a work in the public domain is available for anyone to use without the need to seek prior permission of the creator of the work .

limitations on liability , often called "safe harbors," shelter service providers from copyright infringement suits .

the dmca's safe harbor provisions , codified at 17 u.s.c .

§ 512 , do not confer absolute immunity , but they do significantly limit service providers' liability based on the specific functions they perform .

the safe harbors correspond to four functional operations of a service provider: ( 1 ) transitory digital network communications , ( 2 ) system caching , ( 3 ) storage of information on systems or networks at direction of users , and ( 4 ) information location tools .

since the enactment of the dmca , many online service providers have been the target of infringement lawsuits by large companies that own copyrighted content , particularly recorded music , television shows , and motion pictures .

these lawsuits typically accuse the service provider of direct , vicarious , and contributory copyright infringement , as well as inducement of infringement .

the cases often begin by the service provider asserting a dmca safe harbor as an affirmative defense that limits its infringement liability ; as an affirmative defense , the service provider has the burden of establishing that it meets the safe harbor's eligibility requirements .

if this burden is satisfied , courts often find for the defendant on summary judgment .

it is important to keep in mind that a service provider's inability to qualify for a safe harbor does not mean that it is presumptively liable for copyright infringement ; rather , the copyright holder must still prove its infringement claim .

through the many cases in which the § 512 ( c ) safe harbor is asserted as protecting a service provider from some forms of infringement liability , the federal courts have had an opportunity to interpret the statutory language and evaluate the scope of the safe harbor's application .

what follows is a discussion of these cases .

some copyright holders , particularly those who create and distribute music , television programs , and movies , have publicly expressed frustration with what they consider to be an "outdated" § 512 and would like congress to require service providers to have more responsibility in preventing infringing activity .

in the 113 th congress , the house judiciary committee , subcommittee on courts , intellectual property , and the internet , held a hearing on march 13 , 2014 , specifically regarding § 512 of the copyright act , in which it heard testimony from witnesses about the degree to which the safe harbor is , or is not , operating well .

house judiciary committee chairman goodlatte expressed concern about what he referred to as a "whack - a - mole game by copyright owners" who have to deal with repeated unauthorized postings of their content .

he explained the issue as follows: by most accounts , good faith service providers have acted expeditiously in responding to section 512 notices by removing or disabling links to infringing content .

however , copyright owners are increasingly facing a scenario that simply wasn't anticipated during the enactment of 512 – the need of copyright owners to send a voluminous amount of notices seeking removal of infringing content followed by the almost immediate reappearance of the same infringing content .

at the hearing , content owners argued that § 512 , as currently written and interpreted by the courts , places too much burden on copyright owners to police infringing activity online , whereas service providers urged congress to keep the current dmca framework unchanged and instead rely upon voluntary industry agreements and private industry solutions ( such as content filtering systems ) to address any infringement problems .

