contractors and contractor employees perform countless tasks on the government's behalf , which include playing an integral role in u.s. military operations .

though combat operations in iraq have ceased and the government plans a drawdown of u.s. forces in afghanistan in 2014 , commentators have noted that contractors will continue to be vital to future military efforts .

given the apparent tension between contractor accountability and ensuring that contractors' monetary liability does not get passed , directly or indirectly , to the government or otherwise undermine federal policy , the potential tort liabilities that contractors might face in the course of meeting contractual obligations are of perennial interest to congress .

in recent years , u.s. civilian personnel , military personnel , and other parties have sued federal contractors under state tort law , alleging that contractors intentionally or accidentally injured them during the course of performing a federal contract .

contractors have responded to these tort suits by raising the federal tort claims act ( ftca ) , the political question doctrine , and derivative immunities in seeking to avoid liability .

some have also alleged that the government is obligated to indemnify them for any liability they may incur to third parties .

this report provides background on , and analysis of , key legal issues that such suits present .

it begins by providing a broad overview of tort claims generally .

then , it discusses the primary mechanisms through which contractors have attempted to defend against tort liability .

finally , it examines indemnification agreements between the government and contractors .

such agreements do not permit contractors to escape tort liability , but can allow them to shift the monetary losses resulting from tort liability to the government .

this report supersedes an earlier report on this topic , crs report r41755 , tort suits against federal contractors: an overview of the legal issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

a tort is a civil wrong for which an injured party may obtain remedy , typically in the form of damages .

torts arise from breaches of duties imposed by law .

in contrast , contractual remedies typically result from breaches of duties imposed by oral or written agreements between the parties to a contract .

a tort suit against a contractor therefore generally results from the contractor's breach of duties imposed by law rather than its breach of contractual obligations .

with some exceptions , tort duties are typically imposed by state law , and every state has its own tort laws .

tort law encompasses a number of civil wrongs , including intentional interference with the person of another by assault , battery , and false imprisonment ; various types of interference with property ; and negligence .

negligence indicates culpable carelessness or unintentional injury .

to successfully establish a claim for negligence , a plaintiff must generally prove , by a preponderance of the evidence , that ( 1 ) the defendant owed the plaintiff a legal duty ; ( 2 ) the defendant breached this duty , which generally requires the plaintiff to show that the defendant failed to exercise the care that a reasonably prudent person would have exercised in a similar situation ; ( 3 ) the defendant's action or failure to act actually or proximately caused the plaintiff's injuries ; and ( 4 ) the plaintiff suffered harm as a result of the defendant's action or inaction .

many tort claims against contractors allege negligence on the part of contractor employees in either performing their obligations under a service contract or producing goods pursuant to a contract for goods , though some also allege intentional torts .

furthermore , under the theory of respondeat superior , contractors may be held liable for the wrongful acts of their employees that are committed within the scope of employment .

contractors often raise the ftca , the political question doctrine , and / or derivative immunities when defending against tort claims , particularly claims arising from their involvement in military operations .

these defenses often implicate fundamental legal issues , such as the interaction of federal and state law , separation of powers and which branches of government are best equipped to consider particular types of questions , and protection of the federal government's monetary interests .

unlike the defenses discussed previously in this report , indemnification does not allow a contractor to avoid tort liability .

instead , through an indemnity agreement , one party agrees to compensate another for a loss that the other party incurs , often to a third party .

in the context of tort suits against contractors , when the government has agreed to indemnify a contractor , the government may be obligated to compensate the contractor for certain damages paid to third parties .

because indemnification allows the contractor to forgo paying for the costs of harms it causes , indemnification is sometimes viewed as the practical equivalent of avoiding liability , although indemnification technically alters who pays for any liability .

the use of indemnification agreements in government contracts is limited by the anti - deficiency act , which prevents any government employee from entering a contract on the government's behalf or obligating the government to make a payment in excess or advance of an appropriation unless otherwise authorized by law .

the act generally precludes the government from entering into any open - ended indemnification agreement , barring express statutory permission .

however , three frequently cited statutes expressly permit , and thereby authorize , agencies to enter into open - ended indemnification agreements: p.l .

85-804 , the price - anderson act , and 10 u.s.c .

ยง2354 .

first , p.l .

85-804 allows the president to authorize an agency that acts in connection with the national defense to enter , amend , modify , or make advance payments on contracts without regard to other provisions of law relating to the making , performance , amendment , or modification of contracts , including the anti - deficiency act , whenever he believes that such agency action would facilitate the national defense .

this language has been interpreted to allow the president to authorize certain agencies to indemnify government contractors against risks that are "unusually hazardous or nuclear," as those risks are defined in the relevant contract .

p.l .

85-804's applicability to actions that facilitate the national defense has been liberally construed to encompass the actions of not only certain defense agencies , but also certain civilian agencies , including the department of the treasury , department of the interior , department of agriculture , government printing office , department of commerce , general services administration , national aeronautics and space administration , government printing office , and tennessee valley authority .

p.l .

85-804's indemnification authority only applies when the contractor will not be compensated for its loss , whether by insurance or otherwise .

second , the price - anderson act permits the department of energy ( doe ) to enter into agreements with its nuclear contractors whereby doe provides indemnification for liability arising from specified types of nuclear accidents .

in part , congress enacted the price - anderson act to spur the development of the atomic energy industry .

commentators have noted that the act has proven essential to ensuring that contractors participate in doe nuclear programs , as their participation exposes them to considerable risks that are uninsurable through private insurance .

third , 10 u.s.c .

section 2354 applies only to research and / or development contracts between a military department and a contractor .

in such contracts , military departments can include indemnification clauses to protect contractors against losses that arise out of direct contract performance , but only to the extent that they are not compensated by insurance or otherwise .

under 10 u.s.c .

section 2354 , indemnification can cover any claims by third parties against the contractor , including reasonable litigation and settlement expenses and any loss of the contractor's property .

however , covered claims and losses must be caused by an "unusually hazardous" risk , as defined in the relevant contract .

payments made under a 10 u.s.c .

section 2354 indemnification agreement must come from funds not yet obligated that were made available for research and / or development , funds specifically obligated for the performance of the relevant contract , or funds appropriated for indemnification payments .

the government's increased reliance on contractors in recent years , particularly in the military arena , has led to an increased number of tort suits against contractors .

the government will likely continue its widespread use of contractors well into the future , which will include the use of contractors in military operations .

as such , tort litigation against contractors will likely continue .

to date , there do not appear to have been any congressional attempts to address the defenses that contractors have relied upon , successfully and unsuccessfully , to defend against tort liability .

there further do not appear to have been any attempts by congress to otherwise clarify when contractors may escape liability for torts that occur during government contract performance .

