the expiring provisions improvement reform and efficiency ( expire ) act ( s. 2260 ) would extend a set of expired tax provisions ( including bonus depreciation ) through the end of 2015 .

this bill subsequently became part of an amendment to h.r .

3474 .

the bill did not advance in the senate , as a motion to end debate on h.r .

3474 was voted down on may 15 , 2014 .

an earlier bill introduced by senate majority leader reid at the end of 2013 , the tax extenders act of 2013 ( s. 1859 ) , would have extended expiring tax provisions , including bonus depreciation , through 2014 .

in the house , committee on ways and means chairman dave camp's tax reform discussion draft , the tax reform act of 2014 , released in february , made some extenders permanent , but not bonus depreciation .

his draft bill further restricted depreciation deductions .

many of the proposed permanent extenders in this draft were introduced as separate bills , passed separately , and subsequently combined into a single bill , the jobs for america act ( h.r .

4 , adopted september 18 ) .

one of these permanent provisions was bonus depreciation ( originally , in h.r .

4718 , adopted on july 11 ) , although this provision was not in the camp draft .

the temporary provisions enacted in the past for only a year or two and extended multiple times are generally referred to collectively as the "extenders. .

one reason advanced for temporary provisions has been that time is needed to evaluate them .

most of these provisions , however , have been extended multiple times ( eg , the r&d credit has been extended 15 times since 1981 ) without such an evaluation , which leads some to suggest that these provisions are actually permanent but are extended a year or two at a time because assuming permanence would increase costs in budget projections .

the inclusion of bonus depreciation in the latest extenders bill , which would reflect an extension through an eighth year , creates ambiguity about the nature of this provision , which is far from a minor provision .

similarly , the house proposals that would , in one case , eliminate bonus depreciation , and , in the other , make it permanent , add to this ambiguity .

bonus depreciation is not a traditional "extender. .

it was enacted for a specific , short - term purpose: to provide an economic stimulus during the recession .

its temporary nature is critical to its effectiveness .

most of the major provisions of the stimulus bills in 2008 and 2009 ( the economic stimulus act of 2008 , p.l .

110-185 , and the american recovery and reinvestment act , p.l .

111-5 ) or their replacements have expired .

therefore , a question arises about the nature of bonus depreciation .

if it is not included in the extenders package , its status as a temporary provision becomes clear .

but if it is included , the action may or may not indicate that the provision has become permanent .

however , if it is effectively permanent , there are important implications for the overall treatment of capital income , international comparisons of tax rates , consistency with tax reform proposals , and revenue issues .

this report discusses bonus depreciation as either a temporary stimulus provision or a permanent part of the tax code .

tax depreciation rules determine how quickly the cost of an investment in assets , such as equipment or buildings , can be deducted .

because these assets produce output over a period of years , the cost of acquiring them is also deducted over a period of years so that costs can be matched with receipts to measure profits .

to measure profits correctly , the deduction in each period should match the decline in the value of the asset ( i.e. , the change in price if it were to be sold ) ; this change in value is called economic depreciation .

bonus depreciation was first enacted in the job creation and worker assistance act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-147 ) at a 30% rate , for three years , with the purpose of stimulating investment during an economic slowdown .

concerns about the economy had come in the aftermath of the 2001 terrorist attacks .

although the bonus depreciation rate was increased by the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-27 ) to 50% in the following year and extended for a year , it expired at the end of 2005 .

with the financial distress and recession that began in 2007 , the economic stimulus act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-185 ) was enacted to stimulate the economy , including a single year of bonus depreciation at 50% .

bonus depreciation was not the centerpiece of the stimulus ; the major tax cut , much larger than bonus depreciation , was an individual tax rebate .

as the recession continued , a much larger stimulus measure was adopted in 2009 ( the american recovery and reinvestment act , p.l .

111-5 ) .

it extended bonus depreciation for an additional year , through 2009 .

bonus depreciation was only a minor part of a larger package that included a two - year individual tax credit aimed at low - income individuals ( the making work pay credit ) and spending increases that were much larger than the tax reductions .

bonus depreciation has continued to be extended .

it expired in 2010 but was extended retroactively through 2010 by the small business jobs act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-240 ) , enacted at the end of september 2010 .

this bill was not a stimulus bill , but one associated with small business .

there are a couple of points to note regarding the inclusion of bonus depreciation in the 2010 small business jobs act .

first , bonus depreciation is more valuable to large firms , especially when small businesses are given higher allowances .

second , most of the extension of bonus depreciation was retroactive ( three quarters of the year had passed when the bill was adopted ) .

thus , the extension provided a windfall to firms for that period , rather than a stimulus .

at the end of 2010 , several tax provisions were to expire .

as expected for a number of years , the tax cuts enacted in 2001 and 2003 ( and popularly known as the bush tax cuts ) were to expire .

the regular "extenders" had already expired at the end of 2009 .

finally , many of the stimulus provisions enacted in 2009 , including the making work pay credit along with provisions relating to education , the child credit , and the earned income credit ( along with some spending provisions ) were expiring .

bonus depreciation and increased section 179 expensing were also expiring .

the tax relief , unemployment compensation reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) extended the bush tax cuts and the 2009 provisions relating to education , the child credit , and the earned income credit for two years and retroactively extended the "extenders" for two years ( through 2011 ) .

it increased bonus depreciation to 100% for the period from september 8 , 2010 , through 2011 , and then allowed it at 50% through 2012 , while also extending increased section 179 expensing .

the legislation did not extend the making work pay credit , but it instead reduced the employee's share of the payroll tax by two percentage points .

this legislation , enacted when the economy still appeared to be in recession or at least slow recovery , was still pursuing fiscal stimulus objectives , in part .

although the expiration of the bush tax cuts had been expected for a number of years , their expiration came at a time when large tax increases could damage an economic recovery , so those extensions , at least in part , were also associated with short - term stimulus .

as the slow recovery of the economy continued , issues were raised about a "fiscal cliff" at the end of 2012 , when the bush tax cuts along with the payroll tax relief and some spending measures were due to expire .

in addition , previously planned cuts to discretionary spending were scheduled .

many economists expressed concern that this combination of increased taxes and reduced spending would stall the recovery or even lead to a recession .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) , which was adopted in early january 2013 , made most of the bush tax cuts permanent and extended bonus depreciation for another year , among other things .

with the possible exception of the small business jobs act of 2010 , the legislation that introduced bonus depreciation and extended it through six years was largely associated with fiscal stimulus bills ( or bills that contained other fiscal stimulus proposals ) .

moreover , even the small business jobs act of 2010 was intended to stimulate investment and addressed provisions that had , unlike other tax cuts in the 2009 stimulus , expired .

the proposal to include bonus depreciation in a standard "extenders" bill separates the provision from a fiscal stimulus objective .

this inclusion creates uncertainty about the expected future of bonus depreciation and suggests an analysis of it either as a temporary stimulus or a permanent provision .

investment incentives may be relatively ineffective during a recession that reflects inadequate demand , when firms have idle capital .

the temporary nature of bonus depreciation makes it , in theory , a more effective fiscal stimulus than other investment incentives because it is in the nature of a fire sale .

the bonus depreciation enacted in late 2002 and lasting through 2005 set the stage for the potential effectiveness of the provision in the 2007-2009 recession by signaling that it was temporary .

the continual extension of the current provision , that thus far has lasted six years , may undermine the use of the provision in the future if firms expect the provision to last a long time .

some evidence suggests that the temporary bonus depreciation enacted in 2002 had little or no effect on business investment .

a study of the effect of temporary expensing by cohen and cummins at the federal reserve board found little support for a significant effect .

they suggested several potential reasons for a small effect .

one possibility was that firms without taxable income could not benefit from the timing advantage .

in a treasury study , knittel confirmed that firms did not elect bonus depreciation for about 40% of eligible investment , and speculated that the existence of losses and loss carry - overs may have made the investment subsidy ineffective for many firms , although there were clearly some firms that were profitable that did not use the provision .

cohen and cummins also suggested that the incentive effect was quite small ( largely because depreciation already occurs relatively quickly for most equipment ) , reducing the user cost of capital by only about 3% , and that planning periods may have been too long to adjust investment across time .

knittel also suggests that firms may have found the provision costly to comply with , particularly because most states did not allow bonus depreciation .

a study by house and shapiro found a more pronounced response to bonus depreciation , given the magnitude of the incentive , but they also found that the overall effect on the economy was small .

in their view , this effect was due in part to the limited category of investment affected and the small size of the incentive .

their differences with the cohen and cummins study reflected , in part , uncertainties about when expectations were formed and incentive effects occurred .

cohen and cummins also reported the results of several surveys of firms , which showed that between two - thirds and more than 90% of respondents indicated bonus depreciation had no effect on the timing of investment spending .

a study by hulse and livingstone found mixed results on the effectiveness of bonus depreciation , which they interpret as weakly supportive of an effect .

forecasters vary in the multipliers they assign different tax and spending provisions .

 ( a multiplier estimates the amount of economic output resulting from a certain amount of stimulus. ) .

for example , cbo , during discussion of the fiscal cliff , indicated a multiplier of 0.15 for business tax cuts in general , and a multiplier of 0.6 for expensing .

the latter suggests a dollar of budgetary cost spending induces a 60-cents increase in output .

the dollar of cost was measured as the present value of bonus depreciation .

this multiplier was among the smaller ones with payroll taxes having a multiplier of 0.9 and unemployment insurance a multiplier of 1.1 .

zandi had similar multipliers for these latter provisions but assigned a multiplier of 0.2 for bonus depreciation , measuring the provision as the first year tax saving ( a larger number than present value ) .

overall , bonus depreciation did not appear to be very effective in providing short - term economic stimulus compared with alternatives .

concerns also exist about the effectiveness of bonus depreciation when the extension is retroactive .

when bonus depreciation is extended retroactively , the benefit is a windfall , which cannot affect investment .

although s. 1859 was introduced in 2013 and would not have had a windfall if enacted when introduced , enacting a retroactive extension for 2014 currently would have windfall elements .

if bonus depreciation is permanent , it affects the size and allocation of the capital stock .

in particular , it lowers the tax rate on equipment relative to other depreciable assets .

some have suggested that the traditional extenders have been repeatedly enacted on a temporary basis because the revenue cost is much smaller for a single year's extension compared with a permanent extension with the 10-year budget horizon .

without growth , one would expect a standard provision to cost only 10% of the permanent 10-year cost ; with growth it would be somewhat less because each year's cost would be slightly larger than the year before .

bonus depreciation and section 179 expensing cost even less compared with their cost in the 10-year budget horizon because most of the initial revenue loss is recovered during the budget horizon .

contrast the patterns in table 4 , which shows the last revenue estimate for a one - year extension , and table 5 , which shows the revenue loss if both provisions are made permanent .

in table 4 , there is an initial loss from bonus depreciation ( generally spread over the first two fiscal years ) , but revenue is gained in the following years as firms no longer take deductions that would have been taken under normal depreciation .

in table 5 , there is a new round of investment in each year , always with a revenue loss , but one that declines as each year there are more gains from not taking depreciation on earlier vintages of investment to offset the current year's loss .

although the estimates in the two tables are separated by a year , they provide some idea of the magnitude of the difference .

the combination of bonus depreciation and half of section 179 expensing in table 4 is only 1.7% of the total of these provisions in table 5 .

half of the traditional extenders estimate in table 4 is 7.7% of the total estimate for other expiring provisions in table 1 .

 ( these ratios would be slightly larger if both tables covered the same time periods. ) .

table 5 does not separate the cost of bonus depreciation and section 179 expensing .

based on revenue estimates in table 4 , bonus depreciation is about 90% of the total ( 4.7 / ( 4.7+.5*2.3 ) ) .

however , the latest cbo estimate for the federal budget in coming years indicates a revenue cost of $263 billion for a permanent extension of bonus depreciation for the period fy2014-fy2024 , which indicates bonus depreciation is about 76% of the total cost for a permanent extension .

thus , these estimates indicate that a one year extension costs $5 billion for fy2014-fy2024 , less than 2% of the cost of $263 billion for a permanent provision .

the joint committee on taxation has subsequently confirmed this estimate and scored the extension of bonus depreciation in h.r .

4718 as $263 billion for fy2014-fy2024 .

bonus depreciation has a somewhat smaller score , $244.9 billion , in estimates for h.r .

4 , but this smaller estimate is probably due to interactions with other provisions .

note also that the cost of a permanent extension of bonus depreciation is larger than the steady state cost if the system had been in place for a long time .

the cost declines in table 5 for bonus depreciation and section 179 expensing , because as each year passes more revenue gain occurs for more previous investments .

if the 10 th year is an approximate steady state , as appears to be the case , the permanent cost would be around 40% of the totals in table 5 , or $140 billion , and bonus depreciation ( at 76% of the cost ) would be $105 billion .

that would make a one - year extension about 5% of the steady state .

by contrast , for most of the expiring provisions revenue costs rise over time under a permanent extension , which reflects growth and , to a limited extent , some part of each year's cost that falls in future years for some provisions .

this appendix contains explanations of several mathematical equations needed to provide estimates in this report .

calculation of effective tax rates the effective tax rates in this paper are calculated by first determining , given a required after - tax rate of return and an expected rate of decline in productivity of the asset due to economic depreciation , how much the investment must initially produce in order for the sum of after - tax profits over time , discounted by the after - tax rate of return , to equal the investment outlay ( i.e. , to break even ) .

then all of the tax payments and deductions are eliminated and the before - tax profit flows are used to determine what pre - tax discount rate would sum the flows to the original cost .

the effective tax rate is the pre - tax rate of return minus the after - tax rate of return , divided by the pre - tax rate .

discounting means dividing each flow by a discount factor .

for a flow earned a year from now , the discount factor is ( 1 + r ) , for a flow earned two years from now ( 1 + r ) , 2 for a flow three years from now ( 1 + r ) , 3 where r is the discount rate .

in practice , however , the analysis uses a continuous time method with continuous compounding .

the formula derived from this method is ( 1 ) r = ( r + d ) ( 1 – u z ) / ( 1 – u ) - d where r is the pre - tax rate of return , r is the after - tax real discount rate of the corporation , d is the economic depreciation rate , u is the statutory tax rate and z is the present value of depreciation deductions ( discounted at r + π , where π is the inflation rate ) .

the effective tax rate for an investment financed wholly by equity at the firm level is ( r – r ) / r .

when including individual level taxes and debt finance , the tax rate is measured by determining r as above , where r = f ( i ( 1 – u ) – π ) + ( 1 – f ) e , where f is the share of the investment that is debt financed , i is the nominal interest rate , and e is the real rate of return to equity before individual tax but after the corporate tax .

the value of f is 0 when considering an equity investment and one when considering a debt - financed investment .

e is equal to d + g , where d is the dividend rate and g is the real growth rate .

the after - tax real rate of return , r , is f ( i ( 1 – t ) – π ) + ( 1 – f ) ( d ( 1 – b ) + g ( 1 – c ) ) , where t is the effective individual tax rate b is the effective rate on dividends and c is the effective capital gains tax rate .

the total tax rate is ( r – r ) / r .

for a more complete description of the methodology and data sources , including useful lives for depreciation purposes , formulas for measuring z , and the allocation of assets in the economy , see [author name scrubbed] , the economic effects of taxing capital income , cambridge , ma , mit press , 1994 .

for purposes of the analysis , the following assumptions were made: the interest rate is 7.5% , the inflation is 2% , and the real return to equity before individual taxes is 7% , with a 4% ( or 57% of real profits ) paid as dividends .

the corporate rate is 35% , and the average individual marginal tax rate on investment income is 23% ( data consistent with calculations in the national bureau of economic research taxsim model ) .

tax rates on dividends and capital gains are 15% , although an alternative rate of 23.8% that applies to very high income individuals is also considered .

one half of corporate stock is sold ; the remaining half held until death ; and the holding period is five years .

half of financial assets are held in tax exempt forms such as pensions and iras .

how partial expensing affects the effective tax rate the tax rate can be calculated for 50% expensing by measuring z in equation ( 1 ) as 0.5 ( 1+z ) meaning that half of the investment is expensed and half is depreciated in the normal way .

there is a general relationship that can be found , which is helpful in understanding the effects of bonus depreciation by transforming the effect into a relationship between effective tax rates .

to calculate this effect measure z as a combination of economic depreciation and excess depreciation in equation ( 1 ) , noting that economic depreciation is equal to d / r+d so that z is redefined as z +d / ( r+d ) and z now represents the present value of depreciation in excess of economic depreciation .

solve this equation for the effective tax rate , u*: ( 2 ) u* = [ru - uz ( r+d ) ] / ( r - uz ( r+d ) when z is zero the tax rate is the statutory rate , u .

the present value of depreciation with the 50% bonus provision is now 0.5 ( 1+z+d / ( r+d ) ) .

solve equation ( 2 ) for z in terms of the other variables and replace z with this value to solve for the effective tax rate under bonus depreciation .

the new tax rate with bonus depreciation , u b is: ( 3 ) u b = 0.5u* / ( 1-0.5u* ) for typical effective tax rates the effective tax rate is reduced by somewhat over 40% .

determining the useful life in the camp depreciation proposal estimating the present value of depreciation for the camp proposal requires not only the stated life , t , that is used to determine straight - line depreciation rate ( 1 / t ) but also the effective life when all of the cost is recovered .

the limit of depreciation to original cost means that it is not an indexation of depreciation , but an acceleration , with the rate of acceleration rising as the inflation rate increases .

to determine the useful life in continuous time , integrate e πt / t from 0 to t* , with t representing time , and set that value equal to 1 .

t* is the point where 100% of the cost is recovered , t is the life for determining the straight line rate , and π is the inflation rate .

solving for the integral and making other transformations , the result is t* = ( ln ( 1+ πt ) ) / π .

