federal land management decisions influence the u.s. economy , environment , and social welfare .

these decisions determine how the nation's federal lands will be acquired or disposed of , developed , managed , and protected .

their impact may be local , regional , or national .

this report discusses selected federal land policy issues that the 116 th congress may consider through oversight , authorizations , or appropriations .

the report also identifies crs products that provide more detailed information .

the federal government manages roughly 640 million acres of surface land , approximately 28% of the 2.27 billion acres of land in the united states .

four agencies ( referred to in this report as the federal land management agencies , or flmas ) administer a total of 608 million acres ( ~95% ) of these federal lands: the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture ( usda ) , and the bureau of land management ( blm ) , u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and national park service ( nps ) , all in the department of the interior ( doi ) .

most of these lands are in the west and alaska , where the percentage of federal ownership is significantly higher than elsewhere in the nation ( see figure 1 ) .

in addition , the department of defense administers approximately 11 million acres in military bases , training ranges , and more ; and numerous other agencies administer the remaining federal acreage .

the federal estate also extends to energy and mineral resources located below ground and offshore .

blm manages the federal onshore subsurface mineral estate .

the bureau of ocean and energy management ( boem ) , also in doi , manages access to about 1.7 billion offshore acres located beyond state coastal waters , referred to as u.s. offshore areas or the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) .

not all of these acres can be expected to contain extractable mineral and energy resources , however .

federal land policy and management issues generally fall into several broad thematic questions: should federal land be managed to produce national or local benefits ? .

how should current uses be balanced with future resources and opportunities ? .

should current uses , management , and protection programs be replaced with alternatives ? .

who decides how federal land resources should be managed , and how are the decisions made ? .

some stakeholders seek to maintain or enhance the federal estate , while others seek to divest the federal estate to state or private ownership .

some issues , such as forest management and fire protection , involve both federal and nonfederal ( state , local , or privately owned ) land .

in many cases , policy positions on federal land issues do not divide along clear party lines .

instead , they may be split along the lines of rural - urban , eastern - western , and coastal - interior interests .

several committees in the house and senate have jurisdiction over federal land issues .

for example , issues involving the management of the national forests cross multiple committee jurisdictions , including the committee on agriculture and the committee on natural resources in the house , and the committee on agriculture , nutrition and forestry and committee on energy and natural resources in the senate .

in addition , federal land issues are often addressed during consideration of annual appropriations for the flmas' programs and activities .

these agencies and programs typically receive appropriations through annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations laws .

this report introduces selected federal land issues , many of which are complex and interrelated .

the discussions are broad and aim to introduce the range of issues regarding federal land management , while providing references to more detailed and specific crs products .

the issues are grouped into these broad categories federal estate ownership , funding issues related to federal lands , climate policy and federal land management , energy and minerals resources , forest management , range management , recreation , other land designations , species management , and wildfire management .

this report generally contains the most recent available data and estimates .

federal land ownership began when the original 13 states ceded title of some of their land to the newly formed central government .

the early federal policy was to dispose of federal land to generate revenue and encourage western settlement and development .

however , congress began to withdraw , reserve , and protect federal land through the creation of national parks and forest reserves starting in the late 1800s .

this "reservation era" laid the foundation for the current federal agencies , whose primary purpose is to manage natural resources on federal lands .

the four flmas and boem were created at different times , with different missions and purposes , as discussed below .

the ownership and use of federal lands has generated controversy since the late 1800s .

one key area of debate is the extent of the federal estate , or , in other words , how much land the federal government should own .

this debate includes questions about whether some federal lands should be disposed to state or private ownership , or whether additional land should be acquired for recreation , conservation , open space , or other purposes .

for lands retained in federal ownership , discussion has focused on whether to curtail or expand certain land designations ( eg , national monuments proclaimed by the president or wilderness areas designated by congress ) and whether current management procedures should be changed ( eg , to allow a greater role for state and local governments or to expand economic considerations in decisionmaking ) .

a separate issue is how to ensure the security of international borders while protecting the federal lands and resources along the border , which are managed by multiple agencies with their own missions .

in recent years , some states have initiated efforts to assume title to the federal lands within their borders , echoing efforts of the "sagebrush rebellion" during the 1980s .

these efforts generally are in response to concerns about the amount of federal land within the state , as well as concerns about how the land is managed , fiscally and otherwise .

debates about federal land ownership — including efforts to divest federal lands — often hinge on constitutional principles such as the property clause and the supremacy clause .

the property clause grants congress authority over the lands , territories , or other property of the united states: "the congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states. .

the supremacy clause establishes federal preemption over state law , meaning that where a state law conflicts with federal law , the federal law will prevail .

through these constitutional principles , the u.s. supreme court has described congress's power over federal lands as "without limitations. .

for instance , congress could choose to transfer to states or other entities the ownership of areas of federal land , among other options .

funding for federal land and flma natural resource programs presents an array of issues for congress .

the flmas receive their discretionary appropriations through interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations laws .

in addition to other questions related directly to appropriations , some funding questions relate to the land and water conservation fund ( lwcf ) .

congress appropriates funds from the lwcf for land acquisition by federal agencies , outdoor recreation needs of states , and other purposes .

under debate are the levels , sources , and uses of funding and whether some funding should be continued as discretionary .

a second set of questions relates to the compensation of states or counties for the presence of nontaxable federal lands and resources , including whether to revise or maintain existing payment programs .

a third set of issues relates to the maintenance of assets by the agencies , particularly how to address their backlog of maintenance projects while achieving other government priorities .

scientific evidence shows that the united states' climate has been changing in recent decades .

this poses several interrelated and complex issues for the management of federal lands and their resources , in terms of mitigation , adaptation , and resiliency .

overall , climate change is introducing uncertainty about conditions previously considered relatively stable and predictable .

given the diversity of federal land and resources , concerns are wide - ranging and include invasive species , sea - level rise , wildlife habitat changes , and increased vulnerability to extreme weather events , as well as uncertainty about the effects of these changes on tourism and recreation .

some specific observed effects of climate change include a fire season that begins earlier and lasts longer in some locations , warmer winter temperatures that allow for a longer tourism season but also for various insect and disease infestations to persist in some areas , and habitat shifts that affect the status of sensitive species but may also increase forest productivity .

another concern is how climate change may affect some iconic federal lands , such as the diminishing size of the glaciers at glacier national park in montana and several parks in alaska , or the flooding of some wildlife refuges .

the role of the flmas in responding to climate change is an area under debate .

some stakeholders are concerned that a focus on climate change adaptation may divert resources and attention from other agency activities and near - term challenges .

others see future climate conditions as representing an increased risk to the effective performance of agency missions and roles .

a related debate concerns the impact of energy production on federal lands .

both traditional sources of energy ( nonrenewable fossil fuels such as oil , gas , and coal ) and alternative sources of energy ( renewable fuels such as solar , wind , and geothermal ) are available on some federal lands .

a 2018 report from the u.s. geological survey estimated that greenhouse gas emissions resulting from the extraction and use of fossil fuels produced on federal lands account for , on average , approximately 24% of national emissions for carbon dioxide , 7% for methane , and 1.5% for nitrous oxide .

in addition , the report estimated that carbon sequestration on federal lands offset approximately 15% of those carbon dioxide emissions over the study period , 2005 through 2014 .

this , along with other factors , has contributed to questions among observers about the extent to which the agencies should provide access to and promote different sources of energy production on federal lands based on the effects on climate from that production .

since fossil fuel emissions contribute to climate change , some stakeholders concerned about climate change assert that the agencies should prioritize renewable energy production on federal lands over traditional energy sources .

others assert that , even with renewable energy growth , conventional sources will continue to be needed in the foreseeable future , and that the united states should pursue a robust traditional energy program to ensure u.s. energy security and remain competitive with other nations , including continuing to make fossil fuel production available on federal lands .

specific legislative issues for congress may include the extent to which the flmas manage in furtherance of long - term climate policy goals , and proposals to restructure or improve collaboration among the flmas regarding climate change activities and reporting .

much of the onshore federal estate is open to energy and mineral exploration and development , including blm and many fs lands .

however , many nps lands and designated wilderness areas , as well as certain other federal lands , have been specifically withdrawn from exploration and development .

most offshore federal acres on the u.s. outer continental shelf are also available for exploration and development , although boem has not scheduled lease sales in all available areas .

energy production on federal lands contributes to total u.s. energy production .

for example , in 2017 , as a percentage of total u.s. production , approximately 24% of crude oil and 13% of natural gas production came from federal lands .

coal production from federal lands has consistently accounted for about 40% of annual u.s. coal production over the past decade .

federal lands also are available for renewable energy projects .

geothermal capacity on federal lands represents 40% of u.s. total geothermal electric generating capacity .

solar and wind energy potential on federal lands is growing and , based on blm - approved projects , there is potential for 3,300 megawatts ( mw ) of wind and 6,300 mw of solar energy on federal lands .

the first u.s. offshore wind farm began regular operations in 2016 , and boem has issued 13 wind energy leases off the coasts of eight east coast states .

the 116 th congress may continue debate over issues related to access to and availability of onshore and offshore federal lands for energy and mineral development .

this discussion includes how to balance energy and mineral development with environmental protection , postproduction remediation , and other uses for those federal lands .

some would like to open more federal lands for energy development , whereas others have sought to retain or increase restrictions and withdrawals for certain areas they consider too sensitive or inappropriate for traditional and / or renewable energy development .

congress also continues to focus on the energy and mineral permitting processes , the timeline for energy and mineral development , and issues related to royalty collections .

other issues may include the federal management of split estates , which occur when the surface and subsurface rights are held by different entities .

management of federal forests presents several policy questions for congress .

for instance , there are questions about the appropriate level of timber harvesting on federal forest lands , particularly fs and blm lands , and how to balance timber harvesting against the other statutory uses and values for these federal lands .

further , congress may debate whether or how the agencies use timber harvesting or other active forest management techniques to achieve other resource - management objectives , such as improving wildlife habitat or improving a forest's resistance and resilience to disturbance events ( eg , wildfire , ice storm ) .

fs manages 145 million acres of forests and woodlands in the national forest system ( nfs ) .

in fy2018 , approximately 2.8 billion board feet of timber and other forest products were harvested from nfs lands , at a value of $188.8 million .

blm manages approximately 38 million acres of forest and woodlands .

the vast majority are public domain forests , managed under the principles of multiple use and sustained yield as established by flpma .

the 2.6 million acres of oregon & california ( o&c ) railroad lands in western oregon , however , are managed under a statutory direction for permanent forest production , as well as watershed protection , recreation , and contributing to the economic stability of local communities and industries .

in fy2018 , approximately 177.8 million board feet of timber and other forest products were harvested from blm lands , at a value of $41.3 million .

the nps and fws have limited authorities to cut , sell , or dispose of timber from their lands and have established policies to do so only in certain cases , such as controlling for insect and disease outbreaks .

in the past few years , the ecological condition of the federal forests has been one focus of discussion .

many believe that federal forests are ecologically degraded , contending that decades of wildfire suppression and other forest - management decisions have created overgrown forests overstocked with biomass ( fuels ) that are susceptible to insect and disease outbreaks and can serve to increase the spread or intensity of wildfires .

these observers advocate rapid action to improve forest conditions , including activities such as prescribed burning , forest thinning , salvaging dead and dying trees , and increased commercial timber production .

critics counter that authorities to reduce fuel levels are adequate , treatments that remove commercial timber degrade other ecosystem conditions and waste taxpayer dollars , and expedited processes for treatments may reduce public oversight of commercial timber harvesting .

the 115 th congress enacted several provisions intended to expedite specific forest management projects on federal land and encourage forest restoration projects across larger areas , including projects which involve nonfederal landowners .

the abundance and diversity of recreational uses of federal lands and waters has increased the challenge of balancing different types of recreation with each other and with other land uses .

one issue is how — or whether — fees should be collected for recreational activities on federal lands .

the federal lands recreation enhancement act ( flrea ) established a recreation fee program for the four flmas and the bureau of reclamation .

the authorization ends on september 30 , 2020 .

flrea authorizes the agencies to charge , collect , and spend fees for recreation on their lands , with most of the money remaining at the collecting site .

the 116 th congress faces issues including whether to let lapse , extend , make permanent , or amend the program .

current oversight issues for congress relate to various aspects of agency implementation of the fee program , including the determination of fee changes , use of collected revenue , and pace of obligation of fee collections .

supporters of the program contend that it sets fair and similar fees among agencies and keeps most fees on - site for improvements that visitors desire .

some support new or increased fees or full extension of the program to other agencies , especially the u.s. army corps of engineers .

among critics , some oppose recreation fees in general .

others assert that fees are appropriate for fewer agencies or types of lands , that the fee structure should be simplified , or that more of the fees should be used to reduce agency maintenance backlogs .

another contentious issue is the use of off - highway vehicles ( ohvs ) — all - terrain vehicles , snowmobiles , personal watercraft , and others — on federal lands and waters .

ohv use is a popular recreational activity on blm and fs land , while nps and fws have fewer lands allowing them .

ohv supporters contend that the vehicles facilitate visitor access to hard - to - reach natural areas and bring economic benefits to communities serving riders .

critics raise concerns about disturbance of nonmotorized recreation and potential damage to wildlife habitat and ecosystems .

issues for congress include broad questions of ohv access and management , as well as ohv use at individual parks , forests , conservation areas , and other federal sites .

access to opportunities on federal lands for hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting ( eg , at shooting ranges ) is of perennial interest to congress .

hunting and fishing are allowed on the majority of federal lands , but some contend they are unnecessarily restricted by protective designations , barriers to physical access , and agency planning processes .

others question whether opening more flma lands to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting is fully consistent with good game management , public safety , other recreational uses , resource management , and the statutory purposes of the lands .

issues for congress include questions of whether or how to balance hunting and fishing against other uses , as well as management of equipment used for hunting and fishing activities , including types of firearms and composition of ammunition and fishing tackle .

congress , the president , and some executive branch officials may establish individual designations on federal lands .

although many designations are unique , some have been more commonly applied , such as national recreation area , national scenic area , and national monument .

congress has conferred designations on some nonfederal lands , such as national heritage areas , to commemorate , conserve , and promote important natural , scenic , historical , cultural , and recreational resources .

congress and previous administrations also have designated certain offshore areas as marine national monuments or sanctuaries .

controversial issues involve the types , locations , and management of such designations , and the extent to which some designations should be altered , expanded , or reduced .

in addition , congress has created three cross - cutting systems of federal land designations to preserve or emphasize particular values or resources , or to protect the natural conditions for biological , recreation , or scenic purposes .

these systems are the national wilderness preservation system , the national wild and scenic rivers system , and the national trails system .

the units of these systems can be on one or more agencies' lands , and the agencies manage them within parameters set in statute .

each flma has a responsibility to manage the plant and animal resources under its purview .

an agency's responsibilities may be based on widely applicable statutes or directives , including the endangered species act , the migratory bird treaty act , the fish and wildlife coordination act , executive orders , and other regulations .

species management could also be based on authorities specific to each flma .

in addition , each flma must work closely with state authorities to address species management issues .

in the case of the national wildlife refuge system ( administered by fws ) , the conservation of plants and animals is the mission of the system , and other uses are allowed to the extent they are compatible with that mission and any specific purposes of an individual system unit .

while most refuges are open for public enjoyment , some refuges or parts of refuges ( such as island seabird colonies ) might be closed to visitors to preserve natural resources .

for the national park system , resource conservation ( including wildlife resources ) is part of the national park service's dual mission , shared with the other goal of public enjoyment .

the fs and blm have multiple use missions , with species management being one of several agency responsibilities .

the federal land management agencies do not exercise their wildlife authorities alone .

often , congress has directed federal agencies to share management of their wildlife resources with state agencies .

for example , where game species are found on federal land and hunting is generally allowed on that land , federal agencies work with states on wildlife censuses and require appropriate state licenses to hunt on the federal lands .

in addition , federal agencies often cooperate with states to enhance wildlife habitat for the benefit of both jurisdictions .

the four flmas do not each maintain specific data on how many acres of land are open to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting .

however , both blm and fs are required to open lands under their administration to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting , subject to any existing and applicable law , unless the respective secretary specifically closes an area .

both agencies estimate that nearly all of their lands are open to these activities .

fws is required to report the number of refuges open to hunting and fishing as well as the acreage available for hunting on an annual basis .

as of fy2017 , there were 277 refuges open to fishing and 336 refuges open to hunting , providing access to 86 million acres for hunting .

congress frequently considers species management issues , such as balancing land and resources use , providing access to hunting and fishing on federal lands , and implementing endangered species protections .

wildfire is a concern because it can lead to loss of human life , damage communities and timber resources , and affect soils , watersheds , water quality , and wildlife .

management of wildfire — an unplanned and unwanted wildland fire — includes preparedness , suppression , fuel reduction , site rehabilitation , and more .

a record - setting 10.1 million acres burned in 2015 due to wildfire , and 10.0 million acres burned two years later in 2017 .

in 2018 , 8.8 million acres burned .

the federal government is responsible for managing wildfires that begin on federal land .

fs and doi have overseen wildfire management , with fs receiving approximately two - thirds of federal funding .

wildfire management funding — including supplemental appropriations — has averaged $3.8 billion annually over the last 10 years ( fy2009 through fy2018 ) , ranging from a low of $2.7 billion in fy2012 to a high of $4.9 billion in both fy2016 and fy2018 .

congressional activity regarding wildfire management typically peaks during the fire season , and during the early part of the budget process .

legislative issues for congress include oversight of the agencies' fire management activities and other wildland management practices that have altered fuel loads over time , and consideration of programs and processes for reducing fuel loads .

funding also is a perennial concern , particularly for suppression purposes , an activity for which costs are generally rising but vary annually and are difficult to predict .

the 115 th congress enacted a new adjustment to the discretionary spending limits for wildfire suppression operations , starting in fy2020 .

this means that congress can appropriate some wildfire suppression funds — subject to certain criteria — effectively outside of the discretionary spending limits .

there is also congressional interest in the federal roles and responsibilities for wildfire protection , response , and damages , including activities such as air tanker readiness and efficacy and liability issues .

other issues include the use of new technologies for wildfire detection and response , such as unmanned aircrafts .

another issue is the impact of the expanding wildland - urban interface ( wui ) , which is the area where structures ( usually homes ) are intermingled with or adjacent to vegetated wildlands ( forests or rangelands ) .

the proximity to vegetated landscapes puts these areas at a potential risk of experiencing wildfires and associated damage .

approximately 10% of all land within the lower 48 states is classified as wui .

crs in focus if10244 , wildfire statistics , by katie hoover .

crs in focus if10732 , federal assistance for wildfire response and recovery , by katie hoover .

crs report r44966 , wildfire suppression spending: background , issues , and legislation in the 115th congress , by katie hoover and bruce r. lindsay .

crs report r45005 , wildfire management funding: background , issues , and fy2018 appropriations , by katie hoover , wildfire management funding: background , issues , and fy2018 appropriations , by katie hoover .

