the term "gross income," according to the internal revenue code ( irc ) , generally "means all income from whatever source derived. .

as a result , worldwide income is subject to taxation by the united states .

thus , u.s. citizens and u.s. residents generally are required to pay u.s. income tax on income from sources in foreign countries .

nonetheless , it has been reported that some taxpayers apparently believe that they can successfully avoid u.s. income tax by maintaining assets outside of the country .

this "avoidance" is actually "evasion," which is illegal .

until recently , it was very difficult for the internal revenue service ( irs ) to detect such evasion .

changes in laws , penalties , and enforcement activity are making it easier to encourage compliance with u.s. tax laws .

for many years , u.s. taxpayers have been required to report various foreign accounts to the department of the treasury under the bank secrecy act of 1970 .

over time , additional provisions have been added to that act to encourage such reporting .

more recently , congress enacted a separate provision in the foreign account tax compliance act ( fatca ) that has reporting requirements that in some cases may result in the same account being reported on two different forms , but which includes reporting requirements for assets not covered by the earlier act .

additionally , fatca includes requirements for information reporting by foreign financial institutions ( ffis ) and other financial intermediaries .

in some cases , withholding tax requirements may be imposed on these entities .

this report outlines the u.s. reporting requirements for foreign assets and accounts under fatca along with the reporting requirements ( fbar ) under the bank secrecy act .

it also addresses the requirements imposed on foreign financial institutions and the agreements the united states has with other countries to cooperate in information reporting .

additionally , recently proposed bills to modify fatca either through repeal or amendment are discussed .

in addition to being required , generally , to report all income from accounts and assets even if located outside the united states , certain persons are required to report the existence of such foreign assets either via form 8938 , which is filed along with their tax returns , or by electronically filing fincen form 114 ( fbar ) with the department of the treasury .

in some cases , they must file both even if doing so appears to be duplicative .

tax evasion through offshore accounts can be facilitated by foreign financial institutions ( ffis ) or other financial intermediaries .

although they may not be complicit in the tax evasion , these entities can play a part in curbing offshore tax evasion by reporting information on assets owned or controlled by entities subject to u.s. income tax .

fatca imposes reporting requirements on ffis regarding their u.s. account holders , as well as obligations on non - financial foreign entities ( nffes ) .

these provisions address gaps in the pre - existing legal authorities that the irs uses to learn information about taxpayers suspected of evading u.s. taxes .

some of the primary authorities are summarized in table 1 .

while these tools play an important role in addressing tax evasion relating to assets held overseas ( see , for example , the ubs discussion below ) , their usefulness can be limited by information gaps , particularly when the information is held by a foreign party .

for example , a whistleblower played a key role in the ubs case , thus perhaps raising the question of how the irs might have fared absent his involvement .

tax treaties and tieas may be of limited use when another country's domestic laws restrict providing the information sought by the irs or the treaty partner is unable to get the information .

additionally , thorny legal questions can arise when a u.s. court attempts to take action against an overseas party , for example , to enforce a subpoena .

furthermore , identified limitations in the qualified intermediary program include the lack of a requirement to report foreign source income and the ability for a corporation to be treated as a beneficial owner , both of which might allow u.s. taxpayers to avoid discovery ( eg , by setting up a foreign shell corporation to receive the income ) .

these shortcomings played a role in influencing fatca's reporting requirements for ffis and other foreign entities .

in the 113 th congress , several bills have been introduced that are related to fatca .

first , s. 887 , whose stated purpose is "[t]o repeal the violation of sovereign nations' laws and privacy matters," would repeal many of fatca's provisions .

the repealed provisions would be the reporting and withholding requirements on ffis and nffes ( irc sections 1471-1474 ) ; the reporting requirement for foreign financial assets ( irc section 6038d ) ; the extension of the statute of limitations for significant omissions of income in connection with foreign assets ( irc section 6501 ( e ) ) ; the penalties for underpayments attributable to undisclosed foreign financial assets ( irc section 6662 ( b ) ( 7 ) , ( j ) ) ; the reporting requirements for activities with respect to passive foreign investment companies ( irc section 1298 ( f ) ) ; the reporting requirement for u.s. owners of foreign trusts ( irc section 6048 ( b ) ; and the minimum penalty with respect to failure to report on certain foreign trusts ( irc section 6677 ( a ) ) .

several bills include a provision with the purpose of "strengthening" fatca — stop tax haven abuse act , h.r .

1554 , section 102 ; sequester delay and stop tax haven abuse act , h.r .

3666 , section 202 ; stop tax haven abuse act , s. 1533 , section 102 ; and cut loopholes act , s. 268 , section 102 .

in addition to the fatca provision , these bills include numerous other provisions aimed at tax sheltering and avoidance activities .

the fatca provision would: expand the reporting requirement for passive foreign investment companies , which currently applies to each u.s. person who is a shareholder of the entity , to include any u.s. person "who directly or indirectly forms , transfers assets to , is a beneficiary of , has a beneficial interest in , or receives money or property or the use thereof from. .

expand the definition of "financial account" to include transaction accounts .

expressly include entities engaged in investing in derivatives and swaps in the definition of "financial institution. .

for purposes of the nffe requirements , specify that the requirement that the withholding agent not know or have reason to know that any information provided by the nffe is incorrect would have to be "as a result of any customer identification , anti - money laundering , anti - corruption , or similar obligation to identify account holders," and clarify that the withholding provision does not apply to , among others , "any other class of persons identified by the secretary for purposes of this subsection as posing a low risk of tax evasion .... ( emphasis added ) . .

for purposes of ffi and nffe reporting and withholding requirements , the definition of "substantial u.s. owner" for corporations and partnerships would include any person owning the threshold amount of the entity is any person who owns , directly or indirectly or as a beneficial owner ( emphasis added ) .

for purposes of ffi and nffe reporting and withholding requirements , would amend the existing confidentiality rules to provide "except that information provided under sections 1471 ( c ) or 1472 ( b ) may be disclosed to any federal law enforcement agency , upon request or upon the initiation of the secretary , to investigate or address a possible violation of united states law. .

also , would clarify that the identity of an ffi is not subject to the irc's confidentiality statute if its agreement was terminated .

provide that for purposes of irc section 6038d , which applies to any person holding "an interest" in a specified foreign financial asset , this may be an ownership or beneficial ownership interest .

the provision would also create two rebuttable presumptions for purposes of any u.s. civil judicial or administrative proceeding to determine or collect tax involving non - fatca institutions ( i.e. , ffis that did not meet fatca's reporting requirements ) : that a u.s. person exercised control over an entity holding an account or having assets in a non - fatca institution if the person directly or indirectly formed , transferred assets to , was a beneficiary of , had a beneficial interest in , or received money or property or the use thereof from the entity , and that any amount or thing of value received by a u.s. person from an account or an entity holding an account or assets in a non - fatca institution constitutes income taxable in the year of receipt and any amount or thing of value paid or transferred by or on behalf of a u.s. person directly or indirectly to such an account or entity represents previously unreported income taxable in the year of transfer .

the presumptions could be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence establishing , for purposes of the first presumption , that such taxpayer exercised no control over the account or entity at the time in question and , for purposes of the second , such amounts or things of value did not represent income related to such person .

additionally , the provision would require that a court prohibit the introduction by the taxpayer of any foreign based document that is not authenticated in open court by a person with knowledge of such document , or any other evidence supplied by a person outside the jurisdiction of a u.s. court unless such person appears before the court .

the provision would also establish rebuttable provisions for securities law purposes regarding control and beneficial ownership for non - fatca institutions .

finally , the commission on americans living abroad act ( h.r .

597 ) would establish a commission to study how federal laws and policies affect u.s. citizens living in foreign countries .

among other things , the commission would be required to study federal financial reporting requirements for a u.s. citizen living in a foreign country , including the requirements under 31 u.s.c .

section 5314 , and federal policies and requirements that affect the ability of a u.s. citizen living in a foreign country to access foreign and domestic financial institutions , including requirements under fatca .

the commission would be required to report within one year of the act's enactment on its findings and recommendations and then issue a second report within a year of the first on any administrative actions implemented pursuant to the commissions' recommendations .

