federal law requires the president to submit an annual budget to congress no later than the first monday in february .

the budget informs congress of the president's overall federal fiscal policy based on proposed spending levels , revenues , and deficit ( or surplus ) levels .

the budget request lays out the president's relative priorities for federal programs , such as how much should be spent on defense , education , health , and other federal programs .

the president's budget may also include legislative proposals for spending and tax policy changes .

while the president is not required to propose legislative changes for those parts of the budget that are governed by permanent law ( i.e. , mandatory spending ) , such changes are generally included in the budget .

president obama submitted his fy2015 budget to congress on march 4 , 2014 .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) is the division of the department of health & human services ( hhs ) that is responsible for administering medicare , medicaid , the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and the private health insurance programs .

cms is the largest purchaser of health care in the united states with medicare and federal medicaid expenditures accounting for 29.0% of the total national health expenditures in 2012 .

in fy2015 , cms estimates 123 million individuals will be covered by medicare , medicaid , or chip , which is more than one in three americans .

this report summarizes the president's budget estimates for each section of the cms budget .

then , for each legislative proposal included in the president's budget , this report provides a description of current law and the president's proposal .

the explanations of the president's legislative proposals are grouped by the following program areas: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , chip , state grants and demonstrations , private health insurance programs , and program management .

at the end of each of these sections , there is a table summarizing the estimated costs or savings for each legislative proposal .

the cms budget includes a mixture of both mandatory and discretionary spending .

however , a vast majority of the cms budget is mandatory spending , such as medicare benefits and grants to states for medicaid .

the president's budget estimates that under current law cms mandatory and discretionary net outlays would amount to $881.2 billion in fy2015 .

this is an increase of $44.4 billion , or 5.3% , over the estimated net outlays for fy2014 .

the president's fy2015 budget increases the baseline for medicare spending by assuming no reduction in medicare payments for physician services , relative to current levels , from fy2015 through fy2024 , in contrast to the sustainable growth rate formula ( sgr ) under current law , which calls for significantly lower physician payments during this 10-year period .

the president's budget estimates this adjustment will increase cms's net outlays by $6.2 billion in fy2014 and $13.7 billion in fy2015 .

with this adjustment , cms's total net outlays are estimated to be $894.9 billion in fy2015 .

the president's fy2015 budget proposes to make a number of legislative changes to medicare , medicaid , program integrity , chip , state grants and demonstrations , private health insurance programs , and program management .

the president's budget estimates that if these legislative proposals were implemented , cms's total net outlays would increase by $0.5 billion in fy2014 and increase by a net of $3.0 billion in fy2015 .

with the medicare physician payment adjustment , the estimated impact of the legislative proposals , and the estimated savings from program integrity activities ( $0.6 billion ) , the president's budget estimates cms's net outlays will be $897.4 billion in fy2015 , which is an increase of $53.8 billion , or 6.4% , over the net outlays for fy2014 .

for budgetary purposes , cms is divided into the following sections: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , chip , state grants and demonstrations , private health insurance , the center for medicare and medicaid innovation ( cmmi ) , and program management .

the president's budget estimates for each of these budget sections are summarized below , along with a description of each of these sections of the cms budget .

the president's fy2015 budget contains a number of proposals that would impact the cms budget .

some are program expansions , and others are designed to reduce federal spending .

for each proposal , this report provides a description of current law and the president's proposal .

this report groups these legislative proposals by program areas: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , chip , state grants and demonstrations , private health insurance programs , and program management .

at the end of each of these sections , there is a table summarizing the costs or savings for each legislative proposal as estimated by the administration , and the tables classify each proposal as new , modified from the president's fy2014 budget , or repeated from the president's fy2014 budget .

cms's program management account funds the majority of medicare's administrative and oversight functions , and program management activities include both discretionary and mandatory appropriations .

discretionary program management includes the following five account categories: program operations , federal administration , survey and certification , research , and state high - risk pools .

the largest program management expenditure category is program operations , which funds a range of contractor and information technology activities necessary to administer medicare , medicaid , chip , implementation of private health insurance programs , and additional activities required by legislation .

mandatory program management appropriations ( $199 million ) were established by the following five laws: aca , arra , mippa , atra , and bba .

in addition , the president's fy2015 budget for program management includes reimbursable administration ( $936 million ) and provisions for new legislative initiatives ( $433 million ) .

the president's budget would increase mandatory funding for program management by $400 million to fund implementation of the mandatory health care proposals in the president's budget .

this proposal was included in the president's fy2014 budget proposal .

section 1891 of the social security act requires hhas participating in the medicare program to comply with certain conditions of participation , such as quality of care and safety standards .

to verify an hha's compliance with medicare's conditions of participation , cms contracts with each state survey agency to conduct a recertification survey every three years .

hhas that are out of compliance can be cited for deficiencies and face intermediate sanctions , such as directed plans of correction and temporary management changes .

beginning july 1 , 2014 , intermediate sanctions for noncompliant hhas will also include suspension of medicare payments for new patient admissions and civil monetary penalties .

unless otherwise specified , section 1128a of the social security act requires such civil monetary penalties levied and collected in accordance with the medicare program to be returned to the medicare trust funds .

however , section 6111 of the aca allows a portion of civil monetary penalties levied against noncompliant snfs to be retained to support initiatives that improve the quality of snf care .

the president's budget would allow civil monetary penalties collected from hhas to be retained and invested for activities to improve the quality of care of patients receiving home health services .

this proposal was not included in the president's fy2014 budget .

under current law , the federal payment levy program authorizes cms to impose levies on medicare providers for debts to the federal government .

cms and states electronically match medicare provider payments with delinquent tax and non - tax debts and payments disbursed by the federal government .

the program allows the department of the treasury to assess a fee up to 15% of a provider's outstanding medicare reimbursement as collateral against outstanding debts .

the president's fy2015 budget would authorize cms to assess a fee to offset the administrative costs of the federal payment levy program .

the department of the treasury would continue to receive the full amount of the levy , and medicare providers would be required to pay cms fees to cover administrative costs for operating the federal payment levy program , which are estimated to be $2 million in fy2015 .

this proposal was not included in the president's fy2014 budget .

federal and state governments share responsibility for ensuring that many medicare and medicaid providers and suppliers provide quality care and meet certain safety standards .

the federal government sets quality and safety requirements that these entities must meet to participate in the medicare and medicaid programs .

in general , cms contracts with organizations ( often state survey agencies ) to conduct periodic inspections and investigate quality or safety complaints .

cms estimated that in fy2014 survey and certification entities will complete over 24,434 initial surveys and re - certifications and investigate over 51,400 complaints .

all facility providers must undergo initial survey and certification inspections when they enroll as providers in medicare or medicaid , and be recertified on a regular basis thereafter .

cms intends to add inspection requirements for community mental health centers in fy2014 .

when surveyors identify deficiencies , surveyed entities have a certain period of time to correct the issues before surveyors revisit the facility to verify that the deficiencies were corrected .

the president's budget proposes to require the secretary to begin requiring user fees for survey and certification revisit .

the revisit fee would provide cms with additional resources to conduct follow up visits to poor performing providers , while also creating financial incentives for organizations to quickly correct deficiencies .

the revisit fee would be phased in over a number of years .

this proposal was included in the president's fy2014 budget proposal .

under current law , two provisions authorize specified quality and performance measurement duties for a contracted consensus - based entity .

section 183 of mippa requires the secretary to have a contract with a consensus - based entity ( eg , national quality forum ) to carry out specified performance improvement and quality measurement duties .

these duties include , among others , priority setting ; measure endorsement ; measure maintenance ; convening multi - stakeholder groups to provide input on the selection of quality measures and national priorities ; and annual reporting to congress .

section 3014 of the aca requires the secretary to establish a pre - rulemaking process to select quality measures .

this process involves gathering multi - stakeholder input ; making measures under consideration available to the public ; transmitting the input of multi - stakeholder groups to the secretary ; and publishing the rationale for the use of any quality measure in the federal register .

the secretary must also establish a process for disseminating quality measures used by the secretary and to periodically review quality measures and determine whether to maintain them or phase them out .

under current law , funding expired for section 183 of mippa in fy2013 and for section 3014 of aca in fy2014 .

the president's budget would extend funding for both quality and performance measurement duties by providing $30 million per year , available until expended , for both section 183 of mippa and section 3014 of the aca for each of the fiscal years fy2015 through fy2017 .

the allocation of funding between the two sections is not specified in the proposal .

this proposal is a modification of a legislative proposal from the president's fy2014 budget .

