in the 108 th congress ( 2003-2004 ) , representatives vernon ehlers and mark udall launched what was then known as the bipartisan science and math ( stem ) educational caucus .

the caucus has been registered as a congressional member organization ( cmo ) in the house of representatives under a variety of names since its debut .

in this report , the caucus will be referred to as the congressional stem education caucus .

for a list of the caucus name variants and the co - chairs , see appendix a , table a - 1 .

the caucus seeks to strengthen stem education at all levels ( k - 12 , higher education , and the workforce ) by providing a forum for congress and the science , education , and business communities to discuss problems and solutions related to stem education .

the focus on stem education was due in part to a report to congress that warned of perceived weaknesses in the existing u.s .

stem education system .

the report , published by the national academies , stated that without improved performance and participation in stem fields , national prosperity and power may be threatened .

for a detailed analysis of u.s .

stem education , see crs report r42642 , science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

congressional offices had until january 31 , 2014 , to register as a participant in the house student app challenge — the first congressional stem competition to promote innovation in the fields of science , technology , engineering , and mathematics .

as of the closing date , 137 members had registered for the competition .

the competition ends on april 30 , 2014 , and on may 30 , 2014 , participating members will submit their district winners to the house .

the district winners will be posted on house.gov .

congressional office coordinators of the congressional stem competition were advised to connect with teachers in the district to solicit participation and to set up educational events .

these events may include stem fairs or other related promotional activities in the district .

in addition , the offices were advised to promote the event on the participating member's website , social media , ads , etc .

congressional staff is responsible for selecting experts to act as advisors and judges and determining the criteria for winning entries .

once the submission deadline for apps has passed , staff will meet with judges to monitor the progress of the judging .

the program recommends that staff take an active role in the post - submission phases of the competition by reviewing the videos selected for in - person judging , arranging for the final judging event , winner selection , and the awards ceremony .

the staff will notify the committee on house administration of the winner and provide the winning entry and background materials for house posting .

an instructional aid called the stem district tool kit - local roles has been created to assist congressional staff with conducting the competition in the district .

additionally , multiple resources are available on housenet under the heading "resources for students and teachers," including guides to teach kids programming , self - taught code writing courses , and a tutorial for developing apps on android phones and in apples and windows environments .

the co - chairs for the house student app challenge are representative bob goodlatte ( r - va ) and representative anna eshoo ( d - ca ) .

representatives goodlatte and eshoo are also co - chairs of the long - standing congressional internet caucus .

appendix a .

congressional science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education caucus appendix b .

text of the academic competition resolution of 2013 house committee on administration academic competition resolution of 2013 h.res .

77 in the house of representatives , u .

s . , february 26 , 2013 .

resolved , section 1 .

short title .

this resolution may be cited as the ''academic competition resolution of 2013'' .

sec .

2 .

findings .

the house of representatives finds as follows: ( 1 ) stem ( science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ) fields and knowledge have been integral to the development of civilization over the centuries .

 ( 2 ) stem fields have been , and continue to be , vital to a healthy and thriving united states .

 ( 3 ) stem fields are even more important in a world and nation of continuous and rapid technological advancements and needs .

 ( 4 ) stem fields are necessary to ensure a qualified national workforce and growing american economy , and a recent study predicted that one - half of all stem jobs in 2020 will be related to the field of computer science .

 ( 5 ) a recent study found that less than one - third of eighth graders in the united states showed proficiency in mathematics and science .

 ( 6 ) a recent study found that only 9 states allowed computer science courses to count toward high school students' core graduation requirements .

 ( 7 ) a recent study found that only one - third of the bachelor's degrees earned in the united states are in a stem field .

 ( 8 ) a recent study found that more than one - half of the science and engineering graduate students in institutions of higher education in the united states are from outside the united states .

 ( 9 ) efforts to encourage students to work in stem fields will enhance collaborative efforts between our secondary education systems and stem - related fields and industries .

 ( 10 ) the global economy demands that the united states continue to lead the world in innovation , creativity , and stem - related research .

 ( 11 ) bringing together members of congress and their younger constituents to participate in activities that will result in a deeper appreciation for stem fields will foster enthusiasm for education in the sciences .

 ( 12 ) the support which students will gain through congressional recognition of their work on stem - related projects will encourage them to pursue career paths in stem studies and research .

 ( 13 ) it is appropriate for the house of representatives to institute a new and worthwhile competition to encourage students to participate in stem studies and research .

 ( 14 ) rapid technological change means the competition will evolve over time and will challenge students in specialized areas of science , technology , engineering and math to ensure maximum participation .

because of the importance of computer science it would be appropriate to initially challenge students to develop so - called ''apps'' for mobile , tablet , and computer platforms .

sec .

3 .

congressional competition in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics .

 ( a ) establishment of competition. — there is hereby established an academic competition in the fields of science , technology , engineering , and mathematics which shall be held each year among students in each congressional district .

 ( b ) regulations. — the competition under this resolution shall be carried out in accordance with such regulations as may be prescribed by the committee on house administration , except that the regulations shall permit the office of a member to seek guidance from outside experts in the fields of science , technology , engineering , and mathematics for the purposes of establishing criteria for the selection of competition judges and for the judgment of competition submissions .

appendix c. regulations for the academic competition appendix d. resources for the conduct of the challeng .

