the decisionmaking processes of the house of representatives have developed from english parliamentary procedure , american - colonial legislative practice , and over 225 years of federal lawmaking activity .

the constitution , a set of written rules , statutes , and 29 volumes of recorded precedent together guide the house's legislative actions .

the legislative process has the potential to be complicated .

this overview explains only the most common ways legislation is considered on the house floor , and it describes the types of propositions most likely to be voted on and the opportunities for legislative debate most frequently available to and used by members .

for a more comprehensive introduction to the fundamental principles and procedures that apply in multiple situations on the house floor , see crs report 95-563 , the legislative process on the house floor: an introduction .

references to other more comprehensive crs reports on specific subjects are provided in footnotes throughout this overview .

although the house has a number of possible procedures from which to choose , the most frequently used method to approve bills and resolutions in the house is known as "suspension," short for suspension of the rules .

this method has evolved as a way for measures that enjoy widespread support to be quickly processed by the house .

the decision as to what measures will be taken up under this procedure normally begins in the committee with jurisdiction over the legislation .

if there is bipartisan agreement in the committee that a measure is a good candidate for suspension , committee leaders make that recommendation to party leaders .

the speaker has authority under house rules to determine which measures will be considered under suspension of the rules , and when .

members are notified of measures to be considered by suspension procedures through daily and weekly leadership announcements and whip notices .

especially for measures on which the consideration of amendments may be desired or that are unlikely to garner the necessary two - thirds support to pass under suspension , the house relies on "special rules. .

they are "special" in that they are an adaptation of house rules for consideration of particular measures .

a special rule is a procedural proposal reported by the committee on rules ( in the form of a house resolution ) that sets the terms for debating and amending a measure .

the committee on rules , which is made up of nine majority party members and four minority party members , drafts and reports these resolutions , although they have effect only if agreed to by a majority of house members voting .

under this method of proceeding , the house first approves a special rule and then it considers a bill under the terms of that rule .

this is the second most common method , after suspension of the rules , used to consider bills .

special rules allow the house to customize procedures for considering each bill .

the versatility of special rules is their strength , but it is still possible to generalize about their contents .

first , it is common for the special rule to propose that a text other than the text of a bill as introduced be the basis for house consideration .

for example , a special rule might state that a complete substitute amendment recommended by the committee with jurisdiction over the bill be considered the base text subject to further amendment .

in instances in which multiple committees have jurisdiction over a bill , the base text the special rule makes in order might reflect negotiations among committee and party leaders .

second , special rules generally fall into three broad categories based on the opportunities they provide for amendment .

open rules allow any floor amendments that are otherwise in order under the regular procedures of the house .

closed rules do not allow any amendments to be offered from the floor .

structured rules typically allow amendments that are specified in the printed report accompanying the special rule .

there are three stages for considering legislation on the house floor under a special rule: rules committee action , house action on the rule , and house action on the bill .

passage of a measure through the house is a crucial stage of the legislative process , but a bill or joint resolution must pass both the house and the senate in precisely the same form before it can be sent to the president .

this requirement means , first , that the house and senate must both act on the same measure and , second , that if one chamber agrees to a measure of the other with amendments , the chambers must negotiate a text they can both agree to , using either a conference committee or an exchange of amendments between the houses .

historically , the house has resolved its differences with the senate on major legislation through conference committees , or panels of representatives and senators from the committees of jurisdiction who meet to negotiate a compromise version of the bill .

the resulting recommended legislation — the conference report — must be approved by both the house and senate .

in the house , a conference report is typically considered for one hour under the terms of a special rule .

no amendments are in order to a conference report , as it is meant to reflect the final compromise between the chambers .

sometimes , the house and senate resolve their differences not through conference committee , but through amendments between the houses , or what is popularly known as "ping pong. .

in this process , the house and senate shuttle a measure back and forth between them , each proposing alternatives in the form of amendments until they both agree to the same text .

when the house considers a senate amendment , it might do so under a motion to suspend the rules , as described above , or , when the legislative proposal is unlikely to get the support of two - thirds of the house , under the terms of a special rule .

it is very unlikely that members will have an opportunity to offer amendments from the floor or to make a motion to recommit the senate amendment .

