congress has at times expressed concern regarding ballistic missile and nuclear programs in iran , north korea , and syria .

for decades , most in congress have viewed these three countries with unease because these programs , coupled with the governments' strong anti - u.s. positions and their antagonism toward u.s. regional friends and allies , pose what are widely regarded as threats to u.s. national security interests .

congress has held numerous hearings and passed laws designed to slow and deter iran , north korea , and syria from developing ballistic missiles and nuclear weapons .

congress has also established reporting requirements concerning these countries' missile and nuclear programs .

this report focuses primarily on unclassified and declassified u.s. intelligence community ( ic ) assessments and reports over the past two decades .

these assessments indicate that no public evidence exists that iran and north korea have engaged in nuclear - related trade or cooperation with each other , although ballistic missile technology cooperation between the two is significant and meaningful , and syria has received ballistic missiles and related technology from north korea and iran and also engaged in nuclear technology cooperation with north korea .

it should be noted that nonofficial assessments , including journal articles , foreign and domestic media reports , and internet commentaries , are not always consistent with the official assessments summarized in this report .

although such unofficial sources allege a fairly significant and persistent level of cooperation among these three countries on their ballistic missile and nuclear programs , such reports lack the credibility of official assessments because they are often unsourced or attributed to anonymous government officials , frequently at odds with each other , and unverifiable .

this report begins with a description of the key elements of a nuclear weapons program .

it then explains the available information regarding cooperation among iran , north korea , and syria on ballistic missiles and nuclear technology .

last , the report discusses some specific issues for congress .

an effective nuclear weapons program has three major elements , each of which presents its own unique challenges .

each of these elements must work together to create an operational and effective system .

1 .

the program must produce fissile material in sufficient quantity and quality for a nuclear device .

plutonium and weapons - grade highly enriched uranium ( heu ) are the two types of fissile material used in nuclear weapons .

plutonium is obtained by separating it from spent nuclear reactor fuel — a procedure called "reprocessing. .

weapons - grade heu is produced by enriching uranium — a process that increases the concentration of uranium - 235 ( the relevant fissile isotope ) .

both iran and north korea are in various stages of pursuing and producing different kinds of nuclear material .

syria does not appear to be producing fissile material .

2 .

the program must produce an effective and reliable means of delivering a nuclear weapon , such as a ballistic missile .

both iran and north korea have medium - range ballistic missiles , which have been assessed as capable of delivering a nuclear warhead should such a warhead capability be developed and deployed .

moreover , both countries have demonstrated the capability to launch an object into space orbit , but neither country currently has an intercontinental ballistic missile ( icbm ) capability .

syria possesses only short - range ballistic missiles ( srbms ) .

3 .

the program must produce a nuclear warhead that can be delivered to its intended target , especially at long range .

the ic does not assess that any of the three countries discussed in this report has produced such a warhead , although north korea has conducted several nuclear tests .

according to official sources , iran , north korea , and syria have engaged in various forms of clandestine nuclear cooperation possibly related to nuclear weapons .

north korea and iran obtained designs and materials related to uranium enrichment from a clandestine procurement network run by former pakistani nuclear official abdul qadeer khan .

the cia expressed concern in 2004 that the network could also have transferred nuclear "expertise or technology" to syria , but there appears to be no public official evidence that this potential transfer is still a matter of concern .

syrian president bashar al asad stated in a 2007 newspaper interview that his government had been approached by the khan network but had conducted no transactions with it .

congress has passed legislation providing for sanctions on countries whose entities assist iran , north korea , and syria to obtain weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) and missile delivery systems .

for example , the iran , north korea and syria nonproliferation act ( inksna , p.l .

106-178 ) imposes penalties on countries whose companies assist the efforts of iran , north korea , and syria to acquire wmd and missile delivery systems .

congress originally targeted only iran's proliferation activities , but amended the law in 2005 to address syria ( p.l .

109-112 , the iran nonproliferation amendments act ) .

in 2006 , congress added north korea ( p.l .

109-353 ) .

inksna requires a biannual report from the president to congress on any transfers of controlled items from any foreign person to iran , north korea , or syria .

inksna and other sanctions laws are aimed at discouraging foreign entities from assisting any wmd and missile programs of these three countries .

congress also authorizes u.s. nonproliferation programs , such as export control assistance , that are meant to bolster the ability of other countries to detect and interdict such transfers .

in addition , u.n. sanctions on iran and north korea prohibit the transfer of nuclear or ballistic missile technology to them .

it is also worth noting that international export control regimes , such as the nuclear suppliers group and missile technology control regime , restrict the transfer of nuclear and missile technologies .

congress may wish to consider requiring additional reporting from the executive branch on wmd proliferation .

the number of unclassified reports to congress on wmd - related issues has decreased considerably in recent years .

most recently , section 310 of the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( p.l .

112-277 ) repealed the requirement for the ic to provide an unclassified annual report to congress regarding the "acquisition of technology relating to weapons of mass destruction and advanced conventional munitions. .

the report had been required by section 721 of the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 1997 ( p.l .

104-293 ) .

congress also may wish to consider requesting information from the executive branch , through hearings or reports , regarding the extent to which entities in countries other than iran , north korea , and syria aid those three countries' unconventional weapons programs .

