agriculture - based renewable energy can take several forms , including biofuels such as corn - based ethanol or soy - based biodiesel , wind - driven turbines located on farmland or in rural areas , anaerobic digesters that convert animal waste into methane and electric power , or biomass harvested for burning as a processing fuel or to generate heat as part of an industrial activity .

since the late 1970s , u.s. policymakers at both the federal and state levels have adopted a variety of incentives , regulations , and programs to encourage the production and use of agriculture - based renewable energy ( mostly biofuels ) .

over the years , the two most widely used biofuels — ethanol produced primarily from corn starch and biodiesel produced primarily from soybean oil — have received significant federal support in the form of tax incentives , loans and grants , and regulatory programs .

many of these support programs originate in legislation outside of the farm bill .

for instance , the energy tax act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-618 ) provided an exemption for ethanol from the excise tax on motor fuels .

congress subsequently provided a tax credit for blending ethanol with gasoline , which expired after 2011 .

by executive order the bioenergy program was established in 1999 and in fy2001 began making payments from the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) to eligible producers of ethanol and biodiesel based on year - to - year production increases in these fuels .

the biomass research and development act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-224 ) directed usda and the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) to cooperate and coordinate research and development activities for biobased industrial products , including biofuels .

the 2002 farm bill ( p.l .

107-171 ) authorized several new biofuel programs and added an energy title , title ix .

the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) subsequently extended and expanded the programs promoting biofuels renewable energy , emphasizing particularly those utilizing biomass feedstock .

motivations cited for these legislative initiatives included energy security concerns , reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from traditional fossil fuels , and raising domestic demand for u.s. - produced farm products .

by fy2011 , federal biofuels subsidies peaked at approximately $7.7 billion , of which an estimated $5.7 billion was attributable to the volumetric ethanol excise tax credit ( veetc ) of $0.45 / gallon .

however , the veetc expired at the end of fy2011 , and federal subsidies fell to an estimated $1.3 billion in fy2012 — consisting primarily of tax credits of approximately $1 billion for biodiesel producers .

the remaining biofuels tax credits — for biodiesel and second generation ( formerly cellulosic ) biofuel , and including a tax credit for small producers are temporary incentives , currently scheduled to expire at the end of 20178 .

in recent years , these credits have since been extended several times , most recently in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba ; p.l .

115-123 ) .

in addition to these types of tax incentives and the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) that mandates a minimum level of renewable fuel usage , the provisions of title ix of the 2014 farm bill , the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 ) , represents a significant source of federal support for biofuels production and use in the united states .

title ix of the 2014 farm bill continued long - standing congressional support for the production of renewable energy from agriculturally sourced materials .

this report focuses on those policies contained in the 2014 farm bill that support agriculture - based renewable energy , especially biofuels .

the introductory sections of this report briefly describe how usda bioenergy policies evolved and how they fit into the larger context of u.s. biofuels policy .

then , each of the bioenergy provisions of the 2014 farm bill are defined in terms of their function , goals , administration , funding , and implementation status .

in an appendix at the end of this report , table a - 1 presents data on 2014 farm bill budgetary authority for energy provisions , while table a - 2 presents the original budget authority for title ix programs under the previous 2008 farm bill .

a third table ( table a - 3 ) provides a side - by - side comparison of title ix energy - related provisions for current versus previous law .

renewable energy production plays a key role not just in agricultural policy , but also in energy , tax , and environmental policy .

as a result , many of the federal programs that support renewable energy production in general , and agriculture - based energy production in particular , are outside the purview of usda and have origins outside of omnibus farm bill legislation .

for example , the three principal federal biofuels policies of the past decade were all established outside of farm bills the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) mandates an increasing volume of biofuels use and has its origins in the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-58 ) .

the rfs was expanded in the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ; p.l .

110-140 ) and divided into four distinct , but nested categories — total , advanced , cellulosic , and biodiesel — each with its own mandated volume .

the volumetric ethanol excise tax credit ( veetc ) , originally established in the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) , provided a tax credit that varied in value over the years , which amounted to $0.45 per gallon of pure ethanol blended with gasoline when it expired on december 31 , 2011 .

the ethanol import tariff ( a most - favored - nation duty of $0.54 per gallon ) was intended to offset the blending tax credit and was originally established by the omnibus reconciliation act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-499 ) .

the ethanol import tariff also expired on december 31 , 2011 .

in addition to the rfs , veetc , and ethanol import tariff , several other tax credits that originated outside of farm bills were available for biodiesel production as well as for small producers ( less than 60 million gallons per year per plant ) of ethanol and biodiesel .

a substantial number of federal programs also support renewable energy sources other than biofuels .

in addition to federal programs , many states offer additional support to biofuels producers , blenders , and consumers .

an awareness of the non - usda federal programs is important for appreciating the role envisioned for the energy title of the 2014 farm bill , which was designed to provide incentives for the research and development of new agriculture - based renewable fuels , especially second - generation biofuels ( those based on non - food crop biomass such as cellulose and algae ) , and to expand their distribution and use .

a summary of the evolution of these programs follows .

in general , two types of funding are authorized by congress in a farm bill — mandatory and discretionary .

some farm bill programs identified as receiving mandatory funds ( including most of the bioenergy programs ) are automatically funded at levels "authorized" in the farm bill unless congress limits funding to a lower amount through the appropriations or legislative process .

for many of these programs , mandatory funding is provided through the borrowing authority of usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

the farm bill may also specify some discretionary funding as "authorized to be appropriated" — such discretionary funding is actually determined each year through the annual appropriations process and may or may not reflect the funding level suggested in the authorizing legislation .

what follows is a summary of the bioenergy - related authorities found in the 2014 farm bill , including ( where applicable ) a brief description of each program , funding levels , and the status of program implementation , including any noteworthy changes made by the 2014 farm bill .

like the two preceding farm bills , the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) contained a distinct energy title ( title ix ) that extends many of the previous bioenergy programs .

four previous provisions are omitted or repealed , and a new provision , section 9015 , was added to require usda to submit a report to the house and senate agriculture committees on energy use and energy efficiency projects at usda facilities .

two bioenergy - related provisions in the research title ( title vii ) — one extended , one repealed — are also included in the following discussion .

three provisions from the research title ( title vii ) of the 2014 farm bill relate directly to renewable energy initiatives , which are described below .

administered by: usda .

program overview : this program provided research and extension grants for the purpose of finding innovative methods and technologies to allow agricultural operators to make use of animal waste , such as fertilizer , methane digestion , composting , and other useful by - products ( 7 u.s.c .

§5925a ) .

changes in 201 4 farm bill : the 2014 farm bill repealed the nutrient management research and extension program .

function: established for the purpose of using competitive grants to support research and extension activities that enhance the production of biomass energy crops and the energy efficiency of agricultural operations ( 7 u.s.c .

§5925e ) .

administered by: usda .

changes in 201 4 farm bill : the 2014 farm bill repealed the agricultural bioenergy feedstock and energy efficiency research and extension initiative .

administered by: nifa , usda .

each regional sun grant center manages the programs and activities within its region , although a process based on peer and merit review is used to administer grants .

program overview : under the 2008 farm bill , the sun grant initiative ( sgi ) is a national network of land - grant universities and federally funded laboratories — coordinated through regional sun grant centers — working together to further establish a biobased economy .

competitive grants are available to land - grant schools within each region to be used toward integrated , multistate research , extension , and education programs on technology development and implementation .

sun grant centers are also charged with reviving america's farming communities by placing an emphasis on rural economic development through the production of biobased renewable energy feedstocks .

a provision creating the sun grant program was added subsequent to the 2002 farm bill under the sun grant research initiative act of 2003 ( §778 , consolidated appropriations act , 2004 ; p.l .

108-199 ) .

the initiative was originally established with five national sun grant research centers based at land - grant universities , each covering a different national region , to enhance coordination and collaboration among usda , doe , and land - grant universities in the development , distribution , and implementation of biobased energy technologies .

the 2008 farm bill established the sun grant program and added a sixth regional center ( 7 u.s.c .

§8114 ) .

nifa administers the program under 7 c.f.r .

part 3430 .

changes in 2014 farm bill: the 2014 farm bill extended the sun grant program with its discretionary funding authority ( i.e. , subject to appropriations ) of $75 million annually through fy2018 .

it also consolidates and amends the sun grant program to expand input from other appropriate federal agencies and replace authority for gasification research with bioproducts research and makes the program competitive by removing designation of certain universities as regional centers .

funding: under the 2014 farm bill , discretionary funding of $75 million annually was authorized to be appropriated for fy2014-fy2018 .

of this amount , $2.5 million was appropriated for fy2014-fy2016 , and $3 million for fy2017 and fy2018 .

under the 2008 farm bill , discretionary funding of $75 million annually was authorized to be appropriated for fy2008-fy2012 , but actual appropriations amounted to $2.25 million for fy2010 and $2.2 million for fy2012 .

atra contained no new funding authority for fy2013 .

