several states are experiencing varying degrees of drought , with several western states experiencing severe to exceptional drought conditions .

drought conditions persist in all counties in california , with a majority classified as in either extreme or exceptional drought .

notwithstanding recent rains , california is experiencing its third consecutive dry year , which has resulted in abnormally low reservoir levels , as well as low surface and groundwater levels .

current drought conditions in california and much of the west have fueled congressional interest in drought and its effects on water supplies , agriculture , and ecosystems .

several bills have been introduced in the 113 th congress to address different aspects of drought in california and other regions .

this report focuses on s. 2198 , the "emergency drought relief act," which was introduced april 2 , 2014 , and may proceed quickly to the senate floor under an expedited rule , senate rule xiv .

s. 2198 is largely a revision of a previous drought bill , s. 2016 , the "california emergency drought relief act. .

some provisions in s. 2198 have been broadened to apply to states outside of california ; however , certain provisions in title i remain focused on california water project development , management , and operation .

additionally , s. 2016 contained numerous direct spending provisions that are not included in s. 2198 .

overall , s. 2198 directs the secretary of the interior , the secretary of commerce , and the administrator of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , to undertake numerous actions that would address emergency drought impacts in california and other states , by aiming to increase water supplies for california water users , expanding purposes of program funding for drought mitigation activities , streamlining environmental reviews , providing drought planning assistance , addressing colorado river water supplies , addressing klamath river basin water issues , and expanding the availability of federal emergency disaster assistance .

the bill also would reauthorize and modify several water resource management programs .

s. 2198 includes two titles: title i , "emergency drought relief," contains 14 provisions ranging from mandating maximization of california water supplies — consistent with laws and regulations — through specific project development , management , and operations directives and addressing project environmental reviews , to reauthorizing several water resources management laws ( calfed , p.l .

108-361 ; the reclamation states emergency drought relief act , p.l .

102-250 , 106 stat .

53 , as amended ; and the secure water act , p.l .

111-11 , subtitle f ) .

title ii , "federal disaster assistance," expands the assistance potentially available under an emergency declaration for drought ( or other emergency ) pursuant to the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act , as amended , and discusses in congressional findings the application of the act to drought .

the scope of s. 2198 is fairly broad , as it would address certain drought - related assistance for states that are experiencing drought , as well as specific issues related to water infrastructure and conveyance in california .

in relation to projects and operations that would address drought in california , s. 2198 would direct federal agencies to maximize water supplies and streamline environmental reviews while remaining "consistent" with law and regulations .

this policy approach is aimed at addressing drought , and in doing so , touches upon many long - standing and controversial issues associated with operations of the federal central valley project ( cvp ) , managed by the u.s. bureau of reclamation ( hereinafter referred to as reclamation ) , and the state water project ( swp ) , managed by the california department of water resources .

proposed provisions related to these projects and operations raise several questions that are noted throughout the analysis of title i below .

title i of s. 2198 includes numerous sections related to emergency drought relief .

as noted above , these sections range widely .

while section 103 of the bill focuses on specific actions related to california water supply management , other sections apply to any state during the time for which a state emergency drought declaration is in effect or a u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) natural or agricultural disaster declaration is in effect .

s. 2198 also would change , or in some cases modify , implementation procedures or financial assistance for several water resource and water quality programs .

these include the reclamation states emergency drought relief act of 1991 ( 43 u.s.c .

2201 et seq .

 ) , the secure water act of 2009 ( 42 u.s.c .

10361 et seq .

 ) , and state revolving funds ( srfs ) administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) under the federal clean water act ( 33 u.s.c .

1231 et seq. ) .

and the safe drinking water act ( 42 u.s.c .

300j - 12 ) .

one such provision would direct the secretary of the interior to fund or participate in pilot projects to increase water supplies in colorado river storage project reservoirs .

title i of s. 2198 also would authorize federal drought planning assistance , including hydrologic forecasting and other planning or technical assistance , upon the request of cvp or klamath project contractors or other reclamation project contractors in california .

title i would reauthorize funding for calfed activities through 2018 and the reclamation states emergency drought relief act through 2019 , and increase the funding ceiling for the secure water act .

the bill also would expand the secure water act to include the state of hawaii .

title i provisions related to california water flow , infrastructure development and operations , and environmental permitting have one overarching theme: maximization of water supplies available for general agricultural and municipal and industrial demand while an emergency drought declaration is in effect — consistent with existing law and regulations .

other provisions under title i would largely modify , expand , or reauthorize existing program authorizations .

title ii of s. 2198 would amend the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act , as amended ( 42 u.s.c .

5192 ( a ) ) , to expand the available programs under an emergency declaration to include disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) , emergency nutrition assistance , and crisis counseling assistance .

the provision would apply to emergency declarations broadly ; that is , it is not limited to drought declarations .

emergency declarations are short - term and , given the immediacy of their work , include an abbreviated group of assistance programs when compared to assistance available under a major disaster declaration .

title ii also includes congressional findings indicating that a major drought may be eligible for a major disaster or state of emergency declaration by the president for purposes of the stafford act .

if the effects of a drought overwhelm state or local resources , the president , at the request of the state governor or tribal governing body , is authorized under the stafford act ( 42 u.s.c .

5121 et seq. ) .

to issue major disaster or emergency declarations resulting in federal aid to affected parties .

however , requests by states for stafford act drought - related declarations and related assistance since the 1980s have been denied .

the infrequency of presidential domestic drought declarations increases the uncertainty about the circumstances under which such a declaration is likely to be made .

the de facto federal policy since the 1980s has been that the u.s. secretary of agriculture is the lead in responding and declaring eligibility for federal agricultural disaster assistance , including drought - related disasters .

a declaration of an agricultural disaster area by the secretary of agriculture triggers the availability of multiple agricultural assistance programs , most notably the programs of the farm services agency ( fsa ) , and may trigger availability of other federal programs , such as the economic injury disaster loans of the small business administration ( sba ) .

since fema has deferred to usda over the past three decades , there are no sections of the stafford act , nor regulations or policy guidance documents , that address or even appear to lend themselves to a prolonged drought event as opposed to a disaster incident .

fema has published a listing of the factors that are considered when evaluating a major disaster request by a governor .

however , similar factors are not listed for an emergency declaration , since that action is intended to provide emergency assistance to save lives and protect property and to lessen the threat of a more catastrophic event .

in addition , while governors may request an emergency declaration , the law also provides to the president the authority to issue an emergency declaration if the emergency involves what is considered primarily a federal responsibility .

as previously noted , emergency declarations are short - term and include an abbreviated portfolio of assistance programs compared to assistance associated with major disaster declarations .

for example , while an emergency declaration can provide debris - removal assistance , it cannot offer any form of repair to damaged permanent facilities .

similarly , while emergency temporary housing is available through section 408 of the stafford act , other programs assisting families and individuals are not .

in light of those differences , title ii of s. 2198 would expand the available programs under an emergency declaration to include disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) , emergency nutrition assistance , and crisis counseling assistance .

while each of those programs offers special , targeted assistance for unique problems caused by a disaster event , the reference to the dua program has the closest link to previous fema actions .

for example , the president declared a disaster due to a freeze during the winter of 2007 .

the main form of assistance provided at that time was dua for farmworkers unemployed by the weather event .

the proposed changes to the emergency section would arguably provide the president the authority to provide similar assistance under an emergency declaration without having to reach the bar set by the disaster declaration factors noted earlier .

