the federal government relies heavily on contractors to supply it with goods and services .

each year , fraud by these contractors potentially costs the government billions of dollars .

detecting , prosecuting , and deterring contractor fraud poses a challenge to federal agencies , which often possess limited resources .

contractor fraud comes in many forms , including false or fraudulent claims for payment made under a contract or as part of the contract disputes process ; false statements ; bid rigging ; defective pricing ; cost mischarging ; product substitution ; and false certification of small business size or status .

congressional efforts to deter contractor fraud extend at least as far back as the passage of the false claims act ( fca ) during the civil war .

since that time , congress has enacted several statutes that allow the federal government — and in some instances , private parties — to recover damages , civil penalties , or forfeitures for false or fraudulent claims for payment and other misconduct .

since the passage of the fca , members of congress , courts , and others have continued to debate the proper scope of liability under these civil fraud statutes .

recoveries of large damage awards and penalties by the government or private parties under these statutes have brought new attention to this debate .

for example , in fy2013 , the department of justice ( doj ) recovered about $3.8 billion in settlements and judgments under the fca , which represents the federal government's primary civil fraud remedy .

of this amount , recoveries from procurement fraud cases accounted for a record $890 million .

the government has also recovered large civil penalties and forfeitures from contractors who submit fraudulent claims for payment as part of the contract disputes process , including in a recent case in which the federal circuit affirmed the court of federal claims' ( cofc's ) assessment of a $50.6 million civil penalty against a contractor under the contract disputes act's ( cda's ) anti - fraud provision and rendered judgment of forfeiture of a $13.3 million contractor claim under the forfeiture of fraudulent claims act ( ffca ) .

some federal statutory civil fraud remedies may be cumulative , raising the possibility that the government could potentially recover significant sums , particularly if it suffers damages .

in addition to the significant damage awards that plaintiffs may recover under some of these statutes , courts may find a contractor civilly liable under these laws for conduct that may not amount to fraud under traditional common law definitions .

although many provisions in federal civil fraud statutes require the existence of a "claim" for payment from the government , the statutes may impose civil penalties and forfeitures even when the government has not relied on , or suffered damages from , the claim .

moreover , recent statutory and judicial developments under the fca have reduced the level of "knowledge" that a defendant must possess in order to be liable and extended the scope of the act to cover a wider range of conduct than the common law typically encompasses .

congress has an interest in the scope of federal civil fraud remedy statutes .

in order to be effective , these statutes must be broad enough to punish and deter fraud that often evades detection , wastes taxpayer funds , and negatively impacts government programs .

on the other hand , if courts interpret a fraud statute so broadly that it imposes civil liability on contractors for minor regulatory violations or ordinary breaches of contract — possibly resulting in a contractor having insufficient notice as to which actions will result in liability — contractors may decline to compete for government contracts .

this could lead to higher prices for the government .

this report provides an overview of federal statutes that provide civil remedies for contractor fraud , as well as issues stemming from judicial interpretation of these statutes .

these statutes include the civil fca , anti - fraud provision of the cda , ffca , and the program fraud civil remedies act .

the report also briefly examines regulatory and judicial developments that have implications for enforcement of the fca , including the circuit split regarding the calculation of treble damages under the fca ; the mandatory disclosure rule ; and the presumed loss rule .

congress originally enacted the fca in 1863 to combat fraud by civil war defense contractors .

since that time , congress has occasionally adjusted the scope of the fca's civil liability provisions in response to judicial developments and shifting perceptions of the prevalence of fraud against the federal government .

in its current form , the fca imposes civil liability on "any person" who engages in at least one of seven forms of misconduct .

the fca authorizes the attorney general , as well as certain private parties that sue on behalf of the united states under the act's qui tam provisions , to bring a civil action against an alleged violator of the act .

liability under the fca requires no specific proof of intent to defraud .

liability under two provisions of the fca frequently used against contractors requires , among other things , the existence of a "false or fraudulent" claim for payment from the government .

some federal courts have developed theories that expand the definition of a "false or fraudulent" claim .

under the implied false certification and fraud in the inducement theories , claims for payment that are not explicitly false may become false by implication because of a party's actions or omissions prior to contract formation or during contract performance .

some courts have expressed concerns that , under these theories , a defendant could become liable for ordinary breaches of contract or minor regulatory violations .

thus , some courts have limited the use of the theories by strictly enforcing the fca's mental state requirement ; the heightened pleading requirements for fraud allegations under federal rule of civil procedure 9 ( b ) ; or some form of materiality requirement .

in addition to discussing the scope of liability under the fca , this section also examines a circuit split involving the method by which courts calculate treble damages under the act when the contractor has provided at least some value to the government .

the contract disputes act of 1978 ( cda ) provides administrative and judicial procedures for the resolution of disputes between the government and contractors involving certain contracts awarded by executive agencies .

in part because of concerns that contractors would submit inflated claims during contract disputes as a "negotiating tactic," congress added a provision to the cda imposing a penalty for unsupported claims .

the federal circuit's recent decision in daewoo engineering co. , ltd. v. united states demonstrates that the cda's anti - fraud provision may result in a significant civil penalty for a contractor when it submits a fraudulent claim to the government during a contract dispute in order to extract a settlement .

the forfeiture of fraudulent claims act ( ffca ) , or "special plea in fraud" statute , generally allows the government to assert a counterclaim seeking forfeiture of fraudulent claims brought against it in the cofc .

this penalty exists as a condition of the government's waiver of its sovereign immunity from suit .

congress enacted the ffca as part of an 1863 law that granted new powers to the court of claims .

the ffca states that "a claim against the united states shall be forfeited to the united states by any person who corruptly practices or attempts to practice any fraud against the united states in the proof , statement , establishment , or allowance thereof. .

in such cases the united states court of federal claims shall specifically find such fraud or attempt and render judgment of forfeiture .

judicial interpretations have clarified the elements of the special plea in fraud , as well as its mental state requirement , burden of proof , and application .

the federal circuit has held that the government must prove that the contractor knowingly submitted a false claim with an intent to defraud it , and thus the government does not have to show that it relied on the claim or suffered injury from it .

the burden of proof for the government is "clear and convincing evidence," a higher standard than preponderance of the evidence .

under the ffca , if the court finds part of a claim under a contract to be fraudulent and submitted with the requisite mental state , the court must render judgment of forfeiture on all claims under that contract .

at least one court has sought to justify such a holding on the grounds that separating the claims tainted by fraud from those untainted by fraud is impossible .

a few significant disagreements over the proper interpretation of the ffca have arisen over the years .

for example , courts disagree about whether fraud sufficient for forfeiture may involve fraud in connection with the execution or performance of the contract in addition to fraud related to submission of a claim .

the federal circuit appears to have recently held that the government may establish a violation of the ffca only when the alleged fraud relates to the submission of a claim , stating that the "neighboring provisions illustrate that the forfeiture statute is best understood as a companion requirement of claims procedure rather than a catch - all anti - fraud provision. .

courts also disagree over whether the ffca is subject to the general statute of limitations for claims over which the cofc has jurisdiction .

a few recent examples of cases in which the government has sought forfeiture of a contractor's claims because of purported fraudulent conduct include allegations that the contractor submitted "several inconsistent explanations for its added costs" and knowingly claimed unrecoverable lost profits ; used amounts in purchase orders as actual costs in its claim when related invoices showed lower costs ; and asserted that it was an approved source to obtain two purchase orders .

the program fraud civil remedies act ( pfcra ) provides an administrative process under which certain federal agencies may obtain civil remedies and assessments from "persons" who knowingly make false , fraudulent , or fictitious claims or statements to the agencies .

the act's legislative history suggests that congress intended the pfcra to remedy the "small - dollar cases" of fraud that the department of justice ( doj ) had declined to pursue in court because of litigation costs .

thus , an agency may not use the administrative process contained in the pfcra when the amount of money , property , or services demanded in a claim ( or group of related claims ) exceeds $150,000 .

the pfcra shares some structural similarities with the fca .

like the fca , it allows for the imposition of civil penalties on violators for false claims or statements , as well as an assessment on violators when the government has paid the claim .

as with the fca , liability under the pfcra requires no specific intent to defraud , and thus a party may violate the fca when it acts with reckless disregard of a claim or statement's truth or falsity .

however , unlike the fca , the pfcra establishes a mostly administrative process for recovery of civil remedies rather than a judicial one .

the pfcra provides for agency officials to investigate and review allegations of false claims or statements and ultimately requires the approval of a certain official from doj for the case to be referred to an administrative law judge or other hearing officer .

the act provides the person alleged to be liable with notice and the opportunity for a hearing on the record .

the agency must prove its allegations by a preponderance of the evidence .

a decision on liability or damages by the hearing officer may be appealed to the agency head within 30 days after the hearing officer issues a written decision , and , ultimately , to federal district court within 60 days of the agency head's decision .

few federal agencies use the pfcra , according to a recent study by the government accountability office ( gao ) .

the study found that from fy2006 through fy2010 , five civilian agencies referred 141 cases to doj for approval .

of these cases , the u.s. department of housing and urban development referred 135 , or 96 percent .

a 2008 report by the national procurement fraud task force recommended several reforms to the pfcra designed to increase its use by federal agencies and its effectiveness at deterring fraud .

these reforms include incentivizing agencies to use the pfcra by increasing the act's jurisdictional cap to $500,000 and the civil penalty limit to $15,000 ; allowing agencies to retain recovered funds instead of depositing them into the treasury miscellaneous receipts account ; and simplifying the act's procedural requirements .

this section briefly considers two recent regulatory developments that may affect contractors' potential exposure to civil liability and / or damages under the fca .

among other things , the mandatory disclosure rule allows an agency to suspend or debar a contractor for failing to timely disclose to the government certain violations of federal law related to a contract or subcontract , including violations of the fca .

generally , the presumed loss rule states that when a business willfully misrepresents its size or status in order to obtain certain small business contracting preferences , there is a presumption that the united states has suffered losses equal to the amount that the government has spent on the contract .

preventing contractor fraud without deterring contractors' willingness to compete for government contracts poses a challenge for the federal government because fraud takes a variety of forms and can be difficult to detect and prosecute with limited resources .

several federal statutes allow the federal government — and in some instances , private parties — to recover damages , civil penalties , or forfeitures for false or fraudulent claims for payment and other misconduct .

some members of congress , courts , and others have continued to debate the proper scope of liability under these civil fraud statutes .

congress may enact laws that alter the scope of these statutes and , at least with respect to the fca , has done so many times .

much of the debate about the scope of fraud statutes has focused on the fca , the federal government's primary civil fraud remedy .

two recent court - created theories have further expanded the scope of defendants' liability under the fca — a statute which the supreme court has characterized as imposing "damages that are essentially punitive in nature. .

some commentators have expressed concerns that judicial recognition of these theories could allow the government or relators to recover tort - like damages for defendants' minor breaches of contract .

however , some of the courts that recognize these theories have limited their use by strictly enforcing the fca's mental state requirement ; the heightened pleading requirements for fraud allegations under federal rule of civil procedure 9 ( b ) ; or some form of materiality requirement .

other recent regulatory and judicial developments may also affect contractors' potential exposure to civil liability and damages under the fca .

contractors' submission of fraudulent claims during the contract disputes process poses additional challenges for the government .

federal statutory civil remedies for this type of contractor fraud exist as a condition of the government's waiver of its sovereign immunity from suit , and as a means of deterring fraud against federal agencies that lack the resources to thoroughly evaluate contractor claims that may have been submitted in an effort to extract a settlement offer from the government .

fair resolution of contract disputes by courts , including resolution of government counterclaims alleging fraud , helps ensure that contractors will continue to compete for the government's business .

