federal law classifies marijuana as a schedule i controlled substance .

as a result , it is a federal crime to grow , sell , or merely possess the drug .

in addition to facing the prospect of a federal criminal prosecution , those who violate the federal controlled substances act ( csa ) may suffer a number of additional adverse consequences under federal law .

for example , federal authorities may confiscate any property used to grow marijuana or facilitate its sale or use ; marijuana users may lose their jobs , their homes , or their right to possess a firearm or ammunition ; and sellers of marijuana may lose the tax benefits and banking services that other merchants enjoy , and ultimately their businesses .

nevertheless , without federal statutory sanction , more than 20 states have established medical marijuana regulatory regimes .

four have gone further and "legalized" marijuana under state recreational marijuana laws .

state officials lack the constitutional authority necessary to trump conflicting federal law .

federal officials , however , lack the unlimited resources necessary to trump the impact of conflicting state law .

the following is an analysis of some of the legal issues the situation has generated and some of the proposals to resolve them .

federal regulation of the drugs , chemicals , and plants now considered controlled substances began with the harrison narcotics act of 1914 .

relying upon its constitutional power to tax , regulate commerce , and implement the nation's treaty obligations , congress used the legislation to establish a system under which it taxed lawful medicinal use and proscribed abuse .

little more than two decades later , congress supplemented the harrison act with the marihuana tax act of 1937 , explicitly noting reliance on its tax , commerce , and territorial powers .

the marihuana act replicated the harrison act's procedures in large measure and adopted by cross - reference the harrison act's penalty structure .

it became apparent over time , however , that the marihuana act served no real revenue purpose and in fact had "become , in effect , solely a criminal law imposing sanctions upon persons who [sold] , acquire[d] , or possess[ed] marihuana. .

this proved problematic when , in the late 1960s , the supreme court pointed out the fifth amendment difficulties inherent in a tax - based enforcement structure like that of the harrison and marihuana tax acts .

the court in marchetti observed that a gambler's "obligations to register and to pay the [federal] occupational tax created ... real and appreciable ... hazards of self - incrimination" under federal and state anti - gambling laws .

the same day , in haynes , it held that by the same token "the constitutional privilege against self - incrimination provides a full defense to prosecutions either for failure to register a firearm ... or for possession of an unregistered firearm" under the tax - based structure of the national firearms act .

finally , in lea r y , it struck closer to home .

there , it held that the fifth amendment privilege against self - incrimination provided a full defense to a charge of transporting marijuana acquired without paying the marihuana tax act transfer tax .

within months , the senate judiciary committee reported out a commerce clause / treaty - based controlled substances proposal that featured most of the components ultimately found in the controlled substances act .

it classified marijuana with the most tightly regulated substances in schedule i , but punished its abuse less severely , explaining in its critique of an earlier proposal that [t]o impose the same high mandatory minimum penalties for marihuana - related offenses as for lsd and heroin offenses is inequitable in the face of a considerable amount of evidence that marihuana is significantly less harmful and dangerous than lsd or heroin .

it had also become apparent that the severity of penalties including the length of sentences does not affect the extent of drug abuse and other drug - related violations .

the basic consideration here was that the increasingly longer sentences that had been legislated in the past had not shown the expected overall reduction in drug law violations .

the opposite had been true notably in the case of marihuana .

under federal law and under many states laws marihuana violations carry the same strict penalties that are applicable to hard narcotics , yet marijuana violations have almost doubled in the last 2 years alone .

in addition , the severe drug laws specifically as applied to marihuana have helped create a serious clash between segments of the youth generation and the government .

these youths consider the marihuana laws hypocritical and unjust .

because of these laws the marihuana issue has contributed to the broader problem of alienation of youth from the general society and to a general feeling of disrespect for the law and judicial process .

consistent with this view , it called for the establishment of a study commission to examine and make recommendations on the troubling marijuana - related issues .

the commission's final report recommended the legalization of possession of marijuana for private personal use , but that the controlled substance act otherwise remain unchanged .

to what extent does the csa trump or preempt state medical and recreational marijuana laws ? .

the preemption doctrine stands at the threshold of the federal - state marijuana debate .

the preemption doctrine is grounded in the supremacy clause of article vi , cl .

2 , which states that "[t]he constitution , and the laws of the united states which shall be made in pursuance thereof ; and all treaties made ... under the authority of the united states , shall be the supreme law of the land. .

the supremacy clause , therefore , "elevates" the u.s. constitution , federal statutes , federal regulations , and treaties above the laws of the states .

as a result , where federal and state law are in conflict , the state law is generally preempted , leaving it void and without effect .

preemption is a matter of congress's choice when it operates within its constitutionally enumerated powers .

in some instances , congress has exercised its authority so pervasively as to preclude the possibility of state activity within the same legislative field .

on the other hand , where congress prefers the co - existence of state and federal law , state law must give way only when it conflicts with federal law in either of two ways: ( 1 ) if it is "physically impossible" to comply with both the state and federal law ( "impossibility preemption" ) ; or ( 2 ) if the state law "stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of congress" ( "obstacle preemption" ) .

what constitutes an obstacle for preemption purposes is a matter "to be informed by examining the federal statute as a whole and identifying its purpose and intended effects. .

when congress acts within an area traditionally within the purview of the states , it will be assumed not to have intended to give its words preemptive force unless a contrary purpose is manifestly clear .

the controlled substances act contains an explicit statement of the extent of congress's preemptive intent .

section 903 provides that no provision of this subchapter shall be construed as indicating an intent on the part of the congress to occupy the field in which that provision operates , including criminal penalties , to the exclusion of any state law on the same subject matter which would otherwise be within the authority of the state , unless there is a positive conflict between that provision of this subchapter and that state law so that the two cannot consistently stand together .

several state courts have addressed the preemption challenges to state medical marijuana laws with mixed results .

for example , appellate courts in colorado , california , and michigan have concluded that at least some aspects of the medical marijuana laws in those states survive both impossibility and obstacle preemption analysis .

in two instances , they have held that the language in section 903 evidences an intent to preempt state laws only under impossibility preemption and not under obstacle preemption .

the colorado case , people v. crouse , arose when a defendant , acquitted of cultivation charges on the basis of immunity under the state medical marijuana law , petitioned the trial court to order police to return marijuana plants they had seized in connection with his prosecution .

the state questioned whether the csa precluded such an action .

the court of appeals of colorado determined that a state marijuana law is only in "positive conflict" with the csa when it is "physically impossible" to simultaneously comply with the state and federal law .

it held that in order to preempt the csa section 903 "demands more than that the state law 'stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution' of the federal law.' .

thus , the language of the csa "cannot be used to preempt a state law under the obstacle preemption doctrine. .

the decision in crouse adopted the reasoning of county of san diego v. san diego norml , a california state court decision that also determined that obstacle preemption should not be applied in determining whether a state marijuana law is preempted by the csa .

in both instances , however , the court supplied an alternative , obstacle preemption explanation .

in crouse , the court noted section 885 ( d ) of the csa "carves out a specific exemption for distribution of controlled substances by law enforcement officers. .

thus , if the officers returned ( "distributed" ) the marijuana to crouse they would not be obstructing the csa but acting in a manner which it authorized .

in san diego norml , the california law required local governments to issue medical marijuana cards to qualified applicants .

in the eyes of the california appellate court , the medical marijuana statute posed no obstacle to the csa , because "[t]he purpose of the csa is to combat recreational drug use , not to regulate a state's medical practices. .

the michigan case , beek v. city of wyoming , involved a wyoming city property owner and medical marijuana registrant who sought a declarative judgment against a city ordinance which proscribed the use of his property in a manner contrary to federal law including the csa .

beek argued that the michigan medical marihuana act ( mmma ) , which immunized an individual's cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes , invalidated the city ordinance .

the city argued that the csa preempted the mmma .

the michigan supreme court held that the csa did not preempt the mmma , but also that the ordinance must yield to the mmma .

as understood by the court , the mmma escaped impossibility preemption because it was permissive and therefore did not command the performance of an act prohibited by federal law: "impossibility results when state law requires what federal law forbids , or vice versa. .

the mmma escaped obstacle preemption because it merely conveyed immunity from the consequences of state law: "the mmma's limited state - law immunity for [medical marijuana] use does not frustrate the csa's operation nor refuse its provisions their natural effect , such that its purpose cannot otherwise be accomplished.... [t]his immunity does not purport to alter the csa's federal criminalization of marijuana , or to interfere with or undermine federal enforcement of that prohibition. .

the oregon supreme court understood obstacle preemption a little differently in emerald steel .

state regulators had charged emerald steel with disability discrimination for firing an employee for medical marijuana use .

the oregon court concluded , based on its interpretation of u.s. supreme court precedent , that "[a]ffirmatively authorizing a use that federal law prohibits stands as an obstacle to the implementation and execution of the full purposes and objectives of the controlled substances act. .

thus , "[t]o the extent that [the oregon statute] affirmatively authorizes the use of medical marijuana , federal law preempts that subsection leaving it without effect. .

the continued viability of emerald steel may be open to question .

while the oregon supreme court has not overturned its earlier decision , it has observed in willis that emerald steel 's "affirmative authorization" obstacle preemption test may have been an overgeneralization: " emerald steel should not be construed as announcing a stand - alone rule that any state law that can be viewed as 'affirmatively authorizing' what federal law prohibits is preempted .

rather it reflects this court's attempt to apply the federal rule and the logic of the most relevant federal cases to the particular preemption problem that was before it .

and particularly where , as here , the issue of whether the statute contains an affirmative authorization is not straightforward , the analysis in emerald steel cannot operate as a simple stand - in for the more general federal rule. .

finally , in what is one of the few reported statements by a federal court relating to preemption of state marijuana laws , in in re: rent - rite super kegs west ltd , a bankruptcy court noted ( in what was clearly dicta ) that "conflict preemption is not an issue here .

colorado constitutional amendments for both medical marijuana , and the more recent amendment legalizing marijuana possession and usage generally , both make it clear that their provisions apply to state law only .

absent from either enactment is any effort to impede the enforcement of federal law. .

other colorable constitutional issues involving the csa and state medical or recreational marijuana statutes have arisen on a number of occasions .

the supreme court resolved one of them when it found that congress's constitutional authority to regulate interstate and foreign commerce enabled it to craft the csa so as to categorically outlaw the cultivation and possession of marijuana .

congress's commerce clause authority , however , does not include the power to compel a state legislature to act at its bidding or a state official to enforce its will .

from time to time , medical marijuana litigants have invoked this limitation in an effort to shield themselves from the csa .

because the csa makes no demands of state legislatures or officials , those efforts have been to no avail .

the related tenth amendment argument that the csa intrudes upon those police powers reserved to the states has enjoyed no greater success .

of course , the purported exercise of an explicit constitutional power such as the commerce clause will be defeated , if the exercise is beyond the scope of the asserted power or is contrary to some other explicit or implicit constitutional limitation .

in the case of the fundamental rights of the people , the tenth amendment , the ninth amendment , and the substantive due process components of the fifth and fourteenth amendments all impose limits on the federal or state legislative powers .

here too , litigants generally have been unable to convince the courts that the limitations entitle them to relief .

tenth amendment reservations with respect to the rights of the people disappear once it is established that the constitution has expressly delegated a power to the united states , as in the case of the necessary and proper clause and the csa .

a limitation on intrusion upon the rights of the people , however , may flow from the ninth amendment and the due process clauses' implicit prohibition on governmental encroachment on a fundamental right .

fundamental rights are those "deeply rooted in this nation's history and tradition , and implicit in the concept of ordered liberty , such that neither liberty nor justice would exist if they were sacrificed. .

the courts have thus far declined to find such a fundamental right in the possession , use , or cultivation of marijuana , even for medicinal purposes .

due process and equal protection challenges have surfaced both in cases questioning the csa and those contesting application of the various state marijuana laws .

at the federal level , several courts have rejected the suggestion that the government is estopped from enforcing the csa by virtue of misleading or inconsistent statements in the ogden memorandum and elsewhere .

some of these same cases have rejected the contention that placement of marijuana in schedule i of the csa is irrational and consequently constitutes a violation of equal protection .

municipal zoning or land use ordinances set the stage for most of the state marijuana - related due process cases .

state laws vary as to whether municipalities may ban or restrict marijuana - related activities within their jurisdictions .

where they may do so , the regulatory scheme must comply with due process requirements .

the federal banking laws are designed to shield financial institutions from individuals and entities that deal in controlled substances .

congress has crafted several of them to enlist financial institutions in the investigation and prosecution of those who violate the csa .

as a consequence , medical marijuana providers have experienced difficulty securing banking services .

on february 14 , 2014 , the department of justice and the treasury department's financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) issued guidance with respect to marijuana - related financial crimes .

fincen's guidance specifically addresses the obligations to file suspicious activity reports ( sars ) .

banks must file sars with fincen relating to any transaction involving $5,000 or more that they have reason to suspect are derived from illegal activity .

willful failure to do so is punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years ( not more than 10 years in cases of a substantial pattern of violations or transactions involving other illegal activity ) .

breaking up a transaction into two or more transactions to avoid the reporting requirement subjects the offender to the same 5 / 10 year maximum terms of imprisonment .

banks must also establish and maintain anti - money laundering programs , designed to ensure that bank officers and employees will have sufficient knowledge of the banks' customers and of the business of those customers to identify the circumstances under which filing sars is appropriate .

suspicion aside , banks must file currency transaction reports ( ctrs ) with fincen relating to transactions involving $10,000 or more in cash .

willful failure to do so is punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years ( not more than 10 years in cases of a substantial pattern of violations or transactions involving other illegal activity ) .

again , structuring a transaction to avoid the reporting requirement exposes the offender to the same 5 / 10 year maximum terms of imprisonment .

banks , their officers , employees , and customers may also face criminal liability under the money laundering statutes for marijuana - related financial transactions .

section 1957 makes it a federal crime to deposit or withdraw $10,000 or more in proceeds derived from the distribution of marijuana and any other controlled substances .

section 1956 makes it a federal crime to engage in a financial transaction involving such proceeds conducted with an eye to promoting further offenses , for example , by withdrawing marijuana - generated funds in order to pay the salaries of medical marijuana dispensary employees .

section 1956 violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years .

section 1957 violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 10 years .

conspiracy to violate either section carries the same maximum penalties , as does aiding and abetting the commission of either offense .

moreover , any real or personal property involved in , or traceable to , a transaction proscribed by either statute is subject to confiscation under either civil or criminal forfeiture .

federally insured state - and federally chartered depository institutions that engage in illegal or unsafe banking practices also run the risk of being assessed civil money penalties and even losing deposit insurance coverage , which would result in the termination of their status as an insured depository institution .

in its recent guidance , fincen addressed banks' sar reporting requirements .

fincen began its guidance by emphasizing the point made in the accompanying 2014 cole memorandum , that the justice department's investigation and prosecution of financial crimes would be focused on activities that conflict with any of several federal priorities: preventing the distribution of marijuana to minors ; preventing revenue from the sale of marijuana from going to criminal enterprises , gangs , and cartels ; preventing the diversion of marijuana from states where it is legal under state law in some form to other states ; preventing state - authorized marijuana activity from being used as a cover or pretext for the trafficking of other illegal drugs or other illegal activity ; preventing violence and the use of firearms in cultivation and distribution of marijuana ; preventing drugged driving and the exacerbation of other adverse public health consequences associated with marijuana use ; preventing the growing of marijuana on public lands and attendant public safety and environmental dangers posed by marijuana production on public lands ; and preventing marijuana possession or use on federal property .

fincen advised financial institutions that in providing services to a marijuana - related business they must file one of three forms of special sars: a marijuana limited sar , a marijuana priority sar ; or a marijuana termination sar .

the marijuana limited sar is appropriate when the bank determines , after the exercise of due diligence , that its customer is not engaged in any of the activities that violate state law or that would implicate any of the justice department investigation and prosecution priorities listed in the 2014 cole memorandum .

a marijuana priority sar must be filed when the bank believes its customer is engaged in such activities .

a bank files a marijuana termination sar when it finds it necessary to sever its relationship with a customer in order to maintain an effective anti - money laundering program .

fincen also provides examples of "red flags" that may indicate that a marijuana priority sar is appropriate: the business is unable to produce satisfactory documentation or evidence to demonstrate that it is duly licensed and operating consistently with state law .

the business is unable to demonstrate the legitimate source of significant outside investments .

a customer seeks to conceal or disguise involvement in marijuana - related business activity .

for example , the customer may be using a business with a non - descript name ( eg , a "consulting," "holding," or "management" company ) that purports to engage in commercial activity unrelated to marijuana , but is depositing cash that smells like marijuana .

review of publicly available sources and databases about the business , its owner ( s ) , manager ( s ) , or other related parties , reveal negative information , such as a criminal record , involvement in the illegal purchase or sale of drugs , violence , or other potential connections to illicit activity .

the business , its owner ( s ) , manager ( s ) , or other related parties are , or have been , subject to an enforcement action by the state or local authorities responsible for administering or enforcing marijuana - related laws or regulations .

a marijuana - related business engages in international or interstate activity , including by receiving cash deposits from locations outside the state in which the business operates , making or receiving frequent or large interstate transfers , or otherwise transacting with persons or entities located in different states or countries .

the owner ( s ) or manager ( s ) of a marijuana - related business reside outside the state in which the business is located .

a marijuana - related business is located on federal property or the marijuana sold by the business was grown on federal property .

a marijuana - related business's proximity to a school is not compliant with state law .

a marijuana - related business purporting to be a "non - profit" is engaged in commercial activity inconsistent with that classification , or is making excessive payments to its manager ( s ) or employee ( s ) .

a customer appears to be using a state - licensed marijuana - related business as a front or pretext to launder money derived from other criminal activity ( i.e. , not related to marijuana ) or derived from marijuana - related activity not permitted under state law .

relevant indicia could include the following: the business receives substantially more revenue than may reasonably be expected given the relevant limitations imposed by the state in which it operates .

the business receives substantially more revenue than its local competitors or than might be expected given the population demographics .

the business is depositing more cash than is commensurate with the amount of marijuana - related revenue it is reporting for federal and state tax purposes .

the business is unable to demonstrate that its revenue is derived exclusively from the sale of marijuana in compliance with state law , as opposed to revenue derived from ( i ) the sale of other illicit drugs , ( ii ) the sale of marijuana not in compliance with state law , or ( iii ) other illegal activity .

the business makes cash deposits or withdrawals over a short period of time that are excessive relative to local competitors or the expected activity of the business .

deposits apparently structured to avoid currency transaction report ( "ctr" ) requirements .

rapid movement of funds , such as cash deposits followed by immediate cash withdrawals .

deposits by third parties with no apparent connection to the account holder .

excessive commingling of funds with the personal account of the business's owner ( s ) or manager ( s ) , or with accounts of seemingly unrelated businesses .

individuals conducting transactions for the business appear to be acting on behalf of other , undisclosed parties of interest .

financial statements provided by the business to the financial institution are inconsistent with actual account activity .

a surge in activity by third parties offering goods or services to marijuana - related businesses , such as equipment suppliers or shipping servicers. .

the fincen guidance ends with the observation that a bank is not absolved of its obligation to file a currency transaction report for any financial transaction involving more than $10,000 in cash , regardless of how it resolves its marijuana sar obligations .

rule 1.2 ( d ) of the american bar association's model rules of professional conduct , adopted in virtually every jurisdiction , states that "a lawyer shall not counsel a client to engage , or assist a client , in conduct that the lawyer knows is criminal or fraudulent , but a lawyer may discuss the legal consequences of any proposed course of conduct with a client and may counsel or assist a client to make a good - faith effort to determine the validity , scope , meaning or application of the law. .

bar officials in several states — arizona , colorado , connecticut , maine , and washington , among them — have issued ethics opinions addressing ethical constraints arising out of the conflict between state and federal marijuana laws .

the arizona state bar concluded in opinion 11-01that the ogden memorandum had created a "safe harbor" for those that operated within the confines of the state's medical marijuana statute .

in its view , arizona lawyers may counsel and assist their clients in any activity permitted under the arizona medical marijuana law as long as their clients were made fully aware of the consequences under federal law .

in contrast , opinion 199 of the maine professional ethics commission advised attorneys that , absent an amendment to either the rules of professional conduct or the csa , a member of the maine bar "may counsel or assist a client in making good faith efforts to determine the validity , scope , meaning or application of the law," but "the rule forbids attorneys from counseling a client to engage in the [marijuana] business or to assist a client in doing so. .

the commission declined to provide more specific advice , but warned that significant risks attended practice in the area .

the connecticut bar association offered much the same advice .

lawyers may advise their clients about the features of the state medical marijuana statute , but they may not assist clients in a violation of the csa .

while the arizona , maine , and connecticut opinions are relatively general and relatively terse , the colorado opinion provides far more examples of its view of the permissible and impermissible .

it concluded that , consistent with rule 1.2 ( d ) and the csa , a colorado attorney might ( 1 ) represent and advise a client concerning the consequences of marijuana - related activities for purposes of criminal law , family law , or labor law ; ( 2 ) as a government attorney advise a client in a matter involving the establishing , interpreting , enforcing , or amending zoning relations , local ordinances , or legislation ; or ( 3 ) advise a client on the tax obligations incurred when cultivating or selling marijuana .

it concluded , on the other hand , that a colorado attorney may not ( 1 ) draft or negotiate contracts , leases , or other agreements to facilitate the cultivation , distribution , or consumption of marijuana ; or ( 2 ) provide tax planning assistance with an eye to violating federal law .

the opinion points out that providing such assistance while aware of a client's intent is "likely to constitute aiding and abetting the violation of or conspiracy to violate federal law. .

washington state attorneys have the advantage of not one , but two bar advisories .

both take a position similar to the arizona opinion: attorneys transgress no ethical boundaries if their professional conduct is consistent with state law and perhaps with federal enforcement priorities .

the bar association of king county ( seattle and environs ) opined that an attorney who advises and assists a client to establish and maintain a marijuana dispensary is not subject to discipline , as long as his client's conduct is permitted under state marijuana law and as long as he makes his client aware of the provisions of the csa including the cole memorandum .

moreover , in the opinion of the king county bar association , an attorney is likewise not subject to discipline merely because he owns an interest in a marijuana dispensary .

although such activity may constitute a crime under the csa , it is not "a criminal act that reflects adversely on the lawyer's honesty , trustworthiness or fitness as a lawyer," in the eyes of the county bar association .

the second washington opinion is a proposed advisory opinion which the washington state bar association submitted to the washington supreme court along with a proposal to add a comment to rule 1.2 of the washington rules of professional conduct .

in its proposed opinion , a lawyer would be free to advise a client as to the nuances of state marijuana law as long as he did not do so in furtherance of an effort to violate or mask a violation of state marijuana law .

a lawyer would also be free to advise and assist a client to establish and maintain a dispensary within the bounds of state law at least until such time as federal enforcement policies change .

finally , under the proposed opinion and accompanying proposed comment , a lawyer would be free to engage in a marijuana business without offending the rule that condemns criminal conduct that reflects adversely on a lawyer's fitness to practice .

the federal government retains strict controls over the use of marijuana for research purposes .

under the csa , the attorney general , as delegated to the drug enforcement agency , is authorized to register "practitioners" to "dispense , or conduct research with" controlled substances .

in instances where the practitioner seeks to conduct research on a schedule i drug , such as marijuana , that application is forwarded to the secretary of health and human services "who shall determine the qualifications and competency of each practitioner requesting registration , as well as the merits of the research protocol. .

the secretary is also directed to "consult" with the attorney general to ensure "effective procedures to adequately safeguard against diversion of such controlled substances from legitimate medical or scientific use. .

as of may 2014 , the dea has registered approximately 237 practitioners to conduct marijuana research , including 16 "approved to conduct research with smoked marijuana on human subjects. .

practitioners obtain marijuana for approved research through the national institute on drug abuse ( nida ) drug supply program .

under the csa , the attorney general is authorized to register applicants to manufacture or grow marijuana "if he determines that such registration is consistent with the public interest and with united states obligations under international treaties ..." currently , the national center for natural products research ( ncnpr ) at the university of mississippi is the only organization registered to manufacture marijuana .

nida administers the federal contract with the ncnpr and therefore acts as the "single official source" through which researchers may obtain marijuana for research purposes .

several statutory provisions were enacted late in the 113 th congress and a number of legislative proposals have been introduced in the 114 th concerning marijuana and state legalization initiatives .

p.l .

113-235 §809 ( b ) , 2015 consolidated and further continuing appropriations act .

this provision was enacted with the apparent attempt of preventing the implementation of initiative 71 , d.c.'s recreational marijuana law .

however , there is some uncertainty regarding the legal effect of the provision .

it states: "[n]one of the funds contained in this act may be used to enact any law , rule , or regulation to legalize or otherwise reduce penalties associated with the possession , use , or distribution of any schedule i substance under the controlled substances act ( 21 u.s.c .

801 , et seq. ) .

or any tetrahydrocannabinols derivative for recreational purposes. .

some argue that this provision bars d.c. employees from using fy2015 appropriated funds to implement initiative 71 and that any employee who takes official acts to implement the law could be subject to civil or criminal liability under the antideficiency act .

others , including d.c.'s attorney general , argue that the provision does "not prevent the district from using fy15 appropriated local funds to implement initiative 71" because the marijuana law was enacted before the enactment of the 2015 consolidated and further continuing appropriations act .

p.l .

113-79 ( h.r .

2642 ) , agricultural act of 2014 .

this public law has two marijuana - related sections .

one relates to the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) ( formerly , food stamps ) , and the other relates to industrial hemp .

eligibility for the receipt of snap benefits is governed in part by a means test .

only individuals below a certain income level are eligible .

section 4005 of p.l .

113-79 ( 7 u.s.c .

§2014 ( e ) ( 5 ) ( c ) ) instructs the secretary of agriculture to promulgate rules to ensure that the costs of medical marijuana are not treated as a deduction in that calculation .

section 7606 of p.l .

113-79 authorizes institutions of higher education and state departments of agriculture to grow and cultivate industrial hemp for research purposes .

p.l .

113-235 §538 , 2015 consolidated and further continuing appropriations act .

this provision prohibits the department of justice from using fy2015 appropriated funds "to prevent [32 listed states and the district of columbia] from implementing their own state laws that authorize the use , distribution , possession , or cultivation of medical marijuana. .

there appears to be disagreement regarding the breadth of this appropriations language .

the department of justice reportedly argues that it only prevents the department from using appropriations to restrict a named state's administrative implementation of state medical marijuana laws .

others maintain that it should be interpreted much more broadly to even bar the department from enforcing the csa against individuals who were acting in compliance with a named state's medical marijuana laws .

s. 683 / h.r .

1538 , compassionate access , research expansion , and respect of states act of 2015 .

this bill , also referred to as the carers act , would exempt from the csa "any person acting in compliance with state law relating to the production , possession , distribution , dispensation , administration , laboratory testing , or delivery of medical marihuana. .

it also would reclassify marijuana as a schedule ii substance , meaning that marijuana would be recognized under federal law as having medical benefits and could be prescribed to patients for legitimate medical reasons in accordance with the csa .

the carers act also would provide legal protections to depository institutions ( i.e. , banks , thrifts , and credit unions ) that provide financial services to marijuana businesses , including by adding a provision stating that "[a] federal banking regulator may not prohibit , penalize , or otherwise discourage a depository institution from providing financial services to a marijuana - related legitimate business" ( i.e. , one that is in compliance with a state or local marijuana regulatory regime ) .

the bill also would attempt to further alleviate bsa reporting burdens beyond that which is provided by the february 2014 fincen guidance discussed above .

the bill also would attempt to make it easier for individuals to be able to conduct research on marijuana and for entities to obtain approval from the drug enforcement agency to cultivate marijuana for medical research use .

finally , section 8 of the carers act would authorize department of veterans affairs health care providers to offer recommendations and opinions regarding veterans' use of marijuana in compliance with state medical and recreational marijuana regimes .

s. 134 / h.r .

525 , industrial hemp farming act of 2015 .

this bill would remove industrial hemp from the definition of "marihuana" under the csa .

h.r .

262 , states' medical marijuana property rights protection act .

this bill would amend the civil forfeiture provisions of the csa to provide that no real property may be subject to civil forfeiture to the united states due to medical marijuana - related activities that are performed in compliance with state law .

h.r .

667 , veterans equal access act .

this bill would authorize department of veterans affairs health care providers to offer recommendations and opinions regarding veterans' use of marijuana in compliance with state medical and recreational marijuana regimes .

h.r .

1013 , regulate marijuana like alcohol act .

this bill , among other things , would require the attorney general to remove marijuana from all schedules of the csa and would amend other federal laws to regulate marijuana like alcohol .

h.r .

1014 , marijuana tax revenue act of 2015 .

this bill would amend the internal revenue code to impose an excise tax on the sale of marijuana by the producer or importer of the drug , at a rate of 10% for the first two years after the law goes into effect and increasing by 5% each year until maxing out at 25% from the fifth year on .

the bill would provide certain exemptions to the taxation , including "on the distribution or sale of marijuana for medical use in accordance with state law. .

in addition , the bill would require anyone engaged in a "marijuana enterprise" to pay an occupational tax of $1,000 per year for marijuana producers , manufacturers and importers , and $500 per year for other marijuana enterprisers .

the bill would require all marijuana enterprises to obtain a permit from the secretary of the treasury .

finally , the bill would impose civil and criminal penalties for violation of the duty to pay the new marijuana - related taxes , engaging in business as a marijuana enterprise without obtaining the requisite permit , and for otherwise violating the provisions of the bill .

the bill does not amend the csa , thus its provisions would remain in effect .

h.r .

1635 , charlotte's web medical access act of 2015 .

this bill would remove cannabidiol and cannabidiol - rich plants from coverage under the csa and the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act , subject to a three - year sunset date from the date of enactment .

income from any source is ordinarily subject to federal taxation .

this is so even when the activity that generates the income is unlawful .

marijuana merchants , however , operate under a special federal tax disadvantage .

section 280e of the internal revenue code provides: no deduction or credit shall be allowed for any amount paid or incurred during the taxable year in carrying on any trade or business if such trade or business ( or the activities which comprise such trade or business ) consists of trafficking in controlled substances ( within the meaning of schedule i and ii of the controlled substances act ) which is prohibited by federal law or the law of any state in which such trade or business is conducted .

as a result of this provision , marijuana merchants , unlike most businesses , may not deduct their operating expenses ( eg , general labor , rent , and utilities ) when computing their federal income tax liability .

section 280e does not , however , apply to the cost of goods sold ( cogs ) , which means marijuana sellers may subtract cogs when determining gross income .

courts and the irs have interpreted section 280e to apply to marijuana so long as it is a controlled substance under the csa , regardless of whether the purchase and use are allowed under state law .

the customers of a medical marijuana merchant cannot deduct the amounts spent on marijuana as medical expenses .

