the federal budget is central to congress's ability to exercise its "power of the purse. .

federal budget decisions also express congress's priorities and reinforce congress's influence on federal policies .

making budgetary decisions for the federal government is a complex process and requires balancing competing goals .

recent economic turmoil put a strain on the federal budget due to declining revenues and increasing spending levels .

subsequently , policies enacted to restrain spending , along with a recovering economy , have improved the budget outlook , at least in the near term .

in august 2011 , budget negotiations resulted in the enactment of the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) , which contained provisions to reduce the budget deficit by about $2 trillion over the next decade .

since that time , various legislative changes to the law have lessened the impact on certain types of federal spending .

in addition , the long - term costs of federal health care programs and the effects of the baby boom generation's retirement continue to put pressure on the federal budget and have yet to be addressed .

operating these programs in their current form may pass on substantial economic burdens to future generations .

congress and the president may consider proposals for additional deficit reduction as fiscal issues may remain a key component of the legislative agenda .

this report will provide an overview of federal budget issues , focusing on recent fiscal policy changes .

it will also discuss the major policy proposals contained in the president's fy2015 budget and the house and senate budget resolutions .

finally , it also addresses major short - and long - term fiscal challenges .

this report will track legislative events related to the federal budget and will be updated as budgetary legislation moves through congress .

each fiscal year congress and the president undertake a variety of steps intended to set levels of spending and revenue and to make policy decisions .

this section provides a brief summary of the budget cycle along with an explanation of how budget baselines are constructed .

budget baselines are used to measure how legislative changes affect the budget outlook and are integral to making these policy choices .

during the 112 th and 113 th congresses , several legislative actions and events have affected the fiscal outlook .

in august 2011 , negotiations over increasing the debt limit resulted in the enactment of the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) .

subsequently , two pieces of legislation have revised this law .

first , the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ) was enacted in january 2013 to deal with numerous expiring tax provisions , the bca's across - the - board spending cuts ( i.e. , sequester ) , and other short - term considerations that were scheduled to take effect at the very end of 2012 or in early 2013 .

this combination of policies was referred to by some as the "fiscal cliff. .

during october 2013 , certain activities of the federal government ceased operation ( i.e. , shutdown ) due to a lapse in appropriations .

several months after the shutdown , the second piece of legislation modifying the bca , the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba ) , was enacted ( december 2014 ) .

it contained new discretionary spending levels for fy2014 and fy2015 replacing the old levels as prescribed by the bca .

these actions are discussed in more detail below .

the obama administration released its fy2015 budget in two parts — the first on march 4 , 2014 , and the second on march 10 , 2014 .

the president's budget lays out for congress the administration's views on national priorities and policy initiatives .

congress has also begun its consideration of the fy2015 budget .

ongoing budgetary challenges remain , which may result in congressional action .

in the short term , issues related to deficit reduction and the slow economic recovery may continue to dominate the policy debate .

over the long term , increased spending on entitlement programs , as currently structured , will likely contribute to rising deficits and debt , placing ever - increasing focus on how to achieve fiscal sustainability .

various budget issues may feature prominently in the congressional debate in the near - term .

ongoing discussions over the budget resolution , fy2015 appropriations levels , and the budget control act and related legislation may highlight the agenda .

as discussed above , the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba ) put into place new discretionary spending caps for fy2014 and fy2015 .

as the fy2015 budget and appropriations process continues , the bba levels were intended to serve as an agreement on the amount of discretionary spending to be provided for these fiscal years .

beyond that however , discretionary spending levels for fy2016 to fy2021 remain as prescribed in the bca .

therefore , it is possible that congress and the president may work to change discretionary spending levels in future years .

on september 19 , 2014 , the president signed a continuing resolution into law ( p.l .

113-164 ) providing appropriations for fy2015 through december 11 , 2014 .

further appropriations will need to be enacted on or before that date to avoid a funding lapse .

though discussions may continue over spending levels , the debate over the debt limit is not expected to resume until spring 2015 .

this is a result of legislation to suspend the debt limit , which was enacted on february 15 , 2014 , and suspends the debt limit through march 15 , 2015 ( p.l .

113-83 ) .

this is the third consecutive measure suspending the debt limit .

the economy is still recovering from the most recent recession , which lasted from december 2007 to june 2009 .

growth remains moderate , primarily due to slack in the labor and capital markets .

most economists expect unemployment rates to remain elevated for the medium term .

during the recession and for several subsequent years , the budget deficit grew largely as a result of government actions taken to combat the economic downturn as well as significantly lower revenue and higher spending levels directly attributable to the economic conditions .

cbo's projections , however , assume steady economic growth over the next 10 years , taking into account that changes in economic conditions will average out over the period .

a recession over the budget window is likely and , if it should actually occur , would temporarily worsen the deficit relative to the baseline .

in other years , an expansion could result in a lower deficit relative to the baseline .

other unforeseen events could also change the fiscal outlook .

as the economy continues to recover , revenue should remain on an upward trajectory as unemployment continues to fall and income tax collections continue to rise .

spending should stabilize due to decreased reliance on federal programs meant to provide assistance during economic downturns .

this should lead to a period of more sustainable budget deficits .

the resulting large budget deficits and high debt levels will have an effect for many years , though many argued that fiscal stimulus and other actions were needed to help the economy recover .

many budget analysts are concerned about future levels of federal debt and acknowledge that the current spending and revenue collection cannot continue at current or projected future levels .

however , significant deficit reduction at this time may be harmful to the ongoing economic recovery .

on the other hand , the longer that the country continues without a plan to stabilize its fiscal future , the more costly reform ( i.e. , more severe reductions in spending or larger increases in taxes ) may ultimately be .

in addition , the likelihood of a severe fiscal crisis caused by an unwillingness of private investors to continue financing unsustainable deficits may increase , and , if that occurs , reforms may be forced by events rather than being deliberate and planned .

occasional deficits , in and of themselves , are not necessarily problematic .

deficit spending can allow governments to smooth outlays and taxes to shield taxpayers and program beneficiaries from abrupt economic shocks in the short term , while also temporarily boosting gdp when the economy is underperforming .

persistent deficits , however , lead to growing levels of federal debt that may lead to higher interest payments and may also have adverse macroeconomic consequences in the long term , including slowing investment and lowering economic growth .

since the debt cannot grow faster than gdp indefinitely , large deficits will eventually need to be reduced through increases in taxes , reductions in spending , or both .

the federal government faces long - term budget challenges .

some measures of fiscal solvency in the long term indicate that , under current policy , the united states faces major future imbalance , specifically as it relates to rising health care costs and the likely impact on government - financed health care spending .

even as congress and the president worked to enact deficit reduction legislation ( i.e. , the bca ) , legislators are seen not to have made significant changes to the part of the budget that is projected to grow .

therefore , many budget analysts believe that additional savings are required to put the budget on a sustainable path over the long term .

further , over the last two years , many of those deficit reduction provisions have been softened .

under the current law baseline , deficits continue to be projected over the budget window .

cbo , gao , and the administration agree that the current mix of federal fiscal policies is unsustainable in the long term .

the nation's aging population , combined with rising health care costs per beneficiary , may keep federal health costs rising faster than per capita gdp .

cbo projected in september 2013 that under current policy , federal spending on federal health programs ( including medicare , medicaid , chip , and exchange subsidies ) would grow from 4.7% of gdp today to 7.6% of gdp in 2035 , and 13.5% by 2085 .

the 2013 economic report of the president also projected that future federal spending on medicare and medicaid would rise significantly under current law projections .

though these forecasts are highly uncertain , it seems probable that spending on these programs will rise as a share of gdp over time .

in addition , growing debt and rising interest rates are projected to consume a greater share of future federal spending .

under current law , cbo projects that spending to finance the federal debt will grow rapidly from 1.3% of gdp today , to 4.5% of gdp in fy2035 , and 11.4% of gdp in fy2085 .

gao's recent long - term fiscal simulations , under an alternative policy scenario , projected that debt held by the public as a share of gdp would exceed the post - world war ii historical high in about 15 years .

keeping future federal outlays at 20% of gdp , or approximately at its historical average , and leaving fiscal policies unchanged , according to cbo projections , would require drastic reductions in all spending other than that for medicare , social security , and medicaid , or reining in the costs of these programs .

as shown in table 3 below , under cbo's extended baseline , maintaining the debt to gdp ratio at today's level ( 73% ) through fy2038 would require an immediate and permanent cut in non - interest spending or revenues or some combination of the two in the amount of 0.9% of gdp ( or about $150 billion in fy2014 alone ) in each year .

maintaining this debt - to - gdp ratio beyond fy2038 would require additional savings .

if policy makers wanted to lower future debt levels relative to today , the annual spending reductions or revenue increases would have to be larger .

for example , in order to bring debt as a percentage of gdp in fy2038 down to the same level it was in fy2008 ( 39% of gdp ) , spending reductions or revenue increases or some combination of the two would need to total roughly 2.1% of gdp ( or $360 billion in fy2014 alone ) in each year .

as the economic recovery continues , congress may focus more effort on reducing the deficit and reining in the debt .

this would require less spending , more revenue , faster - than - average economic growth , or a combination of these things .

debt requires interest payments that can strain budgets if debt levels and interest rates are high .

high debt levels could limit the government's flexibility in meeting its obligations or in responding to emerging needs of its citizens .

ultimately , failing to take action to reduce the projected growth in the debt might lead to future insolvency .

cbo documents the congressional budget office ( cbo ) provides data and analysis to congress throughout the budget and appropriations process .

each january , cbo issues a budget and economic outlook that contains current - law baseline estimates of outlays and revenues .

in march , cbo typically issues an analysis of the president's budget submission with revised baseline estimates and projections .

these documents can be delayed as a result of the legislative agenda or if the president's budget is off schedule .

in late summer , cbo issues an updated budget and economic outlook with new baseline projections .

in these documents , cbo sets a current - law baseline as a benchmark to evaluate whether legislative proposals would increase or decrease outlays and revenue collection .

baseline estimates are not intended to predict likely future outcomes , but to show what spending and revenues would be if current law remained in effect .

cbo typically evaluates the budgetary consequences of legislative proposals and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) evaluates the consequences of revenue proposals .

cbo also releases other periodic publications focusing on the future fiscal health of the united states .

in their publication , the long - term budget outlook , cbo makes projections on the state of the federal budget over the next 75 years .

they discuss spending and revenue levels and the related issues that they expect will arise under different policy assumptions .

in their budget options volumes , they provide specific policy options and the impact they will have on spending and revenues over a 10-year budget window .

they also provide arguments for and against enacting each policy .

omb documents the president's budget contains five major volumes: ( 1 ) the budget ; ( 2 ) historical tables ; ( 3 ) analytical perspectives ; ( 4 ) appendix ; and ( 5 ) supplemental materials .

these documents lay out the administration's projections of the fiscal outlook for the country , along with spending levels proposed for each of the federal government's departments and programs .

the historical tables volume also provides significant amounts of budget data , much of which extends back to 1962 or earlier .

along with the administration's budget documents , the department of the treasury also releases its green book , which provides further detail on the revenue proposals that are contained in the budget .

