beginning in summer 2013 , media reports of foreign intelligence activities conducted by the national security agency ( nsa ) have been published and are apparently based on unauthorized disclosures of classified information by edward snowden , a former nsa contractor .

the reports have focused on two main nsa collection activities conducted under the auspices of the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) of 1978 .

the first is the bulk collection of telephony metadata for domestic and international telephone calls .

the second involves the interception of internet - based communications and is targeted at foreigners who are not within the united states , but may also inadvertently acquire the communications of u.s. persons .

this report provides a description of these two programs and the various constitutional challenges that have arisen in judicial forums with respect to each .

although a brief overview of the constitutional arguments and issues raised in the assorted cases is included , a detailed analysis or evaluation of those arguments is beyond the scope of this report .

as both programs make use of authorities provided under fisa , this section provides a brief description of that statute to help inform the subsequent discussion .

fisa currently provides procedures for the approval of various types of investigative methods: ( 1 ) electronic surveillance , ( 2 ) physical searches , ( 3 ) pen register / trap and trace surveillance , and ( 4 ) the use of orders compelling the production of tangible things .

the fisa amendments act ( faa ) of 2008 added additional provisions for the foreign intelligence targeting of non - u.s. persons reasonably believed to be abroad and the targeting of u.s. persons reasonably believed to be located abroad .

although the requirements for each category of investigative tool differ significantly from one another , all make use of the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) , a specialized article iii court established under fisa to review and approve governmental applications seeking to use one of the aforementioned authorities .

fisa also establishes a foreign intelligence surveillance court of review ( fiscr ) to provide appellate review of decisions made by the fisc .

following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the nsa began a program in which domestic telephony metadata was collected with the goal of helping to detect and identify individuals who were part of terrorist networks .

this program is frequently described as collecting telephony metadata "in bulk" to distinguish it from the narrower collection of metadata pertaining to an identified individual or group of individuals that is commonplace in both law enforcement and national security investigations .

since 2006 , the collection of telephony metadata in bulk has been sanctioned by orders of the fisc issued pursuant to section 215 of the usa patriot act of 2001 .

under section 215 , the fbi may apply to the fisc for an order compelling a person to produce "any tangible thing" if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the things sought are "relevant" to an authorized foreign intelligence , international terrorism , or counter - espionage investigation .

an "authorized investigation" must be conducted under guidelines approved by the attorney general under executive order 12333 and may not be conducted of a united states person solely upon the basis of activities protected by the first amendment .

shortly after specific details about the nsa telephony metadata program were published in the media beginning in summer 2013 , concerns about its constitutionality were quickly raised by commentators and lawmakers .

in particular , it has been argued that the collection of telephony metadata in bulk is an "unreasonable search[]" prohibited by the fourth amendment .

before discussing these claims , this report will first provide a brief summary of the program's history and current status .

contemporaneously with the origination of the telephony metadata program in 2001 , the nsa also began acquiring internet - based communications of overseas targets without the use of a traditional law enforcement warrant or an electronic surveillance order under title i of fisa .

ultimately , new statutory authority for this type of acquisition was provided , at first , temporarily under the protect america act ( paa ) of 2007 ; and on a longer term basis by the faa .

according to a partially declassified 2011 opinion from the fisc , nsa collected 250 million internet communications per year under this program .

of these communications , 91% were acquired "directly from internet service providers," referred to as "prism collection. .

the other 9% were acquired through what nsa calls "upstream collection," meaning acquisition while internet traffic is in transit from one unspecified location to another .

nsa also has two methods for collecting information about a specific target: "to / from" communications collection , in which the target is the sender or receiver of the internet communications ; and "about" communications collection , in which the target is only mentioned in communications between non - targets .

the obama administration also acknowledged to the fisc that technical limitations in the "upstream" collection result in the collection of some communications that are unrelated to the target or that may take place entirely between persons located in the united states .

the prism and upstream collections differ from the telephony metadata program in two key respects .

first , the prism and upstream collections acquire the contents of those communications .

second , as this program targets the "to / from" and "about" communications of foreigners who are abroad , the collection of internet - based communications may be considered by some to be more discriminating than the bulk collection of telephony metadata .

section 702 of fisa , as added by the faa , permits the attorney general ( ag ) and the dni to jointly authorize targeting of non - u.s. persons reasonably believed to be located outside the united states .

once authorized , such acquisitions may last for periods of up to one year .

under subsection 702 ( b ) of fisa , such an acquisition is also subject to several limitations .

specifically , an acquisition may not intentionally target any person known at the time of acquisition to be located in the united states ; may not intentionally target a person reasonably believed to be located outside the united states if the purpose of such acquisition is to target a particular , known person reasonably believed to be in the united states ; may not intentionally target a u.s. person reasonably believed to be located outside the united states ; may not intentionally acquire any communication as to which the sender and all intended recipients are known at the time of the acquisition to be located in the united states ; and must be conducted in a manner consistent with the fourth amendment to the constitution of the united states .

traditional fisa orders authorizing electronic surveillance generally require the fisc to find , inter alia , that probable cause exists to believe that the particular target of the proposed surveillance is a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power .

in contrast , under section 702 , individual targets of surveillance are not necessarily reviewed by the fisc prior to acquisition of their communications .

instead , the fisc's role is largely limited to reviewing the targeting and minimization procedures that the government proposes to use to target and acquire communications prospectively .

in order to be approved , section 702 requires the targeting procedures be reasonably designed to ensure that an acquisition is limited to targeting persons reasonably believed to be located outside the united states and to prevent the intentional acquisition of any communication where the sender and all intended recipients are known at the time of the acquisition to be located in the united states .

the court must also find that the minimization procedures are reasonably designed to minimize the retention , and prohibit the dissemination , of information that is about a u.s. person or that could identify a u.s. person .

however , the minimization procedures may allow for the retention and dissemination of information , including u.s. person information , that is evidence of a crime .

constitutional challenges to the nsa's acquisition of internet communications of overseas targets under fisa have arisen in a number of different contexts .

first , such challenges have arisen in the fisc and fiscr as part of those courts' roles in approving the parameters of these collection activities .

secondly , constitutional challenges have been brought in traditional federal courts as civil actions by plaintiffs asserting an injury or in criminal proceedings by defendants who have been notified that evidence against them was obtained or derived from collection under section 702 .

prior to the enactment of section 702 , a similar joint authorization procedure created under the paa was upheld by the fiscr in 2008 .

this suit arose out of the objection of an internet service provider ( isp ) to a directive the company had received ordering it to assist in surveillance activities under the paa .

under a theory of third - party standing , the isp was able to raise the fourth amendment privacy rights of its customers .

under fourth amendment case law , unless an exception applies , the government must obtain a warrant to conduct electronic surveillance , as this type of investigation invades an individual's reasonable expectation of privacy .

although the supreme court has declined to address whether there is a foreign intelligence exception to the fourth amendment that would permit the executive to engage in warrantless electronic surveillance , the fiscr had previously suggested that such an exception applied to surveillance conducted under traditional fisa authorities .

when this question was presented to the fiscr in the context of the paa , the court formally recognized a foreign intelligence exception based upon principles supporting the "special needs" exception that has been developed in other contexts .

generally , the special needs exception may excuse the warrant requirement when the purpose behind governmental action goes beyond routine law enforcement and insisting upon a warrant would materially interfere with the accomplishment of that purpose .

as applied to the joint authorization procedure in the paa , the court found that the acquisition of foreign intelligence information went "well beyond garden - variety law enforcement" purposes .

furthermore , the court found a high degree of probability that requiring a warrant would hinder the government's ability to collect time - sensitive information and that this would impede the vital national security interests at stake .

although no warrant was required by the fourth amendment , the court did hold that the fourth amendment still required the surveillance to be reasonable , based on the totality of the circumstances .

finding the government's interest in national security to be of the highest order , the court held that protections contained in the paa , in light of this very important government interest , reasonably offset the lack of particularity or prior judicial review of the authorized surveillance .

in august 2013 , the obama administration partially declassified several opinions of the fisc regarding collection activities under section 702 .

the first of these opinions , dated october 3 , 2011 , evaluated the targeting and minimization procedures proposed by the government to deal with new information regarding the scope of upstream collection .

specifically , the government had recently discovered that its upstream collection activities had acquired unrelated international communications as well as wholly domestic communications due to technological limitations .

after being presented with this new information , the fisc found the proposed minimization procedures to be deficient on statutory and constitutional grounds .

with respect to the statutory requirements , the fisc noted that the government's proposed minimization procedures were focused "almost exclusively" on information that an analyst wished to use and not on the larger set of information that had been acquired .

consequently , communications that were known to be unrelated to a target , including those that were potentially wholly domestic , could be retained for up to five years so long as the government was not seeking to use that information .

the court found that this had the effect of maximizing the retention of such information , and was not consistent with fisa's mandate to minimize the retention of u.s. person information .

the fisc also held that the proposed minimization procedures did not satisfy the fourth amendment .

notably , it applied the same analysis used by the fiscr in the paa litigation , but found that , under the facts before it , the balance required under the fourth amendment's reasonableness test did not favor the government , particularly in light of the statutory deficiencies .

following the fisc's determination that the fourth amendment had been violated , the government presented revised minimization procedures to the fisc , and the court approved those procedures on november 30 , 2011 .

the revised minimization procedures addressed the court's concerns by requiring the segregation of those communications most likely to involve unrelated or wholly domestic communications ; requiring special handling and markings for those communications which could not be segregated ; and reducing the retention period of upstream collection from five years to two .

with these modifications , the court found that the balancing test required under the fourth amendment supported the conclusion that the search was constitutionally permissible .

upon enactment of section 702 , a number of non - profit organizations brought suit challenging the joint authorization procedure for surveillance of non - u.s. persons reasonably believed to be abroad .

the suit centrally alleged that this authority violated the fourth amendment's prohibition against unreasonable searches .

in order to establish legal standing to challenge title vii , the plaintiffs had argued that the financial costs they incurred in order to avoid their fear of being subject to surveillance constituted a legally cognizable injury .

however , on february 26 , 2013 , in clapper v. amnesty international , the u.s. supreme court held that the plaintiffs had not suffered a sufficiently concrete injury to have legal standing to challenge title vii .

specifically , the court held that in order to obtain injunctive relief from a federal court a plaintiff must prove with "specific facts" that he had been injured or that his injury would be "certainly impending" because of the challenged action .

the high court reasoned that because the non - profit organizations could not prove with specificity that it was "certainly impending" that the united states would utilize section 702 to intercept the plaintiffs' conversations , the plaintiffs lacked standing to bring their case .

because the court did not have jurisdiction to proceed to the merits of the plaintiffs' claims , the court did not decide the fourth amendment question .

the litigation in clapper , while preventing a facial challenge to section 702 by a group of non - profit organizations that allegedly worked with clients who could have been subject to surveillance done pursuant to title vii , may have resulted in a new series of challenges to the faa by certain criminal defendants .

in october 2012 , during oral argument before the high court in clapper , the solicitor general , in responding to a question posed by justice sotomayor , stated that the government was providing notice to criminal defendants that evidence derived from section 702 surveillance would be used in the criminal case , allowing the defendant to challenge the lawfulness of that provision .

the solicitor general's response appears to have been prompted by a provision in fisa requiring the government , whenever it "intends to enter into evidence or otherwise use or disclose ... any information obtained or derived from an electronic surveillance ... [done] pursuant to" fisa , to "notify the aggrieved person and the court" "that the government intends to so disclose or use such information. .

in turn , once a criminal defendant is provided with such a notification , the defendant has the opportunity to ask a court to suppress the evidence that was "unlawfully acquired. .

while the clapper court dismissed the case on standing grounds , the supreme court did so in part relying on the fact that a criminal defendant could potentially have standing to challenge section 702 because of the notification provision .

in the wake of clapper , the solicitor general reportedly examined the justice department's notification policy and discovered that the policy required telling criminal defendants that incriminating evidence was gathered pursuant to surveillance conducted under fisa , but did not specifically mention that the surveillance was conducted under title vii .

as a result of this discovery , the department of justice reportedly altered its disclosure policy , resulting in the filing of several notifications to criminal defendants that the government intends to utilize inculpatory evidence that was obtained or derived pursuant to the authority provided under section 702 .

in three cases , a criminal defendant has responded to the government's notification , utilizing fisa's provision allowing the suppression of any evidence "unlawfully acquired" under statute , by challenging the constitutionality of section 702 .

unlike the litigation in the fisa courts over the constitutionality of the paa and the faa , the litigation resulting over the suppression of evidence derived from section 702 authorities is not isolated to the fourth amendment issue .

in addition to the question of whether section 702 violates the fourth amendment's prohibition on unreasonable searches and seizures , criminal litigation over title vii also challenges whether section 702 violates article iii of the constitution .

article iii of the constitution vests the "judicial power" of the united states in the supreme court and any inferior courts established by congress , including the fisc .

the constitution limits the exercise of the "judicial power" to the adjudication of "cases" or "controversies," and the case - or - controversy limitation has been the impetus of several rules of justiciability that restrict the court's power and curb congress's ability to regulate federal courts .

with respect to an article iii challenge to section 702 , relying on case law holding that the constitutional case - or - controversy requirement restricts a federal court to adjudicating live disputes that are "definite and concrete" and prevents an article iii court from issuing "advisory opinions," critics of section 702 argue that title vii requires a federal court to "evaluat[e] in a vacuum" the legal propriety of the government's targeting and minimization procedures without regard to how the government would be utilizing their faa authorities in a specific surveillance action .

whether such an abstract assessment of the government's surveillance procedures is a constitutionally appropriate role for a federal court may largely depend on how broadly supreme court decisions allowing article iii courts to "perform a variety of functions not necessarily or directly connected to adversarial proceedings in a trial or appellate court" are read .

moreover , while case law rejecting an article iii case - or - controversy challenge with respect to traditional fisa electronic surveillance orders did so because the ex parte review of a foreign surveillance application was viewed as presenting the court with "concrete questions" in a form that a judge was "capable of acting on," it remains to be seen whether the supreme court would find judicial review of the government's targeting and minimization procedures under the faa equally untroubling .

to date , one federal court has issued a written opinion with respect to a suppression motion challenging the constitutionality of the faa .

specifically , in united states v. mohamud , a district court denied the suppression motion of a criminal defendant against whom the government intended to use evidence obtained under the faa in a prosecution for violating 18 u.s.c .

§2332a ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) , attempting to use a weapon of mass destruction .

with regard to the constitutionality of section 702 vis - à - vis article iii , the oregon court concluded that congress , in the faa , provided an "intelligible principle" by which the fisa court could evaluate the legality of the government's targeting and minimization procedures , making article iii review procedures under the faa akin to other traditional non - adjudicative functions of federal courts , like the review of wiretap applications , where a "neutral and detached" federal judge evaluates whether the government's conduct comports with the constitution .

with regard to the defendant's fourth amendment challenge , the district court held that the warrant requirement does not apply to the incidental interception of u.s. persons' communications as part of electronic surveillance targeting non - u.s. persons overseas to obtain foreign intelligence information .

alternatively , the court held , like the fiscr in its 2008 decision , that the foreign intelligence exception permitted the government to conduct surveillance under the faa without a warrant .

applying a similar balancing test as the fiscr , the district court found that the privacy interests implicated by the incidental collection of u.s. persons' communications did not outweigh the government's interest in protecting the nation's security .

further , the court observed that the "numerous safeguards built into the statute," most importantly the minimization and targeting procedures required by the faa , bolstered the reasonableness of the surveillance program .

the defendant in mohamud appealed his judgment in october 2014 , and the appeal is currently pending before the ninth circuit court of appeals .

