the forest service ( fs ) is responsible for managing 193 million acres of the national forest system , as well as for conducting forestry research and providing assistance to state , local , private , and international forest owners .

funding to complete such work is provided through both discretionary and mandatory appropriations ( see figure 1 ) .

although it is an agency within the u.s. department of agriculture , the fs receives its discretionary appropriations through title iii of the regular interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

in some years , the fs has received additional discretionary monies through supplemental appropriations bills .

in addition , continuing appropriations resolutions have been used to maintain funding for the agency when regular appropriations bills have not been enacted before the start of the fiscal year — and in some cases , such as with the fy2015 appropriations measure , to provide full - year funding .

the fs also receives annual mandatory appropriations under existing authorizing statutes .

laws authorizing mandatory appropriations allow the fs to spend money without further action by congress .

the budget authority for several of these mandatory spending accounts is dependent on revenue generated by activities on the national forests .

typically , these laws are permanent — such as the timber salvage sale fund — but sometimes the authorizations have a sunset date .

this report presents and analyzes the discretionary and mandatory appropriations for the fs over the five years from fy2012 to fy2016 .

it also includes a section on the president's fy2017 budget request .

fs discretionary appropriations — which account for 88% of total agency appropriations on average — are primarily divided among six main accounts , described below and listed in the same order as they generally appear in appropriations laws .

the wildland fire management and national forest system accounts together receive nearly 85% of total fs discretionary appropriations ( see figure 2 ) .

fs budget requests and interior appropriations subcommittee documents typically allocate monies at the account and subaccount levels , and in some cases , among specific programs and activities .

allocations below the account level generally are not addressed in this report .

the fs accounts are described briefly below: forest and rangeland research ( frr ) .

the frr account funds research and development efforts to provide scientific information and new technologies to support sustainable forest and rangeland management .

over the last five years , this account has averaged approximately 6% of fs discretionary appropriations .

state and private forestry ( s&pf ) .

the s&pf account funds programs to provide financial and technical assistance to nonfederal forest owners and managers , and to protect communities and the environment from insects , diseases , and invasive plants .

s&pf averages approximately 5% of fs discretionary appropriations .

national forest system ( nfs ) .

nfs appropriations fund management of the 193 million acres of national forests and grasslands .

this account includes several subaccounts , the largest of which is the forest products subaccount , which generally receives just over 20% of the nfs appropriation , and funds the timber sales program .

the nfs account averaged approximately 28% of the fs discretionary appropriations over the last five years .

capital improvement and maintenance ( ci&m ) .

ci&m activities help the fs provide and maintain facilities , roads , trails , and other infrastructure needs .

over the last five years , the ci&m account received approximately 7% of fs discretionary appropriations .

land acquisition ( la ) .

la activities allow the fs to acquire lands for conservation or ownership consolidation purposes .

la activities are funded primarily through the land and water conservation fund .

in addition to this la account , congress provides appropriations for two smaller land acquisition accounts .

these two appropriations — one for special act land acquisitions and one to complete land exchanges — averaged $1.1 million annually over the last five years .

for purposes of this report , those appropriations are included in the la account .

in total , la received approximately 1% of fs discretionary appropriations on average over the last five years .

wildland fire management ( wfm ) and flame wildfire suppression reserve fund ( flame ) .

the wfm account funds activities related to the management of unplanned and unwanted fires , including planning for and suppression of wildfires .

the flame account was established under the federal land assistance , management , and enhancement act of 2009 for emergency wildfire suppression activities .

while flame is a separate account from wfm , for purposes of this report , the two accounts are combined .

funding for wildland fire management activities is sometimes provided outside of the regular interior appropriations bills when there is a need ( eg , a severe fire season ) .

in this report , these emergency or supplemental appropriations will be reflected in the wfm account .

together , wfm and flame appropriations , along with supplemental appropriations , averaged 54% of the fs discretionary appropriation over the last five years .

other .

in addition to the larger accounts listed above , there are several relatively small accounts .

they provide appropriations for the range betterment fund ; the agency to give or receive gifts , donations , and bequests for research ; and management of national forest lands for subsistence uses .

together , these "other" accounts received less than 0.5% of fs discretionary appropriations over the last five years .

the fs allocates the appropriations from these accounts among the nine fs regions , five research stations , two service centers and laboratories , and the national headquarters office in washington , dc .

for most accounts , once the funds have been allocated to the regions , the money is then further allocated to each national forest .

some accounts , however , are managed at a national level .

for example , the wildfire suppression account is allocated based on need throughout the wildfire season .

this can make analyzing appropriations by region or by forest challenging .

further , fs regions do not follow state boundaries , and many national forests cross state boundaries , which can make analyzing fs appropriations by state challenging .

this level of detail is beyond the scope of this report .

the fs has more than 20 permanent appropriations accounts and 4 trust funds that constitute mandatory spending .

together , they account on average for about 12% of total agency appropriations .

budget authority for these accounts is provided in authorizing laws .

for several of these accounts , the budget authority is dependent on the level of receipts received for specific national forest system activities , and some may even have geographic or programmatic expenditure restrictions .

for example , the timber sales pipeline restoration fund authorizes the fs to collect a portion of the revenue from a specific set of national forest timber sales .

the revenue is available in the fs region where it was generated for preparing future timber sales or conducting recreation projects .

another example of a permanent appropriation is the payments to states fund , which consists of several programs that are partially dependent on receipts .

more specifically , the payments to states act of 1908 authorizes the fs to make payments to states — to be distributed to counties — based on a percentage of the revenue generated by activities in the national forests within those counties .

the payments to states fund also consists of payments authorized under the secure rural schools and community self - determination act of 2000 , which are based on a formula dependent in part on historical receipts .

the authorization for the secure rural schools act expired at the end of fy2013 , but it was reauthorized in april 2015 ( p.l .

114-10 ) .

the reauthorization provided a makeup payment to be made in fy2015 for the payment missed during the period the program was expired , as well as a payment to be made in fy2016 .

forest service requested and enacted discretionary appropriations and mandatory appropriations for fy2012 through fy2016 are provided in several figures and tables .

specifically , figure 1 and table 1 provide fs total discretionary and mandatory appropriations in current and constant dollars ; figure 2 shows enacted discretionary appropriations by wfm , nfs , and all other fs accounts in current and constant dollars ; figure 3 and table 4 ( at the end of the report ) provide side - by - side comparisons of fs discretionary budget requests and discretionary appropriations ; figure 4 shows the difference between requested and enacted discretionary appropriations by wfm , nfs , and all other fs accounts ; table 2 contains enacted fs discretionary appropriations , listed by account , with five - year change in current and constant dollars ; and table 3 contains fs discretionary budget requests , listed by account .

in fy2016 , total fs enacted appropriations ( discretionary and mandatory ) were $7.065 billion , 25% higher than the fy2012 total appropriation of $5.655 billion ( in current dollars , see table 1 and figure 1 ) .

when adjusted for inflation , total fs appropriations have increased by 17% since fy2012 .

the fy2016 level was also higher than the five - year average total appropriation of $6.089 billion and is the largest appropriation over the five - year period .

the fy2012 appropriation of $5.655 billion in fy2012 was the smallest appropriation over the same period .

after fy2012 , total fs appropriations increased annually for two years , decreased in fy2015 , and then increased in fy2016 .

on average over the five - year period , fs mandatory spending constituted about 12% of total fs appropriations , or about $755.0 million ( see table 1 ) .

in fy2016 , fs estimates its mandatory spending will be approximately $700.8 million .

from fy2012 to fy2016 , fs discretionary appropriations increased 32% , from $4.834 billion in fy2012 to $6.364 billion in fy2016 ( in current dollars ; see table 1 , table 2 , and figure 2 ) .

within the five - year period , however , appropriations have been variable .

appropriations increased after fy2012 for two consecutive years until decreasing in fy2015 and then increasing by more than $1 billion in fy2016 .

over the five years , fs discretionary appropriations have averaged $5.334 billion in current dollars .

all but two of the accounts decreased over this period , although not equally .

for example , ci&m appropriations had the largest decline — 9% since fy2012 — whereas nfs appropriations decreased at a slower rate of 3% over that same time period .

in contrast , total wfm appropriations have increased by 71% since fy2012 .

when adjusted for inflation to 2015 dollars , fs total discretionary appropriations have increased by 24% since fy2012 ( see table 1 , table 2 , and figure 2 ) .

in fy2016 , the fs requested $5.797 billion in discretionary appropriations ( see table 3 ) , 26% more than the fy2012 request in current dollars .

when adjusted to constant dollars , the overall fs budget request for fy2016 was 18% more than the fy2012 request .

although total budget requests appear to have exceeded the pace of inflation , there are some variances at the account level .

the " fy2017 budget request " section contains more information on the agency's budget requests .

the distribution of fs discretionary appropriations among the wfm accounts , the nfs account , and the total of the remaining accounts is provided in figure 2 .

the wfm appropriation has a five - year average of $2.892 billion in current dollars , ranging from a low of $2.290 billion in fy2012 to a high of $3.909 billion in fy2016 .

the fy2016 wfm appropriation is the largest appropriation going back to at least fy2004 .

on average over the last five years , the wfm accounts have received 54% of the total fs discretionary appropriation .

they account for 61% of fs discretionary appropriations in fy2016 .

the next - largest account , nfs , received on average $1.502 billion , or 28% of the total fs discretionary appropriation .

the fy2013 nfs appropriation of $1.455 billion included post - sequester reductions .

the fy2016 appropriation of $1.509 billion ( 24% of fs discretionary appropriations ) is a slight increase from the fy2015 appropriation of $1.494 billion .

for fy2017 , the administration is requesting $5.757 billion in discretionary appropriations for the fs ( see table 3 ) .

the fy2017 request is $40.0 million below the fy2016 request and $606.9 million below the fy2016 enacted discretionary appropriation .

starting in fy2015 and continuing in fy2017 , the fs has proposed a new funding mechanism for wildfire suppression activities , which included eliminating the flame reserve account .

therefore , the fs did not request an appropriation to the flame reserve account .

for fy2017 , the fs is requesting $2.451 billion for wfm .

in addition , it is requesting up to $864.1 million to be available in fy2017 upon request for emergency suppression operations ( for a total of $3.315 billion ) .

as part of the proposal , any funds for emergency suppression operations up to the maximum $864.1 million would be provided as an adjustment to the statutory discretionary limits established in the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 .

similar legislative proposals have been introduced in the 114 th congress ( h.r .

167 and s. 235 ) .

overall agency appropriations for the fs increased in fy2016 after decreasing in fy2015 .

however , funds provided for wildfire management ( supplemental and regular appropriations ) are responsible for much of the observed differences .

funding for many of the other fs accounts has decreased .

furthermore , funding for wildfire management activities accounts for an increasing percentage of agency appropriations , which may raise questions about the amount of funding necessary to adequately address wildland fire management issues or about the extent to which wildfire management activities direct agency resources — financial and otherwise — away from other fs statutory obligations .

