recent disclosures of various national security agency ( nsa ) surveillance and data collection programs have prompted increased attention on the government's collection of foreign intelligence .

pursuant to the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) of 1978 , the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) reviews government applications to conduct electronic surveillance for foreign intelligence purposes and the foreign intelligence surveillance court of review ( fisa court of review ) reviews decisions of the fisc .

due to concerns about the size and scope of the foreign intelligence collection programs authorized by orders of the fisc , many have suggested substantive changes to the underlying legal authorities relied on by the government to collect foreign intelligence , while others have proposed altering the practices and procedures of the fisa courts .

after a short overview of the fisa judicial review process , this report will briefly analyze the latter set of proposals .

first , this report examines proposals to introduce a public advocate into fisa court proceedings , a third party who would argue against the government's application to the fisc .

second , the report explores various other proposals that would alter the procedural and operational mechanisms of the fisa courts , such as appointing an amicus curiae , or friend of the court , to assist the court in addressing novel legal issues .

third , the report will consider measures designed to displace the authority to designate judges to the fisa court .

finally , the last section discusses the legal implications of proposals that would require the executive branch to release fisa court opinions .

the fisc is an article iii court composed of 11 district court judges selected by the chief justice of the supreme court from at least seven of the regional judicial circuits .

while judges of traditional article iii courts are selected via presidential appointment and senate confirmation , fisc and fisa court of review judges are "designated" to the court by the chief justice .

the fisc's jurisdiction is limited to hearing applications and granting orders for "the collection of foreign intelligence by the federal government. .

this includes four types of investigative methods: ( 1 ) electronic surveillance ; ( 2 ) physical searches ; ( 3 ) pen register / trap and trace surveillance ; and ( 4 ) orders to compel the production of tangible things .

the government may appeal a denial of an application to the fisa court of review .

the fisc is also authorized to review the government's certifications , minimization , and targeting procedures concerning targeting of non - u.s. persons reasonably believed to be abroad .

the fisa court of review has jurisdiction to review fisc decisions to modify or set aside directives and decisions to compel compliance with them .

additionally , the fisc may , on its own initiative , or upon the request of the government in any proceeding , or a party in any proceeding under section 215 of the usa patriot act or section 702 of fisa , hold a hearing or rehearing en banc .

an en banc panel consists of all the judges who constitute the fisc .

in light of the sensitive national security concerns respecting its docket , the fisa courts operate largely in secret and in a non - adversarial fashion .

court sessions are conducted in secret , are generally held ex parte with the government as the only party presenting arguments to the court , and the court's opinions are rarely released .

as noted by the fisc , whereas "[o]ther courts operate primarily in public , with secrecy the exception[,] the fisc operates primarily in secret , with public access the exception. .

however , recipients of production orders under section 215 of the usa patriot act and directives under section 702 of fisa may challenge the legality of orders by petitioning the court .

in the event of a contested hearing , fisa permits in camera review — private review by a court without the challenging party receiving access — of classified information upon motion by the government .

the executive branch classifies most filings made to the fisc as secret or top secret before they are sent to the court , and the fisc's opinions and orders in the possession of the executive branch are similarly classified .

the executive branch can choose to declassify portions of opinions , or entire opinions and release them to the public .

it has done so a number of times since the disclosure of the nsa data collection programs .

some critics of the fisa process have noted the infrequency of fisc rejections of the government's surveillance requests and suggested that the lack of an adversarial process prevents the court from adequately scrutinizing the government's position .

accordingly , a number of legislative proposals seek to allow another attorney to challenge the government's fisa requests in order to protect civil liberty interests .

these proposals have varied according to nomenclature , the structural placement of a potential advocate , and the appointing authority .

nonetheless , most proposals embody three unifying themes .

first , an advocate would oppose the government's request for fisa orders on behalf of the privacy and civil liberties interests of the public .

second , an advocate would take on a robust role in fisa court proceedings .

while the various proposals differ at the margins , public advocate measures generally envision the advocate having a range of responsibilities , such as being able to intervene in ongoing cases , brief the fisc on relevant matters , conduct some forms of discovery , file motions seeking discrete forms of relief from the court , move the court to reconsider past orders , or even appeal an adverse ruling .

finally , proposals envision giving the advocate a measure of independence from the president so as to enjoy unfettered discretion to oppose the government's applications .

aside from altering the procedures of the fisa courts , some have suggested modifying how its judges are chosen .

currently , the fisc is composed of 11 district court judges from at least seven of the regional judicial circuits .

while judges of traditional article iii courts are "appointed" by the president with senate confirmation , fisa court judges are "designated" to their position by the chief justice .

the chief justice also designates 3 district court or court of appeals judges to the fisa court of review .

fisa court judges serve terms of seven years and are not eligible for a second term .

in response to concerns that allowing the chief justice to select all the fisa court judges improperly concentrates an important power in one unelected official , some have proposed to disperse this authority among the chief judges of the circuit courts .

other measures would authorize the president to choose fisa court judges with senate confirmation , and some would leave this choice with the congressional leadership .

these proposals appear to raise several novel legal issues .

the chief justice's authority to designate federal judges to temporarily sit on other federal courts , including specialized article iii tribunals such as the fisa court , and circuit court judges' authority to designate district judges within their circuit , have been upheld against legal challenge .

however , extending similar designating authority to the president or to a lower federal court over a court it does not oversee has never been resolved as a constitutional matter .

the issue has not come up , in large part , because congress has apparently never vested similar designating authority over federal judges beyond the chief justice and the chief judge of each judicial circuit .

beyond historical precedent , supreme court case law provides little guidance in this area .

however , proposals that vest the designation authority in congress may raise a separate constitutional question .

the supreme court has made clear that legislative acts which "alter[] the legal rights , duties , and relations of persons" outside the legislative branch must satisfy the constitutional requirements of bicameralism and presentment .

vesting the authority to designate article iii judges to serve on a fisa court solely with congress would appear to violate this principle .

several other fisa proposals seek to reduce the secretive nature of the fisa courts by requiring the public disclosure of fisa opinions .

such legislation might raise separation of powers questions because both congress and the executive branch claim some power in this area .

the central question to resolve is the extent to which congress may regulate control over national security information , including requiring the executive branch to disclose specific documents — a question not definitively resolved by the courts .

legislation compelling the executive branch to release fisa opinions directs the president to release information he may intend to keep secret and thus implicates the president's power under article ii of the constitution .

on the one hand , the supreme court has explicitly recognized congress's power to require the "mandatory disclosure of documents in the possession of the executive branch. .

however , the executive branch has argued that the commander - in - chief clause of article ii bestows upon the president independent power to control access to national security information .

as such , according to this line of reasoning , congress's generally broad ability to require disclosure of agency documents may be constrained when it implicates national security .

the executive branch has typically exercised discretion to determine what particular information should be classified ; and the supreme court has observed in dicta that the president is commander in chief , and his "authority to classify and control access to information bearing on national security ... flows primarily from this constitutional investment of power in the president and exists quite apart from any explicit congressional grant. .

in addition , courts have crafted common law privileges that protect the executive branch from revealing certain military secrets .

nonetheless , supreme court jurisprudence does not establish absolute power by any branch over classified information and recognizes room for congress to impose classification procedures .

moreover , congress , pursuant to its oversight function , requires consistent disclosure of sensitive national security information to the relevant intelligence and defense committees and has regulated control over access to national security information .

pursuant to these statutes , courts have required the executive branch to disclose information to the public and the judiciary .

consequently , proposals that allow the executive branch to first redact classified information from fisa opinions before public release appear to be on firm constitutional ground ; while a proposal that mandated all past fisa opinions be released in their entirety — without any redactions by the executive branch — might raise a separation of powers issue .

