the unemployment rate declined markedly in 2013 , to 6.7% in december from 7.9% in january , seeming to signal that the labor market is approaching full employment .

other economic and labor market indicators paint a more pessimistic picture , however .

for example , the decline in the unemployment rate was caused in part by workers dropping out of the labor force .

the labor force participation rate has fallen to under 63% at the end of 2013 from 66% before the recession .

understanding this divergence is crucial for an accurate assessment of the current state of the economic recovery and of how close the economy is to full employment .

this report analyzes recent trends in labor market indicators during the current economic recovery , with a particular focus on the contrast between the unemployment rate and other labor market indicators .

it reviews studies that have sought to determine how much of the decline in the labor force participation rate is caused by the recession and how much is caused by structural factors , such as the aging of the labor force .

it then considers whether the economy might reach full employment at a higher rate of unemployment compared to recent expansions .

it concludes by analyzing the implications of these developments for macroeconomic stabilization policy , as policy makers grapple with the transition from the expansionary fiscal and monetary policy put in place during the "great recession. .

if the labor market has experienced structural changes , it would also have implications for labor market and other microeconomic policies ( eg , spending or tax provisions that increase the incentives to hire , seek work , delay retirement , or train ) , which are beyond the scope of this report .

the slow decline in the unemployment rate and continued lack of employment opportunities for youth and the long - term unemployed in the current recovery have raised concerns that the natural rate of unemployment may have risen recently .

in other words , there is a concern that when the economy returns to full employment , it will be at a higher unemployment rate than that obtained in prior expansions .

since the natural rate is defined as the underlying rate of unemployment once cyclical factors are removed , conventional economic theory posits that changes in the natural rate would be driven only by structural factors unrelated to the business cycle , such as demographics .

an alternative theory that economists are now considering is that the natural rate of unemployment has permanently increased as a result of the depth and duration of the great recession and subsequent jobless recovery , and not because of any long - term structural causes .

economists refer to this concept as "hysteresis. .

one reason that hysteresis might occur is because workers' skills erode during bouts of long - term unemployment , making them less employable going forward .

reaching a consensus on whether the protracted period of high unemployment was the result of temporarily inadequate aggregate demand , an upward shift in the natural rate of unemployment unrelated to the recession , or an upward shift caused by hysteresis will require more evidence — notably , how much further unemployment falls in the current expansion before inflation rises .

in the past , there has been little evidence of hysteresis in the united states , but the phenomenon has been observed in parts of europe .

that does not preclude hysteresis in this case , however , given the unusual depth and duration of the great recession and subsequent tepid recovery .

cbo has estimated that the natural rate of unemployment rose to 6% in 2013 from 5% in 2007 .

cbo attributed 0.5 percentage points of the increase to "the stigma of long - term unemployment," 0.5 percentage points to "a decrease in the efficiency with which employers filled vacancies," and 0.1 percentage points to "the incentives generated in 2013 by extensions of unemployment insurance benefits. .

cbo attributed the decrease in the efficiency of filling vacancies at least in part to mismatches between skills and openings , and expects the increase in the natural rate attributable to it to be temporary .

changes in the natural rate are not uncommon historically .

for example , economists believe that it rose in the 1970s and fell in the 1990s .

estimated variations in the natural rate over time are typically modest , however .

cbo has estimated that it has ranged from 5.0% to 6.3% since 1949 .

evidence for and against a rise in the natural rate is presented in crs report r41785 , the increase in unemployment since 2007: is it cyclical or structural ? .

if the natural rate has increased , it would mean that the economy is closer to full employment today than estimates based on the natural rate prevailing before the recession would suggest .

if so , there are macroeconomic policy implications , which are discussed in the next section .

historically , the headline unemployment rate has been viewed as a simple , timely , and transparent indicator of the state of the economy .

there are several other indicators of slack in the economy and the labor market , but , as long as those measures are relatively well correlated with the headline unemployment rate , as they typically are , the unemployment rate provides a simple rule - of - thumb gauge of how close the economy is to full employment .

until recently , the economy was unambiguously operating far below full employment .

by the end of 2013 , the unemployment rate was coming within a percentage point of the mainstream range of the natural rate of unemployment .

were the recent pace of improvement in the unemployment rate to continue , unemployment could fall to the natural rate in the next year or two .

as this report has discussed , other indicators have diverged from the unemployment rate and suggest that significant slack remains in the economy .

these include labor market indicators ( eg , modest employment growth and flat wages ) and other indicators ( eg , the large output gap and the low inflation rate ) .

while most measures show the economy modestly improving since the recession ended , the labor force participation rate has continued to deteriorate over the course of the recovery .

studies have concluded that the participation rate has fallen partly for cyclical reasons and partly for structural reasons .

most economists believe the primary goal of short - term macroeconomic stabilization policy is to bring the economy back to full employment in a timely fashion and keep it there , while maintaining price stability .

they believe "counter - cyclical" policy , which boosts growth when the economy is distressed and reins in growth when it is overheating , can be used to blunt the extremes of the business cycle .

while there is consensus that policy can hypothetically achieve this goal , there is disagreement on the likelihood that appropriate policies will be chosen in reality , and whether the policies that are likely to be chosen could make matters worse .

policy makers have two macroeconomic stabilization tools , fiscal policy and monetary policy , at their disposal .

congress is directly responsible for fiscal policy through its control of federal revenue and spending provisions .

congress has delegated the operation of monetary policy to the federal reserve , but exercises oversight .

in the mainstream economic view , congress can hasten economic recovery by increasing the budget deficit ( fiscal stimulus ) .

but borrowing has long - term economic costs and inter - generational equity implications , and the benefits of fiscal stimulus decline as the economy approaches full employment .

thus , in choosing the appropriate fiscal policy , policy makers balance short - term considerations related to macroeconomic stabilization with long - term considerations about the costs of debt .

a common view among economists is that the government should run deficits when the economy is far below full employment and balanced budgets or surpluses when the economy is near full employment .

the deficit has already declined markedly from historically high levels in fiscal years 2009 to 2011 , but a structural deficit remains that is projected to grow over time under current policy .

thus , many economists advocate further deficit reduction ( fiscal austerity ) as the economy nears full employment .

this view has often been expressed as a prescription of deficit - reduction in the medium term ( i.e. , when the economy is near full employment ) , but not the short term .

likewise , the fed has followed a policy of monetary stimulus since the financial crisis — reducing the federal funds rate to near zero and engaging in large - scale asset purchases — in an attempt to hasten a return to full employment .

the fed has already scaled back its asset purchases and has stated: "in determining how long to maintain the current 0 to 1 / 4 percent target range for the federal funds rate , the committee will assess progress — both realized and expected — toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. .

in other words , the fed intends to raise interest rates only when it judges the economy to be closer to full employment .

the current unemployment rate would seemingly call for a near - term tightening of fiscal and monetary policy .

for example , from december 2012 to january 2014 , the fed's announced policy was that it would keep interest rates "exceptionally low" at least until the unemployment rate reached 6.5% — which is close to current levels .

the preponderance of evidence suggests that the economy is not as close to full employment as the current unemployment rate might suggest .

for that reason , the fed decided in march 2014 to drop its threshold unemployment rate of 6.5% from its forward guidance of when it would raise interest rates .

in a press conference following the decision , fed chair janet yellen provided this explanation of the fed's decision: we initially started with an unemployment rate as a threshold .

that was easy enough for the committee to say , "with an unemployment rate above 6½ percent , we know we're not close to full employment , not close to an employment level consistent with our mandate , and unless inflation were a significant concern , we wouldn't dream of raising the federal funds rate target. .

now , the committee has never felt that the unemployment rate is a sufficient statistic for the labor market .

i think if i had to choose one indicator of the labor market , the unemployment rate is probably as good a one as i could find .

but in assessing the real state of slack in the labor market and ultimately of inflationary pressures that might — or deflationary pressures that could result from that — it's appropriate to look at many more things .

and that's why the committee now states we will look at a broad range of information .

divergence between the unemployment rate and other indicators complicates formulating and communicating a policy response .

if there is still considerable slack in the economy , despite the decline in the unemployment rate , then tightening policy could be premature and there is less concern that continued stimulus would cause inflation to rise .

that evaluation could be proven wrong , however , if there turns out to be less slack in the economy than most economists currently estimate .

this would be the case if structural changes or the great recession ( i.e. , hysteresis ) permanently reduced the potential capacity of output and labor markets , so that the economy is no longer capable of returning to the historical trend .

in this scenario , microeconomic structural policy measures ( eg , spending or tax provisions that increase the incentives to hire , seek work , delay retirement , or train ) are more likely to have positive results than fiscal or monetary stimulus .

for example , if the natural rate of unemployment is now higher , fiscal or monetary stimulus to reduce unemployment to levels attained in previous expansions and maintain price stability would , by definition , not be successful .

if the economy is getting close to full employment ( because the economy's productive potential is lower than projected ) , then continued stimulus would in theory cause inflation to rise .

if policy makers were to wait to tighten policy until inflation starts rising , it might be too late to achieve full employment and maintain price stability , due to lags in the effects of policy changes on the economy .

as this example illustrates , some economists see the risks of choosing an unsuitable macroeconomic policy stance based on incomplete and contradictory data as an argument against pursuing activist macroeconomic policies .

