as a result of advanced oil drilling and extraction technologies ( primarily horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing ) , crude oil production in the united states is growing and , according to energy information administration ( eia ) reference case projections , may reach 9.6 million barrels per day ( bbl / d ) by 2019 ( see figure 1 ) — up from 5 million bbl / d in 2008 .

production of light tight oil ( lto ) is , and is expected to be , the primary contributor to u.s. crude oil production growth in the near to medium term .

as u.s. lto production has increased , some have called for crude oil export restrictions to be either eased or lifted altogether .

however , according to the eia , u.s. crude oil demand is forecasted to be approximately 15 million bbl / d through 2040 .

eia's reference case indicates that crude oil imports are projected to range between 6 million and 8 million bbl / d over the same period .

however , eia's high resource case projections , if realized , could result in lower crude oil import requirements ( 2 to 4 million barrels per day from 2020 to 2040 ) .

this apparent disconnect between expected import needs and the desire to export crude oil can be explained when considering crude oil prices can be influenced by the following: ( 1 ) the geographical location of lto production , ( 2 ) the type / quality ( i.e. , light , sweet ) of crude oil being produced , ( 3 ) the types of crude oil that some u.s. refineries are currently configured to optimally refine , ( 4 ) the petroleum products that are derived from different types of crude oil , and ( 5 ) transportation and infrastructure challenges associated with moving certain types of crude oil to demand centers .

each of these aspects is discussed in more detail throughout this report .

while u.s. crude oil exports are restricted under current law , petroleum products such as naphtha , gasoline , diesel fuel , and natural gas liquids ( ngls ) are not subject to export restrictions .

as a result , production and export of these products have increased in recent years .

in august 2014 , approximately 4.1 million barrels per day ( bbl / d ) of petroleum products , ngls , and other liquids were exported from the united states — up from an average of nearly 1.4 million bbl / d in 2007 .

members of congress have taken various positions regarding crude oil exports , including ( 1 ) calling for the administration to lift export restrictions , ( 2 ) maintaining existing restrictions , ( 3 ) opposing attempts to lift restrictions through the world trade organization , and ( 4 ) proposing bills to eliminate crude oil export restrictions ( see section below titled "legislative action" ) .

the crude oil export policy debate has multiple dimensions and complexities .

as u.s. lto production has increased — along with additional oil supply from canada — certain challenges have emerged that affect some oil producers and refiners .

while the economic arguments both for and against u.s. crude oil exports are quite complex and dynamic , there are some fundamental concepts and issues that may be worth considering during debate about exporting u.s. crude oil .

this report provides background and context about the crude oil legal and regulatory framework , discusses motivations that underlie the desire to export u.s. crude oil , and presents analysis of issues that congress may choose to consider during debate about u.s. crude oil export policy .

current crude oil export restrictions date back to the 1970s , during an era of u.s. oil price controls that motivated producers to export and sell crude oil at unregulated world prices .

in response , crude oil , petroleum products , and natural gas liquids were placed on the commodity control list established by the export administration act of 1969 .

in 1973 , the organization of arab petroleum exporting countries ( oapec ) imposed a total embargo of crude oil delivered to the united states .

the oil embargo motivated congress to enact laws that would limit u.s. crude oil export opportunities .

the embargo resulted in rapid and steep crude oil price increases , thereby creating a perception of oil resource scarcity and prompting concerns about u.s. crude oil import reliance .

in response to these concerns congress passed legislation — including the energy policy and conservation act ( epca ) — to restrict u.s. crude oil exports , with some exceptions as determined by the president .

using these exceptions , the united states has exported crude oil for decades , although in relatively low volumes .

crude oil exports reached a level of 287,000 bbl / d on average in 1980 .

in 2002 , crude oil exports averaged 9,000 bbl / d .

since then , crude oil exports have steadily increased and reached 401,000 bbl / d during the month of july 2014 .

the majority of these exports were sent to canada .

in the context of exports , the bureau of industry and security ( bis ) — the department of commerce agency responsible for crude oil export licenses — defines "crude oil" as follows: "crude oil" is defined as a mixture of hydrocarbons that existed in liquid phase in underground reservoirs and remains liquid at atmospheric pressure after passing through surface separating facilities and which has not been processed through a crude oil distillation tower .

included are reconstituted crude petroleum , and lease condensate and liquid hydrocarbons produced from tar sands , gilsonite , and oil shale .

drip gases are also included , but topped crude oil , residual oil , and other finished and unfinished oils are excluded .

from 1970 to 2008 , u.s. crude oil production was on a steady decline .

during this time , there were periods when easing crude oil export restrictions was a national - level policy topic and presidential determinations were made to exempt crude oil exports that met certain criteria .

in 2009 , production of light / sweet crude in tight oil formations throughout the country started to increase rapidly , and production levels are expected to continue rising out to 2019 , or perhaps later .

the physical and chemical properties of lto , when placed into context of the crude oil slate desired by u.s. refineries , is one important factor that underlies the crude oil export debate .

for more information about crude oil characteristics , see the text box below .

prior to the advent of advanced drilling and extraction technologies , many u.s. refiners in the midwest and gulf coast invested in equipment to process heavy crudes from canada and latin america .

generally , these investments were encouraged by price discounts for heavy crudes .

tight oil production has changed the situation and the entire industry is adjusting .

investments are being made to process more light crude .

transportation bottlenecks are being relieved .

however , as lto volumes increase , oil producers are bracing for continuing price discounts that may result from a structural oversupply of light crudes in certain regions .

whether the industry will be economically motivated to continue adjusting to accommodate expected light crude production and supply is uncertain .

the export of domestically produced crude oil has been significantly restricted since the 1970s by an array of federal laws and regulations , in particular the energy policy and conservation act of 1975 ( epca ) and the resultant short supply control regulations adopted and administered by the bureau of industry and security ( bis ) .

these laws and regulations are discussed below .

as tight oil production has rapidly increased , technical and economic factors are motivating some stakeholders to pursue lifting crude oil export restrictions .

some oil producers would like to receive higher prices for oil produced .

however , some refiners are concerned that regional crude oil acquisition price discounts may narrow if exports are expanded .

narrow price discounts may affect refinery operating margins and may result in some refineries ceasing operations .

additionally , some refiners may need to consider capital investments necessary to absorb increasing volumes of lto — along with the value of products yielded from refining lto .

as mentioned above , the geographic location of tight oil production , refinery configurations , infrastructure limitations , and prices received by some oil producers have been cited as justification for lifting export restrictions .

however , it is important to realize that these factors are not static in nature .

rather , the industry is dynamic and is constantly changing .

refineries can adjust their operations .

transportation infrastructure can adjust based on market conditions .

therefore , oil values received by oil producers would likely adjust as well .

in 2013 , the energy information administration stated: some recent commentary has suggested that it was likely or even inevitable that the growth in u.s. oil production from tight resources would be significantly curtailed unless there was a relaxation of current u.s. policies toward crude oil exports .

however , this is likely an overstatement of the actual situation , because there are several other midstream and downstream adjustments that could help to accommodate changing production patterns .

the dynamic nature of the oil industry makes the debate about oil export policy inherently complex .

each of the three primary industry segments — production , transportation , and refining — will adjust based on changes to any one of the other segments .

as a result , it can be difficult to assess the potential impacts of policy decisions on any one segment without considering how the other two might adjust to changing market conditions .

with that caveat , additional detail about some of the motivations for crude oil exports is provided in the following sections .

debate about u.s. crude oil exports is complex , dynamic , multidimensional , and includes many different stakeholder views .

as a result , there are several issues that congress may consider during future debate about crude oil exports .

the following sections discuss some of these considerations .

also , in 2014 several organizations published analytical studies that assessed the economic and price impacts of potentially removing u.s. crude oil export restrictions .

appendix b includes a table that summarizes results from four studies based on parameters that might be of interest to congress .

in light of the considerations discussed above , and as the debate about exporting crude oil evolves , various proposals might emerge that fall within a spectrum of policy options that congress may choose to consider .

at one end of the spectrum are calls to remove export restrictions entirely .

at the other end are calls to keep , maintain , and possibly expand current export restrictions .

additionally , there are various proposals to ease crude oil export restrictions on a limited basis .

as of the date of this report , two industry groups have formed to advocate opposing positions to crude oil export policy changes: ( 1 ) crude and ( 2 ) pace .

the following sections examine some policy options that may be considered .

during the 113 th congress , several bills were proposed that would eliminate current crude oil export restrictions .

essentially , each bill proposed to modify the energy policy and conservation act by removing the requirement that the president promulgate a rule prohibiting the export of domestically produced crude oil .

following is a list of four bills that were proposed in the 113 th congress: h.r .

4286 : american energy renaissance act of 2014 h.r .

4349 : crude oil export act s. 2170 : american energy renaissance act of 2014 h.r .

5814 : to adapt to changing crude oil market conditions appendix a .

crude oil price history appendix a .

appendix b .

comparison of economic impact studies as debate about u.s. crude oil export policy has continued , several organizations have published analytical studies that assess the potential economic effects associated with removing crude oil export restrictions .

table b - 1 compares four of the published studies in terms of major areas covered that may be of interest to congress .

comparing these studies on a truly equivalent basis is difficult since each study uses a different methodology , approach , model , and set of assumptions to derive results .

additionally , study results can be influenced by oil market conditions , which can change over time , at the point the study was conducted .

finally , one of the unknown factors in the studies that is quite difficult to assess is how the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) might respond ( i.e. , maintaining production and accepting potentially lower prices or reducing production levels as a means of possibly maintaining oil price levels ) to additional crude oil in the international oil market .

exactly how , or even if , opec might respond to a change in u.s. crude oil export policy is highly uncertain .

however , an opec action could affect the economic and market impacts of a change in export policy .

nevertheless , there are some general themes that are consistent among the compared studies .

assuming that crude oil export restrictions are removed , ( 1 ) u.s. domestic and international oil prices will likely converge , ( 2 ) there is expected to be downward pressure on u.s. gasoline and petroleum product prices , and ( 3 ) u.s. oil production and exports are expected to increase , along with economic activity needed to support this increase .

the magnitude of these effects varies , in some cases considerably .

table b - 1 provides an overview assessment of results from the included studies .

however , there are a number of variables and caveats associated with each study .

therefore , readers are encouraged to review the full study reports in order to obtain context and understand the assumptions and caveats associated with individual study results .

in addition to the four studies compared in table b - 1 , other impact studies and analysis from the aspen institute , the government accountability office ( gao ) , and the congressional budget office ( cbo ) have been published that consider economic , price , and budget effects associated with removing crude oil export restrictions .

appendix c. processed condensate exports: a change in energy policy ? .

with some exceptions , crude oil exports are prohibited under current law , while many petroleum products may be freely exported without requiring a license from the department of commerce's bureau of industry and security ( bis ) .

increasing u.s. production of light crude oil and condensate is resulting in price discounts — relative to domestic and international benchmarks — for some oil producers .

limited domestic marketability of "lease condensate," combined with crude oil export restrictions , is motivating oil producers to pursue export markets as a way to increase the value of this hydrocarbon material .

in june 2014 , it was reported that bis ruled to allow processed condensate to be exported by two firms .

press reports about the bis rulings resulted in debate about whether this represents either a change to crude oil export policy or an administrative ruling within the existing regulatory framework .

crude oil definition: open to interpretation the bis crude oil definition specifically includes "lease condensate," which is subject to export restrictions: " crude oil " is defined as a mixture of hydrocarbons that existed in liquid phase in underground reservoirs and remains liquid at atmospheric pressure after passing through surface separating facilities and which has not been processed through a crude oil distillation tower .

included are reconstituted crude petroleum , and lease condensate and liquid hydrocarbons produced from tar sands , gilsonite , and oil shale .

drip gases are also included , but topped crude oil , residual oil , and other finished and unfinished oils are excluded .

[emphasis added] however , the definition also includes language that may allow for processed crude oil and condensate to be exported .

for example , the definition indicates that crude oil / lease condensate processed through a distillation tower is export eligible .

as a result , the regulation allows for some degree of interpretation with regard to the amount of processing necessary to qualify as an exportable product .

lease condensate , typically produced with natural gas , is one aspect of the crude oil export debate with several complexities and considerations ( i.e. , no common definition , limited production and price data , and regulatory inconsistencies ) .

additionally , lease condensate has physical / chemical characteristics similar to exportable hydrocarbons such as naphtha , natural gasoline , and plant condensate .

bis commodity classification restrictions on crude oil exports required by the energy policy and conservation act ( p.l .

94-163 ) and other statutes are administered by bis through short - supply controls .

under the export administration regulations ( ear ) , exporters must obtain a license to export crude oil .

some exports permitted by the regulations may be available for a license exception , under which the exporter certifies that a lawful transaction is taking place .

for goods subject to the ear , if an exporter is unsure about an item's classification and the resulting controls on that item , the exporter may request a commodity classification from bis .

commodity classifications generally are used to determine the control status of sensitive or strategic "dual - use" products controlled for national security or foreign policy reasons .

however , these procedures are available to classify any product subject to the ear , including crude oil .

to obtain a commodity classification , an exporter would provide bis specifications for the good / technology , including blueprints , sales brochures , and catalogs .

the end result is a determination that an item is described in an existing classification or is classified as an ear99 .

for raw material such as crude oil , bis may concentrate on the process ( i.e. , distillation ) by which the product is transformed .

however , for most dual - use goods it is the control status of the product , not the process by which it is produced , that is being determined .

processed condensate applications press reports indicate that two companies submitted separate applications to bis requesting an official classification that would allow processed lease condensate to be exported as a product , without requiring a license .

details of the applications and bis rulings , by law and in accordance with the export administration act , are confidential .

however , a july 2014 presentation provides some insight into the content and approach of one processed condensate application .

according to the presentation , multiple parameters were used to argue that processed lease condensate being produced by this particular company should be eligible for export , including ( 1 ) the input lease condensate is processed enough whereby the output is distinctly different ; ( 2 ) output from stabilization / distillation has suitable product uses — not just as a refinery feedstock ( i.e. , crude oil ) ; and ( 3 ) resulting products have similar physical and chemical characteristics to hydrocarbons that are currently exported ( see figure c - 1 ) .

after considering the application , bis issued a ruling to the company that classifies the processed condensate as an ear99 — no export license required — product .

policy and market implications some industry observers indicate that the bis rulings represent a policy change and may result in large volumes of minimally processed crude oil being exported .

however , the administration has publicly stated that there has been no policy change and that the two rulings are within the scope of current regulations .

logic supporting the industry observers' argument is the following: since , by definition , condensate is crude oil , then applying the same process to crude oil would result in exportable product .

it is important to note that the rulings are specific to products that result from stabilizing and distilling condensate .

applying the same stabilization and distilling processes to crude oil may result in a different output stream and include products that may or may not be considered export eligible .

however , the bis crude oil definition does include language — exclusion of "topped" crude oil and "unfinished" oils — that could be interpreted and might allow for exports of minimally / partially processed crude oil .

while the two bis condensate rulings may not result in mass export volumes of domestically produced crude oil and condensate , they will likely result in an increased number of applications to bis requesting classifications that push the envelope to determine how much crude oil and condensate processing is necessary to result in export - qualified products , especially in light of ambiguity and the lack of clearly defined terms within the crude oil definition .

in july 2014 , it was reported that processed condensate applications at bis were being "held without action. .

