charter schools are public schools of choice that are created in accordance with state laws and are publicly funded and tuition free .

they are operated according to the terms of charters or contracts granted by public chartering agencies , such as local educational agencies ( leas ) or state boards of education .

the terms of charters typically provide charter school operators with increased autonomy over the operation of schools , often including exemption from , or flexibility in the application of , many of the state or local regulations otherwise applicable to public schools .

this increased autonomy is often granted in exchange for the expectation of increased accountability for results or outcomes .

depending on the specific state law , charter schools may operate as their own lea or as part of a traditional lea .

funding for charter schools is normally provided on a per - pupil basis .

as opposed to having neighborhood school catchment areas , enrollment in charter schools is normally open to applicants on an lea - wide or even statewide basis , and parents must actively choose to enroll their children in charter schools .

if more students apply for admission to a charter school than can be accommodated , students are normally admitted on the basis of a lottery .

the first charter school opened its doors in minnesota in 1992 , following the enactment of the first state charter school law in 1991 .

other states followed suit with california , colorado , georgia , massachusetts , michigan , and new mexico enacting charter school laws in 1992 and 1993 .

by 1999 , 36 states and the district of columbia had charter school laws .

currently , 42 states and the district of columbia have charter school laws permitting the authorization of charter schools .

the growth in the number of charter schools and the number of students attending charter schools has been commensurate with the increase in the number of charter school state laws .

for example , during the 2000-2001 school year , 1,941 charter schools were in operation , serving about 459,000 students .

five years later , 3,689 charter schools were in operation , serving just over 1 million students .

during the 2012-2013 school year , there were 6,004 charter schools in operation , accounting for 6.3% of all public schools .

these schools served approximately 2.3 million students , accounting for 4.6% of all public school students .

under title v - b - 1 and v - b - 2 of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , federal support is provided to assist with the opening of new charter schools and for the funding of charter school facilities .

title v - b - 1 authorizes the charter schools program , the per - pupil facilities aid program ( more commonly referred to as the state charter school facilities incentive grants program ) , and national activities .

title v - b - 2 authorizes the credit enhancement initiatives to assist charter school facility acquisition , construction , and renovation program ( more commonly known as the credit enhancement program ) .

during the 112 th and 113 th congresses , congress has actively pursued both a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea , which would include amending and reauthorizing the title v - b charter school programs , and stand alone legislation to amend and reauthorize the title v - b programs independent of a comprehensive esea reauthorization .

most recently , the house education and workforce committee ordered reported the success and opportunity through quality charter schools act ( h.r .

10 ) by a vote of 36-3 on april 8 , 2014 .

the bill would amend and reauthorize the title v - b charter school programs .

this report is divided into three main parts .

the first part examines the federal programs authorized under title v - b of the esea that provide support to public charter schools .

each of the aforementioned programs is considered as is the national activities component of the charter schools program .

the second part of the report provides data on program appropriations .

the third part of the report provides an overview of recent congressional efforts to reauthorize the charter school programs .

the appendix provides a brief legislative history of the federal charter school programs .

congress enacted the first federal charter school program in the mid - 1990s , three years after the passage of the first state charter school law .

the charter schools program was initially authorized in 1994 under title x , part c of the esea with the enactment of the improving america's schools act ( iasa ; p.l .

103-382 ) .

the no child left behind act ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) subsequently created the two charter school facilities support programs included in current law — state charter school facilities incentive grants and credit enhancement for charter school facilities program .

 ( the appendix provides a more detailed legislative history of the charter school programs authorized under the esea. ) .

the charter school programs are authorized under title v - b - 1 and title v - b - 2 of the esea .

title v - b - 1 authorizes the charter schools program , national activities , and state charter school facilities incentive grants .

title v - b - 2 authorizes the credit enhancement program .

the statutory purpose of title v - b - 1 is to increase national understanding of charter schools by providing funding for the planning , program design , and initial implementation of charter schools ; evaluating the effects of such schools , including the effects of charter schools on students , student academic achievement , parents , and staff ; expanding the number of "high - quality" charter schools ; and encouraging states to provide support to charter schools for facilities financing in an amount that is similar to the amount provided to traditional public schools .

the statutory purpose of title v - b - 2 is to provide grants to eligible entities to enable them to demonstrate "innovative credit enhancement initiatives" that will assist charter schools in acquiring , constructing , and renovating facilities .

this part of the report provides an overview of each of the three charter school programs included in title v - b of the esea .

it also discusses national activities that are authorized under title v - b - 1 .

it concludes with a discussion of substantive changes that have been made to these programs through annual appropriations acts since fy2010 .

 table 2 details appropriations for the charter school programs authorized under title v - b of the esea .

appropriations for the state charter school facilities incentive grants were included in the overall appropriation for the charter schools program ( title v - b - 1 ) through fy2007 .

appropriations for the credit enhancement for charter school facilities program were provided as a separate line item in appropriations bills from fy2003 through fy2007 .

beginning in fy2008 , appropriations bills have permitted or required the secretary to use a certain amount of funding from the appropriation for the charter schools program to support the state charter school facilities incentive grant program and the credit enhancement for charter school facilities program .

table 3 specifies how much funding was provided for charter schools program grants to seas and non - seas ( in instances where ed has reported these data separately ) , grants to charter management organizations as permitted through appropriations acts since fy2010 , state charter school facilities incentive grants , peer review of new applications for title v - b - 1 programs and activities , national activities , and credit enhancement grants for charter school facilities .

these data reflect what ed provided ( or anticipates providing ) to each activity based on the parameters established by the esea and appropriations acts .

during the 112 th congress , the house education and workforce committee and the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee ordered reported bills that would have provided for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea .

the elementary and secondary education reauthorization act of 2011 ( s. 3578 ; s.rept .

112-221 ) would have amended and reauthorized the charter school programs as part of a comprehensive esea reauthorization bill .

the encouraging innovation and effective teachers act ( h.r .

3990 ; h.rept .

112-459 part 1 ) , one of two bills that would have collectively provided for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea , expressed the sense of the house of representatives that the charter school programs should be amended as they would have been amended under h.r .

2218 ( empowering parents through quality charter schools act ) .

h.r .

2218 would have amended and reauthorized the charter school programs without providing for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea .

the bill received bipartisan support and was passed on the house floor on september 13 , 2011 , by a vote of 365-54 .

during the 113 th congress , both the house and senate have considered legislation to reauthorize the esea .

on june 12 , 2013 , the help committee considered and ordered reported the strengthening america's schools act ( s. 1094 ) by a strictly partisan vote of 12-10 .

the house education and workforce committee also considered and ordered reported a bill that would reauthorize the esea .

on june 19 , 2013 , on a strictly partisan vote of 23-16 , the success for all students act ( h.r .

5 ) was ordered reported .

h.r .

5 was subsequently considered and amended on the house floor .

the amended version of h.r .

5 was passed on july 19 , 2013 , by a vote of 221-207 .

it is unclear whether s. 1094 will be considered on the senate floor .

both h.r .

5 and s. 1094 would amend and reauthorize the charter schools program as part of a comprehensive esea reauthorization bill .

similar to the 112 th congress , the house education and workforce committee has also acted in the 113 th congress to move a stand - alone bill to amend and reauthorize the charter school programs .

on april 1 , 2014 , representatives kline and miller introduced the success and opportunity through quality charter schools act ( h.r .

10 ) .

h.r .

10 was considered by the house education and workforce committee on april 8 , 2014 .

the bill was ordered reported by a vote of 36-3 .

h.r .

10 would make several changes to current law provisions , while incorporating provisions that are somewhat similar to those that have been included in recent appropriations bills .

key changes include the following .

structurally , h.r .

10 would put all provisions related to the charter school programs under title v - b - 1 of the esea rather than having provisions in both title v - b - 1 and v - b - 2 .

more specifically , all provisions related specifically to the charter schools program would be included in section 5203 .

all provisions related specifically to the two charter school facilities programs would be included in section 5204 .

section 5205 would continue to include provisions related to national programs .

h.r .

10 would modify the authorization of appropriations .

there would be a single authorization of appropriations for all programs .

for fy2015 through fy2020 , the authorization level would be $300 million .

overall appropriations for charter school programs have not exceeded $257 million annually since the enactment of the programs .

the bill would also specify the percentage of funds provided through the annual appropriations process that should be used for each program and national activities .

the bill would alter the purposes of the charter school programs including , for example , a new focus on improving student services to increase opportunities for students with disabilities , limited english proficient students , and other traditionally underserved students to attend charter schools ; supporting efforts to strengthen the charter school authorizing process ; and supporting quality accountability and transparency in the operational performance of authorized public chartering agencies .

while the charter schools program would continue to support the planning and initial implementation of charter schools , the program would focus specifically on supporting ( 1 ) new charter schools ; ( 2 ) replicated , high - quality charter school models ; and ( 3 ) expanded , high - quality charter schools .

the focus on replication and expansion is not included in current law , but as previously discussed , it has been allowed under national activities by recent annual appropriations acts .

it would also allow eligible entities to provide technical assistance to eligible applicants and authorized chartering agencies to carry out the aforementioned activities and to work with authorized public charter agencies to improve authorizing quality .

unlike current law , authorized state recipients of funds under the charter schools program would not be limited to seas .

rather , h.r .

10 would define "state entity" to include seas , a state charter school board , a governor , or a charter school support organization .

in addition , under the charter schools program , developers interested in receiving funds to start charter schools in states that did not apply for or did not receive a charter schools program grant would no longer be able to apply directly to the secretary for a grant under this program .

however , new provisions included in h.r .

10 under national activities would allow an eligible applicant in a state that did not apply for or receive funds under the charter schools program to apply directly to the secretary for a grant .

while current law requires a charter school to use a lottery if more students apply than can be accommodated , h.r .

10 would incorporate new guidance from ed , allowing charter schools to use weighted lotteries to admit students .

under h.r .

10 , grants awarded to state entities would be for a period of not more than five years .

similarly , subgrants awarded by a state entity would be for a period of not more than five years , of which an eligible applicant would not be permitted to use more than 18 months for planning and program design .

a state entity would be prohibited from receiving more than one grant in a five - year period .

an eligible applicant would be prohibited from receiving more than one subgrant per individual charter school for a five - year period , unless the eligible applicant demonstrates not less than three years of improved educational results in specified areas , such as student academic achievement .

h.r .

10 would make substantial changes to the state entity application process with respect to what must be included in the application .

for example , in its application , the state entity would be required to describe how it will support new charter schools ; replicated , high - quality charter school models ; or expanded , high - quality charter schools and the proposed number of each to be opened under the state entity's program .

state entities would be required to provide additional information about how they will help the charter schools supported by eligible applicants and the students attending the charter school participate in federal programs for which they are eligible , receive their commensurate share of federal funds , and meet the needs of students served under such programs .

the state entity would need to have plans and procedures to assist students enrolled in a charter school that closes or loses its charter to enroll in other high - quality schools .

in addition , the state entity would have to explain how it would support charter schools in leas with large numbers of schools identified for improvement ; work with charter schools to promote the inclusion of all students to promote retention ; ensure that charter schools do not have policies or procedures that create barriers to student enrollment ; and share best practices in core academic subjects and science , technology , engineering , and mathematics , including computer science .

h.r .

10 would also include new requirements specific to non - sea state entity applicants .

the bill would require state entities to describe the extent to which the state entity is working to develop or strengthen a cohesive statewide system to support the opening of new charter schools ; replicated , high - quality charter school models ; or expanded , high - quality charter schools .

h.r .

10 would also require a state entity to describe how it will conduct its subgrant competition , including descriptions of roles and responsibilities of various organizations involved with the school , including for - profit management companies ; detailed information about quality controls agreed to between the eligible applicant and the relevant authorized public chartering agency ; how school performance in the state's academic accountability system will be the primary factor upon which charter renewal or revocation decisions will be based , how charters may be revoked or not renewed due to financial , structural , or operational factors involving school management ; the roles and responsibilities of any outside partners ; how the state entity will help the charter school consider students' transportation needs ; and how the state entity will support diverse charter school models .

h.r .

10 would not retain provisions in current law detailing the contents of the eligible applicant application or the selection criteria for eligible applicants .

the bill would also add new assurances that state entities must provide in order to receive a grant .

these new assurances would address topics such as the recruitment , enrollment , and retention of traditionally underserved students ; promotion of quality authorizing , the inclusion of public charter schools in decision - making about the state's public school system ; and information disclosure requirements for each charter school .

h.r .

10 retains many of the same selection criteria included in current law ( eg , those related to flexibility , ambitiousness , assessing , and the likelihood that subgrantees will meet objectives ) .

the bill also adds several new criteria .

for example , the secretary would be required to take into consideration the state entity's plan to ( 1 ) monitor subgrantees ; ( 2 ) work with the authorized public charter agencies to avoid duplication of work for the charter schools and authorized public chartering agencies ; and ( 3 ) provide "adequate" technical assistance for charter schools receiving funds and quality authorizing efforts .

the bill would build on many existing priority criteria for making awards and add several new criteria .

for example , h.r .

10 would give priority in awards to states that do not have caps on the number or percentage of charter schools ; provide equitable financing ; use best practices to improve struggling schools and leas ; partner with an organization that has a track record of success in developing management organizations ( nonprofit or for - profit ) to support the development of charter schools ; support charter schools that support at - risk students ; and take steps to ensure all authorized public chartering agencies implement best practices for authorizing schools .

with respect to local uses of funds , h.r .

10 makes substantial changes to current law provisions .

under h.r .

10 , eligible applicants receiving funds would be required to use the funds to open and prepare to operate a new charter school ; a replicated , high - quality charter school model ; or an expanded , high - quality charter school .

the bill notes that this may include activities such as preparing teachers and school leaders ( eg , professional development ) ; acquiring equipment , educational materials , and supplies ; and necessary renovations and minor facilities repairs .

unlike current law , under h.r .

10 , the state entity would not be permitted to establish a revolving loan fund or award dissemination grants to charter schools .

h.r .

10 would add reporting requirements for each state entity receiving a grant .

the state entity would be required to submit a report to the secretary at the end of the third year of the five - year grant period and at the end of the grant period .

the report would be required to contain information such as the number of students served by each subgrant , the number of subgrants awarded for each of the aforementioned purposes ( i.e. , new charter school , replication , or expansion ) , how the state entity worked with authorized public chartering agencies , how the state entity complied with required assurances and ensured that eligible applicants did the same , and the progress the state entity made in meeting the priority criteria used by the secretary to award grants .

the bill would reserve not more than 10% of the appropriation for charter school programs for national activities , of which at least 75% must be used to make direct grants to charter management organizations or to eligible applicants in states that did not apply for or did not receive a charter school program grant .

the secretary would be required to give priority in awarding these grants to eligible applicants that meet various criteria , including having a high proportion of high - quality charter schools in their network ; demonstrating success serving educationally disadvantaged students and working with schools identified for improvement by the state ; not having a "significant" proportion of charter schools that have been closed , had their charter revoked for compliance issues , or had their affiliation with such eligible applicant revoked ; and having procedures for the timely closing of a charter school and plans for the students to attend other high - quality schools .

remaining funds would be used to provide technical assistance , disseminate best practices , and evaluate the impact of the charter school program , including its impact on student achievement .

with respect to state charter school facilities incentive grants ( also known as the per - pupil facilities aid program ) , h.r .

10 would make three substantial changes .

first , the bill would allow a state that is required by state law to provide charter schools with access to "adequate facility space" but which does not have a per - pupil facilities aid program specified in law to apply for a grant if the state agrees to use the funds consistent with the requirements of state charter school facilities incentive grant program .

second , h.r .

10 would permit a state to receive more than one grant under this program , provided the amount of such funds provided to charter schools increases with each successive grant .

third , the bill would allow a state to partner with one or more organizations to provide up to 50% of the state share of the cost of the program .

the bill would also make three substantive changes to the credit enhancement for charter school facilities program .

first , in the application process , h.r .

10 would require the eligible entity to describe how it will offer a combination of rates and terms that are more favorable than the rates and terms that a charter school could receive without assistance from the eligible entity .

it would also eliminate the secretary's ability to require additional information to be provided on the application .

second , with respect to the program objectives , the bill would add a third objective related to predevelopment costs associated with the acquisition of an interest in improved or real property ; the construction of new facilities ; or the renovation , repair , or alteration of existing facilities that are necessary to start or continue charter school operations .

third , h.r .

10 would alter the reporting requirements associated with the program to require that the report include data on the amount of funds used by each school , the type of project facilitated by the grant , and the type of assistance provided to the charter schools .

while h.r .

10 would retain many of the provisions included in the definition of a "charter school," it would add several new requirements .

the bill would require charter school compliance with additional federal laws including the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) and the family education rights and privacy act ( ferpa ) .

it would allow students attending a charter school that is affiliated with another charter school to be automatically enrolled in the next grade level at the affiliated charter school without going through a lottery process .

h.r .

10 would modify the definition to specify that charter schools may also serve prekindergarten and postsecondary students .

h.r .

10 would also add five new definitions: ( 1 ) "charter management organization," ( 2 ) "charter school support organization," ( 3 ) "expanded , high - quality charter school," ( 4 ) "high - quality charter school," and ( 5 ) "replicated , high - quality charter school model. .

this section provides a summary of the initial authorization of the charter schools program in 1994 .

this was followed by substantial amendments to the program in 1998 and 2002 , as well as the enactment of two additional programs related to charter schools .

initial program authorization the charter schools program was initially authorized in 1994 in title x , part c of the esea with the enactment of the improving america's schools act ( iasa ; p.l .

103-382 ) .

under the charter schools program , the secretary of education ( hereafter referred to as the secretary ) was authorized to make grants of up to three years to state educational agencies ( seas ) for implementation of charter school grant programs for local educational agencies ( leas ) .

charter schools were defined as public schools that , under the terms of state statutes , were exempted from significant state or local rules and were committed to the achievement of specific educational objectives .

these schools either had to be a newly created public school or be converted from an existing traditional public school by an individual or group of individuals , such as teachers , administrators , parents , or community members .

among other requirements , charter schools were required to be nonsectarian , were not permitted to charge tuition , had to comply with specified civil rights statutes , and had to admit students through lotteries if the number of applicants exceeds enrollment capacity .

the schools had to receive their charters from an sea , lea , or other public entity so authorized under state law and approved by the secretary as being a chartering agency .

charter school expansion act of 1998 the charter schools program was subsequently amended by the charter school expansion act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-278 ) .

p.l .

105-278 only amended the charter schools program and did not provide for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea .

among other changes , p.l .

105-278 established a priority to award grants to states that ( 1 ) provide charter schools with financial autonomy ; ( 2 ) have increased their number of charter schools ; ( 3 ) either authorize multiple agencies to grant charters or allow charter applicants to appeal rejections of their applications ; and ( 4 ) periodically review the performance of charter schools .

p.l .

105-278 also expanded technical assistance to charter schools , especially regarding their eligibility for federal aid programs , and required that charter schools receive the federal aid for which they are eligible beginning in their first year of operation .

no child left behind act the charter schools program was next amended by the no child left behind act ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) in 2002 , which provided for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea .

this act largely left intact changes that had been made to the charter schools program through p.l .

105-278 and moved the program from title x - c of the esea to title v - b - 1 .

in addition , two new programs related to charter school facilities were enacted under nclb .

the first program , per - pupil facilities aid program ( more commonly known as state charter schools facilities incentive grants ; section 5205 ( b ) ) , provides competitive grants to states to help establish or enhance , and administer , a per - pupil facilities aid program for charter schools .

the second program , credit enhancement initiatives to assist charter school facility acquisition , construction , and renovation ( more commonly known as the credit enhancement for charter school facilities program ; title v - b - 2 ) , authorizes ed to make grants to three or more entities to help charter schools improve their credit in order to obtain private sector capital to acquire , lease , renovate , or construct appropriate facilities .

substantive changes to the charter school programs made through appropriations acts substantive changes have been made to the charter school programs through the annual labor , health and human services , and education and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations acts since fy2010 .

these changes have affected program funding , the uses of funds by the secretary and charter schools , and the sea application process for grants under the charter schools program .

however , these changes have not amended the law authorizing the charter school programs .

a more detailed discussion of these changes is included in the main body of this report in the section on "substantive changes to program authorizing legislation made through annual appropriations acts. .

