president obama's fy2015 budget proposes to add to the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant a $602 million per year "pathways to jobs" fund .

the fund would exclusively finance subsidized employment programs .

the proposal outlined in budget documents would make grants to states to subsidize jobs for low - income parents , including noncustodial parents ; guardians of children ; and youth .

eligible persons would either have to be eligible for tanf cash assistance or have incomes below 200% of the poverty line .

under the proposal , the program would subsidize up to 100% of employment costs ( wages , workplace benefits , training , and administrative costs ) for the first 90 days of employment .

partial subsidies would be payable thereafter .

to offset the cost of the "pathways to jobs" fund , the budget proposes to end the current law tanf "contingency fund. .

the administration's "pathways to jobs" proposal comes as interest in subsidized employment for the economically disadvantaged has been rekindled by a brief experience of tanf - funded jobs during the recent recession .

to help assess the proposal , this report provides background on government - funded subsidized employment programs ; discusses the history of subsidized employment within the tanf block grant ; and examines some of the policy considerations raised by the proposal .

subsidized employment programs use government funds to pay all or part of the wages of those working in jobs .

the job may be in either the public or the private sector .

the employment subsidies are payments to employers that reduce the cost of hiring and employing a program participant .

these jobs pay wages , unlike unpaid activities that are performed in exchange for receiving a cash assistance benefit ( often referred to as "workfare" ) .

subsidized employment programs are also distinct from "on - the - job training," because there is no explicit requirement that employees be given training opportunities .

historically , subsidized employment programs usually provided public service jobs .

they began as measures to provide work and income during the mass unemployment of the great depression , as the federal government employed persons in the works progress administration ( wpa ) and civilian conversation corps ( ccc ) .

beginning in the 1970s , public service jobs were also used to address unemployment during recessions .

under the comprehensive employment and training act ( ceta ) , public service jobs were used both to address cyclical unemployment as well as provide employment to the economically disadvantaged .

these were jobs in state or local governments .

ceta's public service employment program ended in 1981 .

from that time until the 2007-2009 recession , subsidized employment was provided primarily in summer youth employment , and in transitional jobs demonstrations targeting very "hard - to - serve" adults .

transitional jobs are usually in either state or local governments or in the nonprofit sector .

there has been limited funding for transitional jobs .

in fy2011 , an appropriation of $40 million was provided for the department of labor's ( dol's ) enhanced transitional jobs demonstration program .

though subsidized employment , by paying part or all of the wages to employers , has been a small part of recent policies for the economically disadvantaged , wage subsidies in general have been an important part of public policy for low - income families with children since the 1990s .

the largest wage subsidies go directly to low - income workers ( rather than employers ) through the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and child tax credit .

these two refundable tax credits are conditioned on having earnings , and are policies designed to "make work pay" more than public assistance and induce parents who would earn low wages into the labor force .

less attention has been focused on reducing the costs to employers of hiring people in low - income families .

much of the experience of subsidizing private sector employment is from tax credits to employers for hiring recipients of public assistance or disadvantaged persons ( for example , the work opportunity tax credit ( wotc ) and the welfare - to - work tax credit ) .

though there is limited recent experience with subsidized employment programs from which to determine whether they can achieve their policy goals , this might soon change .

the department of health and human services ( hhs ) is currently fielding an experiment evaluating subsidized jobs programs , though findings from this study are yet to be published .

the department of labor is currently fielding and evaluating "enhanced" transitional jobs programs .

additionally , the recent "farm bill" permitted states to operate pilot work programs in the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , which could include subsidized employment .

the tanf block grant is best known for helping states finance cash assistance ( "welfare" ) for needy families with children .

in addition to cash assistance , tanf finances a wide range of benefits and services aimed at ameliorating the effects of , and addressing the root causes of , child poverty .

since the enactment of the 1996 welfare reform law , which established tanf , states have had the authority to use tanf funds for subsidizing the employment for certain populations .

states can subsidize employment for recipients of cash assistance , or operate programs for broader populations as long as it is consistent with tanf goals .

the populations states can use tanf to assist include parents , including noncustodial parents , and youths .

states have broad latitude in designing their tanf programs , including subsidized employment .

however , states must have procedures in place to address potential "displacement" of regular workers by tanf assistance recipients involved in work activities , including subsidized employment .

states are prohibited from employing a tanf assistance recipient in a position when another individual is on layoff from the same or a substantially equivalent job , and they cannot place an individual in a job from which another person has been fired for the purpose of replacement with a tanf assistance recipient in an activity .

states must create a procedure to hear complaints of violations of the "nondisplacement" rules .

though subsidized employment has been a part of tanf from its inception , up until fy2010 it was little used .

figure 1 shows federal and state tanf expenditures on wage subsidies for fy2000 through fy2012 .

as shown , expenditures tended to be low before fy2010 , but then spiked to over $1 billion in fy2010 .

the spike occurred at the level of peak unemployment caused by the 2007-2009 recession .

it was also in response to extra tanf funding provided , in part , to finance subsidized employment programs .

the administration's proposal to create a tanf fund to exclusively finance subsidized employment and end the current law contingency fund raises two sets of policy considerations .

the first is whether subsidized employment programs can achieve certain policy goals .

subsidized employment programs can be intended to serve a number of policy purposes , including ( 1 ) creating jobs , ( 2 ) providing income support to those in subsidized jobs , and ( 3 ) increasing the long - term employability of participants .

there is some research to draw upon in assessing whether the tanf subsidized employment initiative might meet these goals .

the second set of policy considerations asks whether certain policy goals are forgone by offsetting the cost of the subsidized employment program through ending the current law contingency fund .

policy makers , should they choose to end the current tanf contingency fund , might wish to consider alternative uses of the budget savings from such an action .

subsidized employment programs historically were provided in the workforce programs , with most jobs in the public sector .

such public service jobs used to be associated with both counter - cyclical job creation as well as providing work for the economically disadvantaged .

except for youth employment programs , large - scale public service employment ended in 1981 .

the brief experience of tanf ecf - funded subsidized jobs has rekindled interest in providing government funds to subsidize the cost of employing the economically disadvantaged .

unlike many earlier subsidized jobs programs , the ecf did not rely on public service jobs alone , financing some jobs in the private sector .

subsidized jobs are one means of having economically disadvantaged parents work — a goal of the 1996 welfare reform law .

however , the evidence is mixed on whether subsidized jobs programs can have positive long - term impacts on the employment and earnings of program participants .

research comparing the efficacy of subsidized jobs to other potential policies — such as education , training , or on - the - job training — has yet to be done .

u.s. department of health and human services , administration for children and families , office of planning , research , and evaluation ( opre ) .

subsidizing employment opportunities for low - income families .

a review of state employment programs created through the tanf emergency fund , opre report 2011-38 , december 2011 , prepared by mdrc , http: / / www.acf.hhs.gov / sites / default / files / opre / tanf_emer_fund.pdf .

dan bloom .

transitional jobs: background , program models , and evaluation evidence .

mdrc .

february 2010. http: / / www.mdrc.org / sites / default / files / transitional_jobs_background_fr.pdf .

