the u.s. congress has expressed deep concern over russia's annexation of crimea and its role in the ongoing crisis in ukraine .

among other things , the crisis has heightened concerns in the united states and in europe about the future direction and scope of the transatlantic security relationship and the cornerstone of that relationship , the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) .

some policy makers and analysts have called for a reassessment of the transatlantic community's progress in realizing its goal of a europe "whole , free , and at peace," citing security concerns in some of nato's central and eastern european member states and ongoing territorial disputes in countries on the alliance's borders , such as moldova , ukraine , and georgia .

questions about nato's commitment and capacity to defend its member states and about the nature of the alliance's relationship with russia have moved to the forefront of discussions about nato's future .

these questions are expected to feature prominently at nato's next summit of heads of state and government , scheduled to take place in wales on september 4-5 , 2014 .

the crisis in ukraine has also exposed longer - standing tensions within nato regarding its strategic focus .

since the end of the cold war , nato has evolved from an exclusive focus on territorial defense and deterrence in europe to overseeing a range of military and crisis management operations across the globe .

this transformation was predicated largely on the perception that russia no longer posed a security threat to nato , and on a conviction that the primary security challenges facing the allies emanated from beyond the euro - atlantic region .

however , some nato members , including many former members of the communist bloc , have consistently expressed concern that the alliance's transformation could come at the expense of its capacity to uphold its commitment to collective defense , enshrined in article 5 of the north atlantic treaty .

after more than a decade of war in afghanistan and against the backdrop of a militarily resurgent russia , some allies are calling for a renewed nato focus on collective defense .

debates about nato's mission come against the backdrop of continued economic stagnation in europe and long - standing u.s. concerns about a downward trend in european defense spending , shortfalls in european defense capabilities , and burden sharing within the alliance .

in 2013 , total defense spending by nato european allies as a percentage of gdp was about 1.6% ; and just three nato allies ( greece , the uk , and the united states ) exceeded the alliance's goal of spending 2% of gdp on defense .

since 2001 , the u.s. share of total allied defense spending has grown from 63% to 72% .

analysts in the united states have long asserted that defense spending in many european countries is inefficient , with disproportionately high personnel costs coming at the expense of much - needed research , development , and procurement .

in 2013 , only four allies met a nato guideline to devote 20% of defense expenditures to the purchase of major equipment , considered a key indicator of the pace of military modernization .

these trends correlate with significant shortfalls in key military capabilities , including strategic air - and sealift ; aerial refueling ; and intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance ( isr ) .

nato secretary general anders fogh rasmussen and others have argued that the budgetary constraints facing allied governments could spur much - needed defense cooperation among european allies .

at nato's may 2012 summit , the allies committed to a "smart defense" initiative that calls for cooperation , prioritization , and specialization in pursuit of needed defense capabilities .

some critics maintain that this is just the latest in a long line of post - cold war efforts to enhance capabilities that have had mixed success , at best .

they argue that the limited outcomes may reflect a general lack of public support for military engagement and divergent threat perceptions both across the atlantic and within europe .

as noted above , within europe , some allies have emphasized the need for territorial defense capabilities , while others have stressed the importance of more flexible , rapidly deployable units and civilian - military crisis management operations .

an increasingly strained budget environment and heightened concerns about the security threat from russia appear to be amplifying these differences .

u.s. officials have consistently underscored their firm commitment to the transatlantic security relationship and the collective defense of the alliance .

however , far - reaching defense budget cuts in the united states , the obama administration's "rebalance" to asia , and the withdrawal over the past two years of two of the u.s. army's four brigade combat teams based in europe have raised questions about future u.s. commitments to european security .

russia's actions in ukraine have heightened these concerns .

reflecting the views of the united states and its european allies , nato secretary general rasmussen has characterized russia's military aggression as "the most serious crisis in europe since the fall of the berlin wall," and declared that nato can "no longer do business as usual with russia. .

nato's response to the crisis thus far has focused on demonstrating support for ukraine and its territorial integrity ; reaffirming the allied commitment to defensing central and eastern european allies ; and rebuking russia .

in early april , nato announced the suspension of all "practical" civilian and military cooperation with russia in the framework of the nato - russia council .

political dialogue between the two sides will continue .

cooperative activities in the nato - russia council that could be affected include a helicopter maintenance fund and a counternarcotics initiative in afghanistan , and some joint counter - terrorism initiatives .

russian actions in ukraine have prompted a reassessment of post - cold war efforts to build a cooperative relationship with moscow .

as noted above , on april 2 , nato suspended all practical civilian and military cooperation with russia .

in the words of nato deputy secretary general alexander vershbow , "for 20 years , the security of the euro - atlantic region has been based on the premise that we do not face an adversary to our east .

that premise is now in doubt. .

according to some analysts , russia's annexation of crimea validates the concerns long expressed by some nato member states , especially in central and eastern europe , regarding russia's commitment to partnership , its unpredictability , acts of hostility toward nato and its partners , and perceived attempts to sow disunity within the alliance .

on the other hand , while russian actions have drawn uniform condemnation from nato and the european union , many in europe and the united states emphasize that europe's long - term security will depend on cooperative relations with russia .

as noted above , some nato members in western europe have expressed concern that a military response to russian actions could significantly hinder future attempts to boost cooperation with russia .

the principal institutional mechanism for nato - russia cooperation has been the nato - russia council ( nrc ) , established in may 2002 , five years after the 1997 nato - russia founding act provided the formal basis for bilateral cooperation .

most observers agree that despite having advanced nato - russia cooperation in some areas — including in afghanistan — the nrc has failed to live up to its potential .

these perceived shortcomings are often attributed to russian suspicion about nato's long - term intentions , including with respect to countries it long considered within its sphere of influence such as ukraine and georgia .

many european allies continue to stress that they aspire to cooperation and partnership with russia .

however , analysts expect ties to continue to be marked by contention and mistrust , at least for the time being .

moscow has objected to nato and the united states' military responses to the crisis , calling into question the alliance's 1997 commitment — codified in the nato - russia founding act — not to permanently station substantial combat forces in countries that joined nato after the collapse of the soviet union .

although nato has not as yet made decisions about permanent troop deployments , secretary general rasmussen has responded to russian complaints by noting that russia "has violated every principle and international commitment it has made. .

on july 29 , 2014 , eu member states ( 22 of which are also members of nato ) committed to ending all future arms sales to russia , after months of pressure from governments and analysts on both sides of the atlantic .

the embargo will not , however , apply to previously agreed sales .

compared to other european arms sales , sales to russia are relatively insignificant .

however , over the past several years , some critics have drawn attention to several high profile deals .

chief among these is a 2011 french agreement to sell russia two amphibious assault warships in a deal worth €1.2 billion ( about $1.6 billion ) — the first ever sale of a significant offensive military capability by a nato member to russia .

the first of these mistral ships is scheduled to be delivered later this year .

french president françois hollande has repeatedly stated that france would honor the existing contract .

even before the annexation of crimea , some members of congress and european leaders repeatedly criticized france's decision to sell the mistral to russia , expressing concern about russia's military intentions , while french commentators have noted the economic and associated political benefits of the sale for france .

some members of congress have called on nato to offer to purchase the mistrals built for russia from france .

since russia's annexation of crimea , germany has cancelled the planned sale of a military training facility to russia ; the uk and united states also say they have halted military cooperation .

russian actions in ukraine have prompted some u.s. observers and members of congress to call for a more concerted nato effort to enlarge the alliance , particularly to the east .

among other things , they argue that continued enlargement would send an important signal to aspiring members that nato's "open door" policy will not be scaled back in the face of russian opposition .

some proponents of enlargement add that russia would be less willing and less able to take the aggressive actions it has in ukraine , georgia , and elsewhere in its near - abroad if these countries were members of the alliance .

despite these calls , most analysts consider nato unlikely to make any significant progress toward expanding over the next several years .

they point to a perception in some western european countries that nato has enlarged too quickly and that the alliance should agree on how to resolve a complex range of issues , including managing relations with russia , before taking in new members .

for some allied governments , ongoing territorial disputes with russia in countries such as georgia and ukraine could be a strong deterrent to extending membership invitations to these countries .

four countries are currently considered formal aspirants for nato membership: montenegro , bosnia - herzegovina , macedonia , and georgia .

montenegro has had a membership action plan ( map ) since december 2009 .

although it is considered the candidate with the most advanced membership prospects , nato officials have cautioned that montenegrin security agencies and the defense sector require reforms to meet nato standards and that further efforts need to be made to fight corruption and organized crime in the country .

some have also questioned the level of public support for nato membership in montenegro .

bosnia was formally invited to join the map in april 2010 , but was told that its annual national program under the map would not be accepted until the country resolved the issue of immovable defense property ( mainly former military bases and barracks ) on its territory .

the country's leaders have agreed in principle to resolve the issue , but many doubt whether bosnia can agree on whether to join nato , as bosnian serb leaders have given mixed signals on the issue and public opinion polls have shown very strong opposition to membership among the bosnian serb population .

nato agreed that macedonia met the qualifications for membership in 2008 , but its candidacy has been stalled due to a protracted dispute with nato ally greece over the country's official name .

the two sides have been unable to resolve the issue during talks sponsored by the united nations .

representatives of ukraine's current government have said the country is not seeking nato membership .

this reflects long - standing indifference , if not opposition , to nato membership in the country .

under former president yanukovych , the country renounced previously asserted ambitions to join nato .

according to one march 2014 opinion poll , 34% of ukrainians were for nato membership , and 44% opposed , with a regional split of 74% for membership in western ukraine and 67% opposed in the east .

as the conflict in ukraine has persisted , there has been some indication that public support for nato membership has increased to some degree , though not significantly .

some observers assert that the ukrainian government could be cautious about expressing ambitions to join nato for a number of reasons , including sensitivity to public opinion and possible opposition to membership from countries within the alliance that would be reluctant to further antagonize russia .

in early april , in response to nato secretary general rasmussen's assertion that the door to nato membership for ukraine remained open , german foreign minister frank - walter steinmeier reportedly countered that "nato membership for ukraine is not pending. .

in september 2008 , nato and georgia established the nato - georgia commission ( ngc ) in an effort both to both oversee nato assistance to georgia after its 2008 conflict with russia and to supervise progress toward eventual membership in the alliance , as called for at nato's 2008 bucharest summit .

since then , the two sides have deepened cooperation in a variety of areas , especially on defense and security sector reform , and georgia has contributed to ongoing nato operations , including by deploying the second - largest non - nato contingent in afghanistan .

nonetheless , most observers believe that the unresolved situation in georgia's breakaway regions of south ossetia and abkhazia could continue to pose a major obstacle to possible georgian membership for the foreseeable future .

they contend that as long as the territorial dispute persists , some allies could oppose defining a specific timeline for membership .

georgia has not been granted a membership action plan , but administration officials have indicated that they would support granting a map to georgia at nato's september summit in wales .

some observers have argued that recent russian military aggression could indirectly serve to boost support for nato membership in sweden and finland .

since joining nato's partnership for peace program in 1994 , both countries have been active participants in nato operations and have taken significant steps to modernize their militaries .

in a reflection of continuing sensitivities regarding relations with russia , both have also continued to maintain long - standing policies of military "nonalignment. .

in 2013 , russian prime minister dmitry medvedev said that moscow would be forced to "respond" if finland or sweden joined nato , and in the past year russian forces have performed air and land exercises near swedish and finnish territory .

recent russian actions and statements have led at least one swedish government official to advocate a "doctrinal shift" in defense policy ; and finland's current prime minister supports nato membership .

nonetheless , public opinion in both countries remains firmly opposed to nato membership .

some analysts assert that at the least , the two governments could continue to bolster defense spending and cooperation with other nordic states and the baltics .

the crisis in ukraine has renewed focus on the u.s. commitment to european security and on overall u.s. force posture in europe .

since the end of the cold war , as nato and the eu have enlarged eastward and as both organizations have pursued partnership with russia , the perceived need for a robust u.s. military presence to defend the continent receded .

today , about 67,000 u.s. forces are stationed in europe , primarily in germany , italy , and the uk ; this is down from a cold war high of about 400,000 .

some allies in central and eastern europe have consistently expressed concerns about the reduced u.s. force posture , and especially the recent withdrawal of two of the army's four brigade combat teams .

other allies and u.s. policy makers supported the shift , particularly given other security challenges facing the united states and nato .

the adjusted u.s. force posture has coincided with u.s. calls for european allies and the eu to enhance their own military capabilities in order to boost nato's effectiveness and reduce europe's dependence on the u.s. security guarantee .

as discussed above , such efforts have had mixed results , at best .

the obama administration and its supporters assert that the united states remains prepared and able to honor its commitments to the defense and security of fellow nato member states .

in addition to the aforementioned u.s. military responses to the crisis in ukraine , they note that the united states was a key proponent of nato's drafting of contingency plans for the defense of poland and the baltic states in 2009 , and they draw attention to recent u.s. calls for a new round of nato contingency planning .

they add that the u.s. agreement in 2011 to establish an air force aviation detachment in poland has paved the way for the recent deployment of 12 f - 16s to the country , and point out that to compensate for the reduction of u.s .

brigade combat teams in europe , the department of defense has committed a u.s. - based rapid reaction force to rotate to europe for joint training exercises .

the current cornerstone of the u.s. commitment to nato military capabilities in europe is the ballistic missile defense ( bmd ) program known as the european phased adaptive approach ( epaa ) .

the u.s. system , designed to defend alliance territory against possible missile attacks from iran and other potential adversaries , serves as the foundation for a new nato missile defense capability , based primarily on u.s. assets under nato command and control .

the united states has deployed missile defense ships to the mediterranean , ready to operate under nato control when necessary .

a u.s. radar , based in turkey , is also under nato operational control .

interceptor sites are to be deployed in romania in 2015 and in poland in 2018 .

the united states and nato have consistently emphasized , however , that the missile defense system is neither intended to nor capable of defending against a potential missile attack from russia .

while they have welcomed these steps , critics of the administration's and nato's response to russian actions in ukraine have argued that more should be done to support ukraine , reassure allies in central and eastern europe , and counter russian aggression .

some have called for bolstered and possibly permanent nato and / or u.s. troop deployments in central and eastern europe , as well as more frequent military exercises , including in the black sea .

for example , as discussed above , the polish government has requested the deployment of two heavy brigades of nato troops on its territory .

in a march 26 , 2014 , letter to president obama , house armed services committee chairman buck mckeon and seven other members of congress called on the president to "increase and enhance the alert posture and readiness of u.s. forces in europe without delay , including maintaining forward - deployed u.s. quick - reaction forces. .

at an april 10 , 2014 , hearing of the senate foreign relations committee's subcommittee on european affairs , assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs derek chollet said that he did not foresee a significant adjustment to the u.s. military's permanent footprint in europe , but added that forward or rotational deployments to central and eastern europe were an ongoing possibility .

critics of administration policy draw attention to the fact that only 300 u.s. forces reportedly participated in nato's november 2013 steadfast jazz exercise in estonia , latvia , lithuania , and poland .

the 6,000-troop exercise — the largest nato exercise to take place in the region in over 10 years — was intended to certify command and control elements of the nato response force , including in response to a possible attack on the territory of a nato member state .

other analysts have questioned the administration's commitment to missile defense , noting that in 2013 , the administration dropped phase 4 of the epaa , which would have deployed in europe land - and possible sea - based versions of advanced naval bmd interceptors designed to destroy limited numbers of first generation intercontinental ballistic missiles ( icbms ) .

as discussed above , the united states has provided the ukrainian government with some nonlethal military aid but has thus far declined to provide lethal military aid .

some analysts , including a former nato military commander , have argued that the united states and other allies should consider providing additional military assistance , including intelligence and surveillance capabilities and anti - aircraft and anti - tank weapons .

congress could continue to play an important role in shaping u.s. and nato responses to russia's actions in ukraine .

in terms of u.s. defense policy , possible congressional action could include reexamining u.s. force posture in europe and assessing u.s. capacity and willingness to uphold its collective defense commitments in europe .

congress could also take an increasingly active role in determining u.s. policy toward nato and in guiding broader discussions about nato's future , particularly ahead of the next nato summit , scheduled to take place in wales on september 4-5 , 2014 .

this could include holding hearings and / or drafting legislation on issues such as development of allied military capabilities and military burdensharing within the alliance , the allied commitment to nato enlargement and its relations with partner countries such as ukraine and georgia , nato relations with russia , and nato involvement in areas such as cybersecurity and energy security .

