in vitro diagnostic ( ivd ) devices , including genetic tests , provide information that is used to inform health care decision making .

ivds are devices that are used in laboratory analysis of human samples an d include commercial test products and instruments used in testing , among other things .

ivds may be used in a variety of settings , including a clinical laboratory , a physician's office , or in the home .

ivds have a number of uses , such as diagnosis , screening , staging , and disease management , including , for example , the selection and dosing of therapeutics .

one estimate found that the results of clinical laboratory tests influence approximately 70% of health care decisions .

despite this broad effect on the delivery of health care , spending on ivds represents a small portion of overall health care costs .

the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) estimated that , based on 2007 data , approximately 6.8 billion clinical laboratory tests are performed in the united states annually , but noted that "publicly available information about the economic status and quality of the laboratory medicine sector remains limited. .

ivds may be used in the care of a patient in numerous ways ( see text box ) and at various points in the delivery of care .

ivds differ from other medical devices in that they do not act directly on a patient to produce a result as does , for example , an implantable stent that keeps an artery open to allow blood flow .

instead , the potential for risk of harm to the patient would be from the generation of inaccurate test results that could lead to the mismanagement of a patient's disease or condition ( i.e. , false negative test result ) or to treatment for a disease or condition that is in fact absent ( false positive test result ) .

given this potential risk , as well as the impact on the overall delivery of health care , the federal government has taken a role in the oversight of ivds .

federal oversight of ivds spans several federal agencies , including the food and drug administration ( fda ) and the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) .

oversight efforts focus on ensuring the safety and effectiveness of ivds ; the accuracy and reliability of ivds ; the quality of clinical laboratories that carry out ivd testing ; the utility of the information in clinician and patient decision making ; and the truthfulness of claims made about ivds that are marketed directly to consumers .

ivds include genetic tests , a type of diagnostic test that analyzes various aspects of an individual's genetic material ( dna , rna , chromosomes , and genes ) .

through basic research , scientists have "discovered hundreds of genes that harbor variations contributing to human illness. .

they have also found "genetic variability in patients' responses to dozens of treatments" and are using ivds "to better predict patients' responses to targeted therapy. .

the use of an ivd companion diagnostic device to select the best therapy , at the right dose , at the correct time for a particular patient is often referred to as personalized medicine .

another term , pharmacogenomics , is sometimes used interchangeably with personalized medicine .

pharmacogenomics is the study of how individual genetic variation affects a person's response to drugs .

currently , more than 100 fda - approved drugs contain pharmacogenomic information in their labeling .

the regulation of genetic testing has raised several issues .

traditionally , most genetic tests have not been subject to premarket review by the fda .

it has been noted that , in the past , genetic tests were developed mostly by academic or research laboratories primarily for in - house use — tests referred to as laboratory - developed tests ( ldts ) — to diagnose rare diseases and were highly dependent on expert interpretation .

in recent years , ldts have been developed to assess relatively common diseases and conditions , such as various cancers .

the extent to which all ldts should be regulated by the fda has been a subject of debate .

on july 31 , 2014 , the fda officially notified the senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions and the house committee on energy and commerce that it would be issuing draft guidance on ldt regulation ; on october 3 , 2014 , the agency published a notice in the federal register announcing the availability of the guidance documents and requesting comments within 120 days to ensure their consideration in the development of final guidance .

the agency announced in november 2016 that it would be delaying finalization of the draft guidance .

in january 2017 , fda released a discussion paper on ldts that included a possible approach to ldt oversight ( for more detail , see " fda's january 2017 discussion paper: a possible approach to ldt oversight " ) .

the appropriate degree and extent of federal regulation of direct - to - consumer ( dtc ) genetic testing has also been a subject of debate amongst relevant federal agencies as well as the affected entities ( mostly for - profit companies , for example , 23andme , pathway genomics , or life technologies ) .

genetic testing has become increasingly available for direct purchase by consumers , generally over the internet .

in this type of testing — direct - to - consumer genetic testing — the consumer sends in a tissue sample , often cells from the inside of the cheek , and the results are conveyed directly to the consumer by the company that developed the test .

almost a decade ago , in 2010 , the government accountability office ( gao ) testified that in its investigation of dtc genetic tests — priced from $299 to $999 — from four companies , it found the dtc genetic test results to be "misleading and of little or no practical use to consumers. .

however , in a reflection of evolution in both dtc genetic tests themselves and fda oversight of these tests , in april 2017 , fda approved the first dtc genetic test that provides information about the risk of developing disease ( predisposition ) .

this test , 23andme's personal genome service genetic health risk , provides consumers with information about their likelihood of manifesting 10 diseases or conditions ( eg , celiac disease , parkinson's disease ) .

congress and the regulatory agencies have historically been interested in balancing the goals of allowing consumers to have access , as quickly as possible , to new and improved medical devices with preventing devices that are not safe and effective from entering or remaining on the market .

in the case of ivds , and specifically , ldts , congress has introduced bills that attempt to address both of these goals , that is , to support innovation and to increase or expand regulatory oversight .

approaches have included , among others , streamlining regulation by concentrating it in a single federal agency or requiring the fda to assert its enforcement authority over ldts .

in addition to its role as regulator , the federal government has a role as a payor for ivds , primarily through the medicare program .

medicare covers outpatient clinical laboratory testing and generally reimburses for these tests based on the clinical laboratory fee schedule ( clfs ) .

medicare also covers clinical laboratory testing conducted during inpatient care either in a hospital or a skilled nursing facility ( snf ) .

although an in - depth discussion of this issue is outside the scope of this report , the federal role as payer intersects with its role as regulator .

this is due to the fact that , as a payor , medicare generally will only cover ivds that have passed fda premarket review — either approval or clearance — where such fda review is required by applicable statute and regulation .

however , in these cases , fda approval or clearance is not sufficient in and of itself to result in a favorable coverage decision by cms for any given ivd .

this report provides an overview of federal regulation of ivds by fda , through the federal food , drug , and cosmetics act ( ffdca ) and the public health service act ( phsa ) , and by cms , through the clinical laboratory improvement amendments ( clia ) of 1988 .

it then provides a discussion of the oversight of ldts — including the history of the debate over regulating ldts and a description of fda's recently announced framework for regulatory oversight of laboratory developed tests ( ldts ) — as well as an overview of the regulation of dtc genetic tests .

terms used throughout this report are defined in the text box .

as with other medical devices , the application of fda regulatory requirements to ivds depends on the ivd's risk classification according to its intended use .

risk classification "is based on the risk the device poses to the patient or the user and the information available to address that risk. .

the risk classification process is described in more detail in the "ivd regulatory requirements" section of this report .

ivds are defined in regulation as a specific subset of medical devices that include "reagents , instruments , and systems intended for use in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions ... in order to cure , mitigate , treat , or prevent disease ... [s]uch products are intended for use in the collection , preparation , and examination of specimens taken from the human body. .

as indicated by this definition , an ivd may be either a complete test or a component of a test .

in either case , the ivd comes under fda's regulatory purview .

test components include both non - diagnostic ingredients , called general purpose reagents ( gprs ) , and the active ingredient in a diagnostic test , referred to as the analyte specific reagent ( asr ) .

there are two routes to market for an ivd used in the clinical management of patients .

in one route , the product is developed , produced , and sold by a manufacturer for distribution to multiple laboratories — referred to as a "commercial test kit. .

in the second route , the product is developed by and used in a single laboratory — referred to as a "laboratory developed test," or ldt .

ldts may use asrs or gprs that are either manufactured in - house by the laboratory or that are commercially developed and distributed .

the fda has been generally exercising enforcement discretion for ldts in that the agency has generally not enforced applicable regulatory requirements .

the clinical laboratory improvement amendments ( clia ) of 1988 provides cms with authority to regulate clinical laboratories .

clia establishes quality standards for clinical laboratory testing and a certification program for clinical laboratories that perform testing using ivd devices .

all laboratories that perform diagnostic testing for health - related reasons ( i.e. , with results returned to the patient or a health care practitioner ) are regulated by cms under the authority of clia .

for clia to apply , testing must be carried out on a human specimen .

the fda pursuant to the ffdca , and cms through clia , have different regulatory goals .

fda regulation "addresses the safety and effectiveness of the diagnostic tests themselves and the quality of the design and manufacture of the diagnostic tests. .

clia regulates the quality of the clinical testing process itself , mostly by assessing the quality of the clinical laboratory .

however , this oversight also includes requirements that assess the performance of the tests themselves and , therefore , there is some overlap in the two agencies' approaches .

specifically , clia requirements evaluate a test's analytical validity , whereas the fda's premarket review requirements assess a test's analytical validity and clinical validity .

analytical validity is defined as the ability of a test to detect or measure the analyte it is intended to detect or measure ; the clinical validity of a test is defined as its ability to accurately diagnose or predict the risk of a particular clinical outcome .

to summarize , fda oversight of ivds — and not clia oversight — includes the following components: ( 1 ) the regulation of the safety and effectiveness of the test ; ( 2 ) pre - market review of the test ; ( 3 ) demonstration of clinical validity ; ( 4 ) systematic adverse event reporting ; and ( 5 ) a process for corrections or recalls .

in 1988 , congress passed clia in response to concern about the quality of clinical laboratory testing , and specifically , concerns about pap smears .

this law expanded the department of health and human services' ( hhs's ) existing authority to regulate clinical laboratories ( and therefore clinical laboratory testing ) to include any clinical laboratory that examines "materials derived from the human body for the purpose of providing information for the diagnosis , prevention , or treatment of any disease or impairment of , or the assessment of the health of , human beings. .

all such facilities are required to receive certification demonstrating that they meet certain requirements , as well as specific quality standards "to assure consistent performance by laboratories issued a certificate … of valid and reliable laboratory examinations and other procedures. .

clia does not apply to laboratories conducting only tests for research purposes , or to laboratories in those states where state law establishes requirements of equal or greater stringency ( currently , these states are new york and washington ) .

clia certification is based on the level of complexity of testing that the laboratory performs , specifically ( 1 ) low ( therefore , waived ) complexity ; ( 2 ) moderate complexity ; and ( 3 ) high complexity .

the fda has responsibility for categorizing tests according to their level of complexity .

this fda role is distinct from the device risk classification discussed in the " ivd regulatory requirements " section of this report .

laboratories that perform moderate and high complexity testing must meet specific standards and requirements as a condition of certification , including proficiency testing ( pt ) , patient test management , quality control , personnel qualifications , and quality assurance .

an inspection is part of the initial certification process , and cms ( or another survey and certification entity ) may perform subsequent inspections on a biennial basis to ensure continued compliance with the requirements of clia .

laboratories that only perform waived tests receive a certificate of waiver ( cow ) from cms ; under current law , waived tests are those "that have been approved by the fda for home use or that , as determined by the secretary , are simple laboratory examinations and procedures that have an insignificant risk of an erroneous result. .

in order to monitor the quality , accuracy , and reliability of testing carried out by clia - certified laboratories ( those conducting moderate and high complexity testing , as noted above ) , cms requires the laboratory to carry out proficiency testing .

proficiency testing is defined as , "the testing of unknown samples sent to a laboratory by a cms - approved proficiency testing program" and is required and defined in regulation for certain specialties and subspecialties ( eg , virology , chemistry , endocrinology ) .

laboratories carrying out moderate or high complexity testing must be certified in each specialty or subspecialty in which they carry out such testing .

proficiency test samples must be tested in the same way that the laboratory tests its patient samples , and sent back to the approved proficiency testing program for analysis .

in this way , the quality of the laboratory's services may be evaluated .

given the role of proficiency testing in the certification process , clia prohibits laboratories from sending the samples they receive for proficiency testing out to another laboratory for processing .

additionally , as a condition of certification , a laboratory must agree "to treat proficiency testing samples in the same manner as it treats materials derived from the human body referred to it for laboratory examinations or other procedures in the ordinary course of business. .

all ldts , including genetic tests offered as ldts , are considered high complexity tests under clia and therefore labs conducting these tests would otherwise have to carry out proficiency testing .

however , in practice , there are no specified proficiency testing requirements for genetic testing laboratories , because genetics is not a designated specialty area and none of the specified regulated analytes include nucleic acids ( rna , dna ) .

some labs that conduct genetic testing are also conducting moderate or high complexity testing in other specialty or subspecialty areas that do have specified proficiency testing requirements .

the centers for disease control and prevention's ( cdc ) clinical laboratory improvement advisory committee ( cliac ) recommended adding a genetic specialty under clia , and cms considered but eventually decided against such an action .

this decision was made partially based on a potential lack of sufficient proficiency testing samples for many genetic tests and the absence of a mechanism for assessing clinical validity due to lack of adequate data .

fda has , to date , focused its enforcement efforts on commercial ivds , which are broadly marketed to labs or to the public , and has not generally enforced the pre - market clearance or approval requirements for ldts .

in recent years , however , fda has indicated its intent to broadly regulate ldts using a risk - based approach .

genetic testing may be offered directly to consumers , with companies entering the market and offering health - related testing ( eg , 23andme ) .

proponents of dtc genetic testing maintain that such testing provides consumers with information necessary to make better health care decisions and also that it generally empowers consumers , enhancing their autonomy .

however , as the field has expanded and issues related to the accuracy and utility of the tests have grown , questions have arisen generally about whether and how to regulate this type of test , and specifically about the applicability of fda and clia regulatory requirements to dtc genetic testing .

as fda historically exercised enforcement discretion over ldts , and because the majority of dtc genetic tests are ldts , manufacturers of dtc genetic tests that are also ldts have generally operated under the assumption that regulatory requirements pertaining to these tests are not actively being enforced by the fda .

 ( fda - regulated asrs contained in such tests are clearly regulated ; however , not all ldts contain regulated asrs. ) .

to date , the agency has not provided guidance on this issue ; however , the fda has "stated publicly that dtc genetic testing should be regulated by the agency .

several companies have decided to come to the fda with premarket submissions , and these are in the process of working with the fda to come into compliance. .

notably , the fda states in its recently released framework for oversight of laboratory developed tests ( ldts ) that "fda generally does not exercise enforcement discretion for direct - to - consumer ( dtc ) tests regardless of whether they meet the definition of an ldt provided in this guidance .

therefore the enforcement policies in this guidance do not apply to dtc tests , and fda's usual enforcement policies apply to dtc tests [emphasis added]. .

despite stating that it generally does not exercise enforcement discretion over direct - to - consumer tests , nevertheless , the agency has generally not actively enforced regulatory requirements for dtc genetic tests .

for example , in 2010 testimony , jeffrey shuren , director of fda's center for devices and radiological health , noted that "although fda has cleared a number of genetic tests since 2003 , none of the genetic tests now offered directly to consumers have undergone premarket review by the fda.... " however , more recently , the fda has taken steps to enforce the regulation of certain dtc genetic tests .

specifically , in november of 2013 , the agency sent a warning letter to 23andme instructing the company to discontinue marketing of its personal genome service ( pgs ) test until it receives fda clearance for this test .

in april 2017 , fda approved 23andme's personal genome service genetic health risk , making it the first fda - pproved dtc genetic test that provides information about the risk of developing disease ( predisposition ) .

this test provides consumers with information about their likelihood of manifesting 10 diseases or conditions ( eg , celiac disease , parkinson's disease ) .

in late 2015 , fda sent several letters to companies marketing dtc genetic tests that are ldts ; this came at around the same time that the agency announced in the federal register its "intent to exempt from the premarket notification requirements autosomal recessive carrier screening gene mutation detection systems , subject to certain limitations. .

fda also published a second announcement simultaneously in the federal register stating that the agency was classifying these tests as class ii devices .

both of these decisions apply to such tests that are marketed over - the - counter directly to consumers , with certain special controls in place .

part of the agency's rationale for proposing to exempt these tests from premarket notification requirements is that carriers of autosomal recessive mutations do not manifest the disease or disorder being screened for ( the disease or disorder being screened for would only manifest in this case if an individual had two copies of the variant gene ) , so the potential harm from a false negative in particular would not be high .

clinical laboratories performing health - related genetic testing on human specimens are subject to clia requirements , whether or not the tests are provided directly to consumers ; however , regulators have had some difficulty determining whether companies offering dtc genetic testing are utilizing clia - certified laboratories or not .

in addition , certain manufacturer claims about their products are regulated by the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , although a full discussion of this regulation is outside the scope of this report .

"section 5 of the federal trade commission act [ ( ftca , 15 u.s.c .

§45 ) ] prohibits unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce .

section 12 of the ftca [ ( 15 u.s.c .

§52 ) ] specifically prohibits the dissemination of false advertisements for foods , drugs , devices , services , or cosmetics .

the ftc analyzes the role of advertising in bringing health - related information to consumers and can bring law enforcement actions against false or deceptive advertising. .

the truthfulness of such claims in dtc genetic testing is an issue , compounded by the fact that consumers are often ordering the test in the absence of consultation with a health care provider .

additionally , companies may modify the content of their webpages in real time , creating difficulty in enforcing regulatory requirements .

gao has carried out a number of investigations and other oversight activities related to dtc genetic testing .

a 2006 gao investigation of four companies selling dtc genetic tests found that these companies "misled consumers by providing test results that were both medically unproven and so ambiguous as to be meaningless. .

gao conducted a second investigation , from june 2009 to june 2010 , of four different genetic testing companies , this time selecting companies that were "frequently cited as being credible by the media and in scientific publications. .

in july 2010 , gao provided testimony on this second investigation before the subcommittee on oversight and investigations of the committee on energy and commerce .

gao stated that the dtc genetic test results were "misleading and of little or no practical use to consumers. .

specifically , gao found that identical dna samples yielded contradictory predictions depending solely on the company the dna was sent to for analysis .

the tests in the second gao investigation cost from $299 to $999 and provided risk predictions for diseases such as diabetes , hypertension , multiple sclerosis , leukemia , breast cancer and prostate cancer .

gao consulted with several external experts in the field of genetics about the results of this second investigation .

one expert stated that "the science of risk prediction based on genetic markers is not fully worked out , and that the limitations inherent in this sort of risk prediction have not been adequately disclosed. .

an expert further noted "the fact that different companies , using the same samples , predict different…directions of risk is telling and is important .

it shows that we are nowhere near really being able to interpret [such tests]. .

when asked if any of the test results or disease predictions were more accurate than the others , the genetics experts stated that "there are too many uncertainties and ambiguities in this type of testing to rely on any of the results. .

for certain situations , the external experts agreed the limitations of the tests should be "clearly disclosed upfront" and suggested that gao attempt to obtain a refund ; two companies complied , but a third refused and the fourth did not respond to the refund request .

sacghs also addressed the issue of the regulation of dtc testing in its 2008 report on the oversight of genetic testing .

in response to recommendations by both sacgt and sacghs , nih has created a voluntary genetic testing registry for all genetic tests in order to provide a central location for information on "the test's purpose , methodology , validity , evidence of the test's usefulness , and laboratory contacts and credentials. .

this voluntary registry may include information about genetic tests that are directly marketed to consumers .

such information , including whether or not the test was cleared or approved by fda , could allow physicians and patients to make better informed decisions about using these tests .

