of all the problems facing the nuclear weapons program and nuclear weapons complex over the past several decades , few , if any , have been as vexing as pit production .

a "pit" is a hollow plutonium shell that is imploded , creating an explosion that triggers the rest of the weapon .

the rocky flats plant ( co ) manufactured pits on a large scale during the cold war until production halted in 1989 .

it took until fy2007 for the united states to produce even a small quantity , 11 pits per year ( ppy ) , for the stockpile .

yet the department of defense ( dod ) calls for a capacity to produce 30 ppy by 2021 as an interim goal and 50 to 80 ppy by around 2030 .

at issue is how to reach the higher capacity .

this report is intended primarily for members and staff with a direct interest in pit issues , including members who will be making decisions on pit projects that could total several billion dollars .

since the issues are complicated , this report contains technical and regulatory details that are needed to understand the advantages , drawbacks , and uncertainties of various options .

it may also be of value for members and staff with an interest in nuclear weapons , stockpile stewardship , and nuclear policy more broadly .

this report begins with a description of plutonium , pits , and pit factory problems .

it next considers several pit production options .

it notes studies that could provide information to assist congress in choosing among options , and concludes with several observations .

there are several appendixes , including a list of abbreviations .

the pit issue is important because of the relationship between pit production infrastructure and national goals , as shown in figure 1 .

national goals include minimizing the risk of nuclear war and , for the longer term , "the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons," as president obama declared in his 2009 prague speech .

the nuclear posture review sets out policy objectives , such as "preventing nuclear proliferation," "reducing the role of u.s. nuclear weapons in u.s. national security strategy," "maintaining strategic deterrence and stability at reduced nuclear force levels," "strengthening regional deterrence," and "sustaining a safe , secure , and effective nuclear arsenal. .

various strategies , such as deterrence , counterproliferation , and arms control , seek to implement policy .

in turn , delivery systems , such as heavy bombers and long - range ballistic missiles , are one means of implementing strategy .

nuclear weapons ( a term used in this report to refer to nuclear bombs and warheads ) arm delivery systems .

the nuclear posture review declares , "the united states will not develop new nuclear warheads. .

accordingly , the united states will retain the weapons in its arsenal for the foreseeable future .

yet weapons deteriorate over time .

extending the service life of existing weapons requires replacing or modifying some components .

while "life extension programs" ( leps ) for some weapons can use existing pits , dod and the department of energy ( doe ) state that leps for other weapons will require newly manufactured pits .

the current infrastructure cannot produce pits at the capacity dod requires , and many efforts stretching back to the late 1980s to produce pits have been canceled or have otherwise foundered .

a concern is that if a type of nuclear weapon could no longer perform satisfactorily , an inability to make new pits in the quantities required so the weapons could be replaced could lead to that weapon type being removed from service .

that , in turn , would leave missiles and bombers without those weapons , which would undermine strategies , the policies they seek to implement , and the ability to attain national goals .

this section begins by discussing plutonium , pits , pit production , programs to extend the service life of nuclear weapons , and production capacity required .

it next turns to current plutonium facilities and provides a brief history of unsuccessful efforts to build a facility to produce pits on a scale larger than about 10 per year .

it concludes by presenting important regulatory terms .

in order to examine the costs , risks , and benefits of the options discussed in this report , congress would need further information .

to gather it , congress could direct nnsa to conduct several studies , including the following: study of potential pf - 4 / rluob production capacity: since it is unlikely that new plutonium buildings ( especially large ones ) will be built for many years , pf - 4 and rluob have value beyond their cost .

many measures could increase capacity , such as moving pu - 238 out of pf - 4 , repurposing space in pf - 4 , and permitting rluob to perform all ac .

congress could direct nnsa to study whether some combination of such measures would enable production of 80 ppy while maintaining other essential plutonium missions in pf - 4 , and the number of ppy rluob and pf - 4 could produce if more or less than 80 .

study of repurposing pf - 4 space: los alamos plans to repurpose some space in pf - 4 .

could enough space be made available for pit production and support without disrupting other critical missions in the building ? .

if such disruption was required for pit production , could other missions be done in existing facilities elsewhere in the nuclear weapons complex , or would new facilities have to be built ? .

if new facilities were required , what would they cost and how long would they take to build , and what would happen to the mission before they were completed ? .

study of the feasibility and cost of converting rluob to hc - 3: rluob was built but not certified to hc - 3 standards ; it is sometimes called an "hc - 3-like" building .

in order to hold 1,000 g of wgpu while complying with regulations , it would have to be certified to hc - 3 .

this would involve many actions .

many would be studies , but some of them could lead to physical changes to the building , such as seismic bracing or installation of equipment .

it is not clear what physical work would be required .

a "study of studies" would help determine if conversion would be feasible , and if so at what cost .

study of adverse consequences of allowing rl u ob to operate as is but with 1,000 g wgpu: converting a radiological facility to hc - 3 would entail costs , yet the dose resulting from an earthquake that collapsed rluob would be far below the guidelines set by doe , as appendix b shows .

congress could direct an independent organization to study the adverse consequences of using rluob for 1,000 g of wgpu as is , that is , with ac equipment installed but no steps to convert the building to hc - 3 .

if it is determined that rluob as is would not provide adequate safety with 1,000 g wgpu , a related study could examine if there are additional steps short of full conversion to hc - 3 that would provide adequate safety , and what they would cost .

study of having llnl , srs , or both perform some ac to support pit production : llnl and srs have infrastructure to perform ac to support pit production , though beyond some level of capacity they would need to upgrade equipment and hire additional staff .

there would be benefit from dispersing ac expertise , capacity , and work to other sites in the nuclear weapons complex , but also benefit from concentrating them at lanl , the plutonium center of the nuclear weapons complex .

it seems unlikely that a site other than lanl would perform all ac to support pit production .

at issue: should one or more sites other than lanl perform some ac to support pit production ? .

if so , how much capacity should be dispersed to other sites ? .

which site or sites should be chosen ? .

what would it cost to upgrade the site or sites for that capacity ? .

study of pu - 238 options: pu - 238 activities are costly given the high level of radioactivity of that material .

pu - 238 work could be moved to inl , srs , a module at lanl , or perhaps other sites .

doe's office of nuclear energy prepared a study on this topic .

however , that study did not consider the costs and benefits to the weapons program of moving pu - 238 out of pf - 4 ; those costs and benefits might change the calculus of that move .

specifically , if moving pu - 238 to another site made a major contribution toward permitting production of 80 ppy without building new buildings , the value to the weapons program would be significant , and reducing mar in pf - 4 could help extend its service life .

on the other hand , while doe has estimated the cost of the inl or srs options for pu - 238 to be several hundred million dollars , other costs would be involved , as well as temporary disruption of the pu - 238 program .

congress could direct nnsa to contract with an independent organization to study these costs and benefits .

study of cost implications of the regulatory system: a radiological facility is able to hold 38.6 g pu - 239e ( 26 g wgpu ) .

as shown by rluob , such facilities can be affordable and can be built .

in contrast , the history of the past quarter - century , as discussed in " a sisyphean history: failed efforts to construct a building to restore pit production ," has been that a facility intended to hold more than 26 g wgpu has seen cost and schedule escalate to the point where it cannot be acquired .

these efforts have resulted in the expenditure of billions of dollars with the net result of canceled programs , unusable buildings that had to be demolished , and continued operations in "decrepit" facilities .

congress could task nnsa to report on cost implications of the current regulatory system governing nuclear facilities , focusing on tradeoffs between cost and risk .

long - term planning is difficult for all parties concerned .

delays and cost growth by nnsa on its major facilities reduce confidence in nnsa's cost and schedule projections , making it difficult for congress and the administration to budget for these facilities .

nnsa sources say that congressional budgeting outside the regular budget process , such as sequesters and short - term continuing resolutions , and withdrawal of congressional support , such as the termination of mpf , make it difficult for nnsa to plan .

changes in administration planning , such as the deferral of cmrr - nf , make it difficult for congress and nnsa to plan .

long - term planning for pit production has proven particularly difficult .

nnsa provides plans going out 10 to 20 years .

however , these plans have often been stretched out , canceled , or modified substantially .

pit production at rocky flats plant halted in 1989 , yet lanl did not produce its first war reserve pits until 2007 , nnsa has not needed to expand its small capacity , and there is still no plan for larger - scale pit production .

planning for mpf began in 2002 , and congress canceled it in 2005 , followed by planning for cmrr , with the nuclear facility deferred "for at least five years" by the administration in its fy2013 budget request .

similar delays have occurred with other nuclear weapons complex construction projects and with leps .

while organizations need long - term plans as general guides to future plans , this history raises questions about the value of such planning .

requirements for pit production capacity have been fluid , reducing their credibility .

the options studied for mpf in a 2003 eis were between 125 and 450 ppy .

even if pits had a service life of 45 years , as was thought at the time , a 450-ppy capacity would support a stockpile of some 20,000 weapons , far more than the stockpile had .

then , the interim capacity at lanl was 10 ppy , with a goal of 30 ppy by 2021 and a requirement of 50-80 ppy by around 2030 .

yet this latter requirement was not based on an analysis of weapons , targets , and scenarios , but on what nnsa estimated that los alamos could produce with pf - 4 and cmrr - nf .

despite the deferral of cmrr - nf , and congressional authorization for nnsa to pursue a modular strategy as an alternative to that facility , the requirement for 50-80 ppy remains , and it is unclear if the number needed is 50 or 80 .

at the same time , steady increases in estimates of pit life , steady reductions in numbers of weapons , and the possibility of reusing pits from retired weapons may reduce the required capacity .

as a consequence , it is hard to know what capacity is needed , and thus what new facilities or modifications to existing ones are needed .

differing time horizons between congress and nnsa , and between political and technical imperatives , cause problems .

congress and the administration , on the one hand , and doe , nnsa , the labs , and the plants , on the other , work on very different timescales .

it takes well over a decade , at best , for nnsa to bring a major nuclear facility project from initial approval to design , construction , and operation .

in contrast , congress and the administration have changed course often on a plutonium strategy , sometimes from one year to the next .

the more time from start to finish of a project , the more chance there is for intervening events to alter plans .

thus it would be to nnsa's advantage to drastically shorten the time from start to finish of a project .

a construction cycle of a decade or more ( or 24 years and counting in the case of a new plutonium facility ) faces great difficulty when its funding hinges on a political cycle of one or a few years .

for a successful plutonium strategy , congress would find unacceptable management that allows costs to grow immensely , 10-fold in some cases , or that allows multi - year delays .

at the same time , congress and the administration cannot expect a project to be completed in a couple of years .

analysis of alternatives , site surveys , compliance with nepa requirements , planning , contracting , and construction typically take years .

thus , time is of the essence and delay is the enemy .

this is a problem for congress , the administration , dod , nnsa , the nuclear weapons complex , and the nation .

is there is a meeting - ground between the political and technical worlds ? .

can nnsa define the need for a major nuclear facility construction project , then quickly design it , comply with various federal , state , and local regulations , and build it ? .

how could nnsa expedite the process ? .

can it avoid cost growth , delay , and mission creep ? .

conversely , once a project is defined , can congress and the administration commit to it on a longer - term basis ? .

nnsa would need to gain the confidence of congress in its ability to manage major construction projects .

the capacity range studied for mpf implied the nominal ability to support a stockpile far larger than the then - current and likely future stockpile .

cmrr - nf experienced a several - fold increase in estimated cost and years of schedule slippage .

failing to provide a realistic estimate of required capacity or to stay remotely close to cost and schedule estimates had consequences .

congress canceled mpf , and the administration proposed to "defer" cmrr - nf for "at least five years. .

and as noted in " two other failed attempts ," two plutonium buildings were built , found to be unusable for their intended purpose , and were torn down .

congressional support for a modular strategy — yet another change in plans — increases the likelihood that the deferral of cmrr - nf will be a cancellation .

many believe that nnsa weakens its case for future projects when it releases estimates that are far in excess of a capacity that seems reasonable , or that are far below the ultimate cost and schedule , or when it changes its plans repeatedly .

there are costs and risks to doing nothing .

time spent in planning and construction for new buildings to support pit production can reduce risk , for example by studying the impact of the facility on the environment , by studying the seismicity of the construction site , by designing the facility to meet requirements ( such as for hazard category 2 or 3 ) , and by incorporating measures in the design to reduce dose that individuals could receive from a major accident .

however , if history is a guide , it could take many years before a new facility could become operational .

until then , whether the new facility is at los alamos or elsewhere , cmr must be used to provide ac support for pit production in pf - 4 .

this entails multiple risks and costs: cmr is at high risk of collapse in the event of even a moderate earthquake .

collapse would kill many workers in the building .

pit production requires much more ac than pf - 4 can accommodate .

collapse of cmr , without another building to conduct ac , would — not could — disrupt pit production until another facility for ac came on line , which could take years .

bringing another facility online on an emergency basis would probably cost more than doing so in an orderly manner , and shortcuts taken to expedite design , siting , and construction could increase the risk of problems down the road .

cmr has a mar of 9 kg of pu - 239e , and all the plutonium in that facility is considered at risk because no vault or container could be counted on to survive that building's collapse .

dispersal of some of that plutonium could place collocated workers and members of the public at risk .

depending on specifics of the collapse ( wind direction , fire , form of plutonium , amount of plutonium escaping , etc .

 ) , dispersal of the plutonium could contaminate and force the closure of parts of the laboratory , possibly for months or years .

that would disrupt laboratory operations , with operations affected at random based on which areas were contaminated .

cleanup of a large area contaminated by plutonium would be extremely costly and time - consuming .

it would be a more effective use of those funds to avoid that problem by moving operations out of cmr as soon as possible .

a facility can be safe without being compliant .

as appendix b shows , if rluob had 1 kg of wgpu , all of which was released in a dba , the accident would result in doses well below doe guidelines .

yet rluob would be in compliance with doe regulations as a radiological facility only if it had less than 26 g of wgpu .

as a corollary , there is a tradeoff between cost and regulatory compliance: where is the point of diminishing returns ? .

should plutonium quantity in a building be limited by mar or dose ? .

the regulatory system defines a building's hazard category by mar .

an hc - 3 building can hold between 38.6 grams and 2,610 grams of pu - 239e ; a radiological facility can hold up to 38.6 grams .

the objective is safety ; however , mar is a surrogate for safety .

it is simple for regulators to measure mar .

in contrast , determining dose to a collocated worker or a maximally - exposed offsite individual requires a complex analysis for each building , taking into account such factors as details of construction , measures taken to increase seismic robustness and fire suppression , and assumptions on the amount of plutonium that would be lofted into the air in an earthquake , wind speed , and wind direction .

yet it is dose , not mar , that determines whether an individual is safe , and as shown in appendix b , even with mar of 2,610 g pu - 239e ( 1,750 g of wgpu ) for rluob , the maximum permitted in an hc - 3 building , dose to those individuals would be far below doe guidelines .

weapons and infrastructure constrain policy and strategy .

logically , these four elements should be linked , and policy and strategy should drive weapons and infrastructure .

but given cancellations , multi - year schedule slippages , and major cost growth for leps and infrastructure facilities , even if strategy calls for having certain numbers of a certain weapon by a certain year , if an lep is delayed by cost growth or infrastructure delays , it is the strategy that adapts .

the political system is more flexible than the regulatory system .

regulators are bound by statutes , regulations , orders , and standards , and can only determine if a plan complies with these rules without regard to cost .

standards define acceptable risk: a radiological facility must have less than 38.6 grams of pu - 239e ; a security category iv facility can have up to 200 grams of pure plutonium ; the doe guideline is for an moi to receive a dose of no more than 25 rem over 2 hours .

but this system is inflexible .

it does not have a way of trading risk ( and the benefit of reducing it ) against cost ( and the benefit of reducing it ) .

as a result , it may force the expenditure of years , and many millions of dollars , to further minimize an already - minimal risk .

in order to inject cost - benefit calculations into recommendations by dnfsb , section 3202 of h.r .

1960 , the fy2014 defense authorization bill as passed by the house , required dnfsb to provide an analysis of the costs and benefits of its recommendations if requested to do so by the secretary of energy ; in such instances , the secretary would also be required to conduct a similar analysis .

this provision , however , was not included in the final legislation , p.l .

113-66 .

even so , while the regulator can present costs and benefits , only the political system has the authority , ability , and culture to decide which tradeoffs are worth making , and to offer regulatory relief .

for example , political decisions could make the difference between whether or not a rluob / pf - 4 option is feasible .

if the doe hazard categorization standard is applied , so that rluob could hold only 26 grams of wgpu , then rluob could provide very limited ac support for pit production .

if it were upgraded , the regulatory system could determine only if the upgrades would meet hc - 3 requirements .

in contrast , the political system could judge whether certain upgrades would reduce the risk to an moi enough , with "enough" a matter of political judgment , and if the reduction in risk from these upgrades was worth the cost .

the political system could also decide if the risk was acceptable without upgrades .

there are several potential paths forward: several options discussed in this report have the potential to produce 80 ppy , resolve the pu - 238 issue , and permit other plutonium activities , all at relatively modest cost , in a relatively short time , with no new buildings , and with minimal environmental impact .

determining the cost , schedule , feasibility , and other characteristics of these options would require detailed study .

appendix a .

the regulatory structure laws a dense web of "laws" ( statutes , regulations , orders , standards , guides , etc. ) .

bears on nuclear facilities and how they are to be built and operated consistent with worker safety , public health , and environmental protection .

a critical point is that legislation trumps regulation: since regulations , orders , and standards derive their authority from statutes , statutes can mandate changes in them .

some of the more important laws are: atomic energy act of 1954 , as amended , 42 u.s.c .

2201 et seq. , is the fundamental statute setting policy for civilian and military uses of atomic energy and materials .

it established the atomic energy commission , which was superseded by the energy research and development administration and then by the department of energy .

department of energy organization act of 1977 , 42 u.s.c .

7101 et seq. , established the department .

national environmental policy act ( nepa ) of 1970 , 42 u.s.c .

4321-4347 , established a national policy on the environment , mandated the preparation of environmental impact statements for certain projects and proposals that could have a significant impact on the environment , and created the council on environmental quality to , among other things , review federal activities to determine their consistency with national environmental policy .

establishment of defense nuclear facilities safety board ( dnfsb ) : 42 u.s.c .

2286 et seq .

 ( p.l .

100-456 , fy1989 national defense authorization act ) established dnfsb as an independent executive branch agency , as described in "regulators," below .

note that the nuclear regulatory commission does not regulate defense nuclear facilities .

national nuclear security administration act , 50 u.s.c .

2401 et seq .

 ( title xxxii of the fy2000 national defense authorization act , p.l .

106-65 ) , established nnsa as a separately organized agency within doe responsible for , among other things , the nuclear weapons program .

nuclear safety management: 10 cfr 830 sets forth requirements that "must be implemented in a manner that provides reasonable assurance of adequate protection of workers , the public , and the environment from adverse consequences , taking into account the work to be performed and the associated hazards. .

10 cfr 830 lists its authority as 42 u.s.c .

2201 , 42 u.s.c .

7101 et seq. , and 50 u.s.c .

2401 et seq .

nuclear safety analysis report , doe order 5480.23 , april 30 , 1992 .

its purpose is "to establish requirements for contractors responsible for the design , construction , operation , decontamination , or decommissioning of nuclear facilities to develop safety analyses that establish and evaluate the adequacy of the safety bases of the facilities .

the nuclear safety analysis report ( sar ) required by this order documents the results of the safety analysis. .

safety analysis requirements for defining adequate protection for the public and workers , recommendation 2010-1 issued by dnfsb to the secretary of energy , october 29 , 2010 .

regulators the main regulators of nuclear weapons complex facilities are as follows: the defense nuclear facilities safety board ( dnfsb ) is an independent executive branch agency .

its mission , as set by legislation , is "to provide independent analysis , advice , and recommendations to the secretary of energy to inform the secretary , in the role of the secretary as operator and regulator of the defense nuclear facilities of the department of energy , in providing adequate protection of public health and safety at such defense nuclear facilities. .

it is to "review and evaluate the content and implementation of the standards relating to the design , construction , operation , and decommissioning of defense nuclear facilities of the department of energy … at each department of energy defense nuclear facility .

the board shall recommend to the secretary of energy those specific measures that should be adopted to ensure that public health and safety are adequately protected. .

recommendations are central to dnfsb's role , especially since that agency does not issue regulations .

recommendations are not requirements , but "to date , the secretary of energy has accepted every board recommendation , though three were accepted with conditions or exceptions described in the department's acceptance letters. .

the doe office of health , safety and security ( hss ) integrates doe "headquarters - level functions for health , safety , environment , and security into one unified office.... hss is focused on providing the department with effective and consistent policy development , technical assistance , education and training , complex - wide independent oversight , and enforcement. .

the doe office of nepa policy and compliance has as its mission "to assure that the department's proposed actions comply with the requirements of the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) and related environmental review requirements … that are necessary prior to project implementation .

the office is the departmental focal point for nepa expertise and related activities in all program areas , covering virtually every facet of the department's diverse and complex operations. .

the doe office of general counsel reviews environmental impact statements and similar documents and decides whether to approve their release to the public .

nnsa headquarters sets policy on the nuclear weapons complex , such as major construction ; its programs , such as leps ; and its operations and maintenance .

nnsa field offices are part of the regulatory system .

nuclear weapons complex sites are government - owned , contractor - operated .

field offices hold the contracts with the contractors and interact directly with them .

for example , the los alamos field office handles day - to - day administration of the contract with the contractor , los alamos national security , llc .

nnsa headquarters , in conjunction with congress and the administration , sets policy in such matters as how many pits to produce and what facilities to build , and the field office provides direction to the contractor for implementing policy while abiding by rules , such as for safety and security .

appendix b .

calculation of dose as a function of material at risk if congress were to grant rluob regulatory relief so that it could hold 500 g to 1,000 g of wgpu , what risk would that pose to laboratory staff and members of the public ? .

the following equations calculate dose resulting from a major accident that involved these quantities of plutonium , using assumptions as explained below .

these calculations are only for dose , and are specific to rluob .

they do not assess risk to individuals inside the building , nor do they assess risk from fire , earthquake , gas main explosions , and the like .

this table calculates the dose to two types of individuals in the event of a major accident .

a maximally exposed offsite individual is a hypothetical person at the location nearest to the site boundary where individuals could normally be expected to be , such as on a main road or in a house .

the distance from rluob to moi is assumed to be 1200 meters .

a collocated worker is an onsite worker 100 meters from the building .

dose is calculated by multiplying the factors in this table .

the calculation is specific to rluob ; values for some factors would differ for other buildings .

the calculation assumes a worst - case accident , that is , an earthquake that collapses the building , causing plutonium - containing material to spill out of containers , followed by a fire that aerosolizes the plutonium .

the factors are as follows: material at risk ( mar ) : the amount of material , in this case plutonium , acted upon by an event .

it is measured in units of grams of plutonium - 239 equivalent ( g pu - 239e ) , a standard used to compare the radioactivity of diverse materials .

table b - 1 assumes a mar of 500 g pu - 239e ; table b - 2 uses several values of mar .

damage ratio ( dr ) : the amount of damage to the structure , with 0 being no damage and 1 being complete collapse .

the calculation uses a value of 1 , that is , complete collapse of rluob , the worst case .

airborne release fraction ( arf ) : the fraction of material at risk released into the air as a result of the event .

arf is specific to the type of material ( eg , plutonium oxide , plutonium metal , plutonium in solution ) .

the material in this accident is assumed to be 90% liquid ( plutonium in solution ) and 10% waste ( such as rags with plutonium oxide particles ) .

the value for arf used in the calculation is 0.002 , so this one value reduces dose by a factor of 500 .

thus the dose resulting from an earthquake that collapsed rluob with 1,000g wgpu could be much higher than shown in table b - 1 if that value is in error .

a doe handbook shows that the factor 2e - 3 ( i.e. , 0.002 ) is for airborne droplets containing plutonium oxide rather than for solid plutonium oxide particles that result from the aqueous solution containing plutonium having boiled away .

in response to a question on the validity of using that figure in table b - 1 , los alamos stated:  "the arfs and rfs are almost always very conservative .

in most of the experiments the average value was about 1 to 2 orders of magnitude lower than the value recommended for use in safety analysis .

so , no there is not a problem .

it really more goes the other way .

at each stage we used very conservative values that multiply on each other , such that the final answer in no way represents reality. .

consequently , the actual dose that would result from collapse of rluob with 1,000 g wgpu could be tens or even 100 times smaller than shown in table b - 2 .

respirable fraction ( rf ) : the fraction of the material released into the air that is of a particle size ( 3 microns in diameter or less for plutonium oxide ) that , when inhaled , remains in the lungs .

in this calculation , rf is assumed to be 1 , the worst case .

leak path factor ( lpf ) : the fraction of material that escapes the building .

while arf is related to material type , lpf is related to engineered containment mechanisms , such as robust containers .

in this calculation , lpf is set at 1 , that is , no containment is assumed .

source term ( st ) : the amount of material released that provides dose to individuals .

it is calculated by multiplying the previous five factors together .

st is then multiplied by the following four factors to arrive at dose .

chi over q ( χ / q ) : the rate at which plutonium particles are deposited ( fall to the ground ) .

it includes such factors as wind speed , wind direction , and distance from the facility to the moi or cw receiving the dose .

breathing rate ( br ) : the volume of air , in cubic meters per second , that an individual breathes in .

this is important in calculating dose because the more air an individual breathes in , other things being constant , the higher the dose .

specific activity ( sa ) : a measure of the radioactivity of a material , expressed in curies ( a measure of the number of radioactive disintegrations per second ) per gram of material .

this table shows sa for pu - 239pe .

dose conversion factor ( dcf ) : multiplying sa by this factor converts sa to dose .

dose is expressed in rem , a measure of ionizing radiation absorbed by human tissue .

doe sets radiation exposure guidelines for moi and cw in accidents that release radioactive material .

the guideline dose for cw , 100 rem , is higher than that for moi , 5 to 25 rem .

the reason is that , just as workers in any hazardous occupation , such as mining or window washing , assume greater risk than the general public , so do workers in close proximity to snm .

the higher guideline reflects that risk .

as noted in " key regulatory terms ," one expert lists a dose of between 0 and 25 rem as having "no detectable clinical effects ; small increase in risk of delayed cancer and genetic effects," a dose of 25 to 100 rem as "serious effects on average individual highly improbable," and for 100-200 rem "minimal symptoms ; nausea and fatigue with possible vomiting. .

thus the doses in table b - 1 and table b - 2 are very low and , as noted in "airborne release fraction," above , could be much lower .

abbreviations: moi , maximally exposed offsite individual ; cw , collocated worker ; doe guideline , maximum dose ( in rem ) per doe regulations .

conversion of g pu - 239e to g wgpu: the fissile material in pits is pu - 239 .

however , the actual material in pits , wgpu , is not pure pu - 239 .

instead , it is composed mainly of that isotope as well as small amounts of other plutonium isotopes , some of which are more radioactive than pu - 239 .

the ratio of pu - 239 to other plutonium isotopes varies slightly from one batch to another , and the ratio changes over time as plutonium undergoes radioactive decay , with each isotope having a different rate of decay .

it is useful to convert all radioactive material in a building to a single unit , in this case g pu - 239e , to facilitate compliance with mar limits .

given the isotopic variance inherent in wgpu , no single factor can precisely convert g wgpu to g pu - 239e for all batches of wgpu .

for most purposes , and for purposes of this table , multiplying g pu - 239e by 0.67 yields g wgpu .

rluob , as a radiological facility , is only permitted to hold 38.6 g pu - 239e .

in order for rluob to do the ac and some mc to support production in pf - 4 of 80 pits per year , rluob would probably need to hold 1,000 g of weapons - grade plutonium , though a lesser amount , perhaps 500 g , might suffice .

 ( as noted , it is not clear that rluob would have the floor space to do all the ac for that rate of production. ) .

the table shows dose resulting from an accident that released those quantities of plutonium .

the table includes 2,610 g pu - 239e ( 1,760 g wgpu ) because that is the maximum amount of plutonium that a hazard category 3 building can hold .

the conclusion is that even in a worst - case accident , with rluob collapsed by an earthquake and all plutonium in the building spilled out , converted to plutonium oxide particles by a fire , and lofted into the air , the dose that an moi or a cw would receive if rluob contained 1,010 g of wgpu would be at least an order of magnitude below doe guidelines .

that would still be the case even if rluob held 1,760 g of wgpu .

appendix c. security and hazard categories for plutonium appendix d. preliminary outline of potential tasks required for rluob to exceed hazard category 3 nuclear facility threshold quantity los alamos national laboratory prepared the following document to indicate the types of tasks that would be necessary to enable rluob to contain more than 38.6 g pu - 239e under current statutes , regulations , doe orders , doe standards , administrative procedures , and other requirements .

these tasks would convert rluob to an hc - 3 facility .

as will be seen , the list of tasks is extensive , and tasks derive from many sources .

note that while this is a list of tasks , many of these tasks would require extensive effort to complete , and some might lead to physical changes in rluob , such as seismic strengthening or added safety equipment .

appendix e. comparison of seismic resiliency of cmr and rluob structural engineers strive to make buildings safe against possible earthquake ground motion .

the model building codes are constantly evolving and incorporate lessons learned from the response of buildings in real earthquakes .

prior to the 1933 long beach earthquake , the model building codes had very few seismic requirements .

this earthquake led to new requirements being added to codes .

another big change in design codes came after the 1971 san fernando earthquake , which showed that reinforced concrete buildings with certain characteristics were prone to collapse in large earthquakes .

since that time , the codes have implemented much stricter rules for the design of both steel and reinforced - concrete buildings .

rluob was designed and constructed to withstand earthquake motion much better than cmr .

cmr was constructed in the late 1940s and is not very seismically robust .

in fact , it is a "non - ductile reinforced concrete moment frame" — the very type of structure that the 1971 san fernando earthquake proved to be vulnerable to collapse in earthquakes .

lanl estimates that it is vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake expected to strike with a frequency of once in 167 years to once in 500 years .

while rluob , as a radiological facility , could have been built of light - duty design and materials because it was to have only about 6 grams of wgpu , nnsa decided to build it to a much higher standard in order to understand issues that could be encountered in building cmrr - nf .

specifically , rluob was designed and built to the 2003 edition of the international building code supplemented to meet the requirements for seismic performance category 2 as provided in doe standard 1020-2002 , that is , able to withstand ground motions associated with an earthquake expected to strike with a frequency of once in 2,500 years .

it has a special reinforced concrete structure for the basement , first ( laboratory ) , and second ( office ) floors .

the third and fourth floors , which are also for offices , are constructed of steel framing designed to the standards of an emergency response building ( eg , a hospital or fire station ) , so they are more seismically robust than a typical office building .

as a result , rluob is much sturdier than it needed to be .

based on lanl's models of seismic performance , collapsing rluob would take an earthquake with 4 to 12 times more force than an earthquake that would collapse cmr .

its better performance is largely the result of being able to dissipate energy through bending deformations in its steel frame .

this energy absorption is key in seismic design .

brittle structures , such as cmr , cannot dissipate energy and are hence more susceptible to collapse when the ground motions exceed the building's design basis .

in addition , the earthquake risk in the los alamos area is much better known today than it was when cmr was constructed .

for example , it is now known that there is a seismic fault directly under cmr but not under rluob .

designing rluob with a more accurate understanding of the seismic characteristics of the underlying geology increases the ability of that building to withstand potential ground motion .

appendix f. space requirements for analytical chemistry to support production of 80 pits per year lanl has never analyzed the space requirements for ac to support 80 ppy .

however , in 2007 it analyzed the ac capacity of cmrr - nf plus rluob , and found that they could , together , support ac for 40-50 ppy .

in the original plan for building both rluob and cmrr nf , there was to be a total of 16,500 square feet ( sf ) of laboratory space devoted to ac ( see table below ) .

if rluob were allowed to hold 1,000 g wgpu and cmrr - nf were to remain deferred , the amount of space for ac in rluob would exceed that value without incurring the operational penalty of having to use gloveboxes in pf - 4 to the extent that would otherwise be required .

regarding the latter point , a few types of ac can be done in gloveboxes .

for example , sample management , which involves cutting pieces of plutonium from a larger sample , and analysis that uses solid samples on the order of 1 to 5 g of plutonium , can be done in gloveboxes because they do not require fine manipulation .

in contrast , most ac uses samples of a few drops of liquid with milligram ( or smaller ) quantities of plutonium ; such samples require fine manipulation , which is much easier to do in hoods .

performing ac tasks of the latter type in gloveboxes exacts a penalty in the time required to do the analysis , which slows throughput and thereby reduces capacity .

by performing ac tasks best suited for hoods in rluob and ac tasks that can be performed in gloveboxes in pf - 4 , by studying how to maximize efficient use of space for ac , and perhaps by using two shifts per day instead of one , it seems likely that a configuration of pf - 4 plus rluob with 1,000 g wgpu would have the space both to fabricate 80 ppy and to provide the ac necessary to support that level of production .

a detailed analysis would be needed to reach this conclusion with confidence .

appendix g. abbreviation .

