since the united states and vietnam established diplomatic relations in 1995 , the two countries have expanded relations and cooperation across a wide range of sectors .

as u.s. - vietnam bilateral economic , military , and diplomatic ties have grown , so has interest in strengthening cooperation in the nuclear energy sphere .

a civilian nuclear cooperation agreement was initialed by the two countries in december 2013 and signed in may 2014 under section 123 of the atomic energy act of 1954 ( as amended ) .

such "123 agreements" are necessary for the export of nuclear reactors and components and can help facilitate the transfer of nuclear energy technology .

the u.s. - vietnam 123 agreement was subject to congressional review .

congress received the agreement with the required supporting documents on may 8 , 2014 , for review .

it may enter into force after the 90 th day of continuous session after its submittal to congress ( a period of 30 plus 60 days of review ) unless a joint resolution disapproving the agreement is enacted .

the congressional review period for this agreement was completed on september 9 , 2014 .

at least four issues were prominent during the congressional review period: ( 1 ) whether the agreement should have included stronger nonproliferation commitments such as a legally binding commitment by vietnam not to build uranium enrichment and reprocessing facilities ; ( 2 ) the extent to which vietnam's human rights record should affect the decision to enter into a nuclear energy agreement ; ( 3 ) the weight that should be given to the growing strategic relationship between the united states and vietnam ; and ( 4 ) the extent to which u.s. companies would benefit from an agreement .

vietnam also has nuclear cooperation agreements with russia , france , china , south korea , japan , and canada .

the u.s. nuclear industry contends that billions of dollars of exports could result from the vietnam 123 agreement .

while it is unclear what , if any , contracts the u.s. nuclear industry would conclude with vietnam's nuclear energy sector , it is likely that u.s. companies would provide services as part of a reactor supply agreement that vietnam signed with japan in 2010 .

such services would not necessarily require a u.s. 123 agreement , but transfers might be facilitated if one were in place .

the first major step by the united states and vietnam toward a 123 agreement was the signing of an agreement to strengthen nuclear safety and the nascent nuclear regulatory framework in vietnam in 2008 .

under that agreement , u.s. nuclear regulatory commission experts have been advising the vietnam agency for radiation and nuclear safety and control ( varans ) .

the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) and the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) train vietnamese officials on nonproliferation and nuclear safety best practices related to power plant operation , and assisted with the drafting of vietnam's atomic energy law , passed by vietnam's national assembly in june 2008 .

vietnamese technicians have also attended nonproliferation safeguards training programs at u.s. national laboratories .

in march 2010 , the united states and vietnam signed a memorandum of understanding concerning cooperation in the civil nuclear field that was designed to increase cooperation on nuclear safety and facilitate development of an independent regulatory agency .

then - u.s .

ambassador to vietnam michael michalak said he anticipated the 2010 memorandum would be a "stepping stone" to a bilateral nuclear energy cooperation ( section 123 agreement ) .

vietnam's current nuclear infrastructure consists of a research reactor and several research institutes .

under the atoms for peace program in the early 1960s , the united states provided south vietnam with a 250 kilowatt ( kw ) pool - type triga mark - ii research reactor .

this research reactor , located at dalat , used highly enriched uranium ( heu ) fuel and went critical in 1963 .

it was used for training , research , and radioisotope production .

the research reactor was shut down during the vietnam war .

after north vietnam defeated the south in 1975 and reunified the country , the vietnam atomic energy commission ( vaec ) was established in 1976 for civilian nuclear research .

the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) has provided technical cooperation ( tc ) assistance to vietnam since it joined the agency in 1978 .

in the early 1980s , the soviet union helped vietnam restore and upgrade the research reactor to a 500 kw russian vvr - m design .

this research reactor was powered with highly enriched uranium , weapons - usable material which is considered to be a potential nuclear security risk .

with u.s. assistance under the department of energy's global threat reduction initiative , since 2007 , vietnam has converted the dalat research reactor from heu to low enriched uranium ( leu ) fuel , and returned the heu fresh and spent fuel to russia .

the shipments , which removed a total of 11 kg of heu , were completed in july 2013 .

this activity advanced u.s. - vietnam cooperation in the nuclear nonproliferation sphere .

as vietnam's economy has grown , so have its energy demands , which , according to one source , grew by 15% annually in the first decade of the 2000s .

to help keep pace , vietnam plans to build its first nuclear power plants in the coming decades .

nuclear power is projected to provide 20% - 30% of the country's electricity by 2050 .

vietnam first began considering nuclear power as an option in a 1995 government study that recommended the introduction of nuclear energy by 2015 .

feasibility studies were conducted in the late 1990s and early 2000s .

in 2004 , then - prime minister phan van khai endorsed the "strategy for vietnam's electricity development 2004-2010. .

in 2006 , the prime minister signed the "strategy for peaceful uses of atomic energy up to 2020," which specified a nuclear power target of 2,000 megawatts of electric generating capacity ( mwe ) by 2020 , and an eventual 20,000 mwe by 2040 .

the latter would represent 25% - 30% of vietnam's electricity production .

vietnam's national assembly in november 2009 approved plans to build the first two 1,000 mwe reactors at phuoc dinh , ninh thuan province ( ninh thuan 1 plant ) which were to come on - line by 2020 .

two additional 1,000 mwe reactors are planned to be built in nearby vinh hai ( ninh thuan 2 plant ) and be brought on - line by 2026 ( see figure 1 below ) .

the country's nuclear energy plan envisioned a three - phase approach: phase i , 2010-2015: training technical specialists , setting up regulatory frameworks and cooperation agreements , approval of licenses , etc .

phase ii , 2015-2020: construction phase for first nuclear plants at phuoc dinh ; beginning construction at vinh hai .

phase iii , 2020-2030: additional reactor construction , up to an additional 6,000 mwe .

the vietnamese government issued a master plan in july 2011 that called for two additional reactors to be constructed at phuoc dinh by 2025 and two more at vinh hai by 2027 , plus two larger reactors , possibly korean , at another site to begin operating by 2029 .

another 4,000 megawatts of planned capacity would bring the country's generating capacity to 14,800 megawatts by 2030 .

however , vietnam's prime minister announced in january 2014 that it might delay construction of the first plant , at phuoc dinh , until 2020 , potentially pushing back the planned completion of the first reactor to the mid - 2020s .

difficulties in training staff for the planned nuclear power program have been mentioned by news reports as a possible reason for the delay .

the russian firm atomstroyexport is to build two 1,200 mwe light - water reactors ( standard commercial reactors ) at the ninh thuan 1 power plant at phuoc dinh .

they will be built on a turnkey basis , and will be operated by state - owned utility electricity of vietnam ( evn ) .

as with other russian - built nuclear power plants in non - nuclear weapon states , the contract includes a provision to both supply fuel and take back spent ( used ) fuel .

the russian atomic energy agency , rosatom , will set up a training center in vietnam to help prepare nuclear specialists .

cost estimates for the power plants vary ; rosatom reportedly has forecast the cost of the first two - reactor plants as up to $8 billion , but some press reports that included related infrastructure development estimate a total of $10 billion .

russia's ministry of finance is expected to finance the majority of these costs .

under the 2011 master plan , atomstroyexport is to build two additional reactors at the site as well .

up to four light - water reactors at ninh thuan 2 are to be built by the japanese consortium international nuclear energy development of japan company ( jined ) .

the japanese government has offered low - interest and preferential loans for the project , as well as assistance in waste treatment and infrastructure support .

according to the iaea , vietnam has no plans for developing a full fuel cycle capability .

current plans would store spent nuclear fuel on - site for at least 30 years , and studies on more permanent disposal are underway .

as mentioned above , russia will take back the spent fuel from the russian - built plants .

other suppliers , such as japan , do not usually do so , so vietnam will need to explore spent fuel storage options .

vietnam is now exploring how to exploit its domestic uranium reserves in the north of the country , and is cooperating with canadian and japanese firms on initial exploration .

vietnam has signed a memorandum of understanding with india on uranium ore processing technologies .

as of mid - 2014 , vietnam's nuclear energy plans do not appear to have generated significant domestic opposition , though members of the champa ethnic group , an ethnic minority in vietnam , have said that the plants will infringe upon champa villages and centers of worship in ninh tuan province and that the vietnamese government has harassed individuals who have criticized the plants .

it is unclear if the apparent absence of major opposition is due to widespread support for the government's energy vision , apathy or a lack of awareness , and / or a reluctance to challenge the government on one of its significant priorities .

obama administration officials have stated that the prospect of concluding a nuclear cooperation agreement with the united states spurred vietnam to strengthen its nonproliferation policies .

vietnam has been a vocal supporter of nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation in international fora , and as a member of the non - aligned movement .

vietnam's law on atomic energy passed in 2008 forbids the development of nuclear weapons and all forms of nuclear proliferation .

vietnam is party to the major nonproliferation treaties ( see table 1 ) , including the nuclear non - proliferation treaty ( npt ) , which it joined in 1982 as a non - nuclear weapon state .

it has been an iaea member since 1978 and its comprehensive safeguards agreement has been in force since 1990 .

vietnam signed the additional protocol to its safeguards agreement in 2007 , and it entered into force in 2012 .

also , in cooperation with the iaea and south korea , vietnam is developing a real - time tracking system for the movement of radiological materials in the country .

vietnam is also a member of the u.s. - led global nuclear energy partnership ( gnep ) , now called the international framework for nuclear energy cooperation ( ifnec ) .

vietnam has also joined the u.s. - led global initiative to combat nuclear terrorism .

in a move related to the bilateral nuclear energy agreement signing , in may 2014 vietnam's government announced that it would participate in the multinational proliferation security initiative ( psi ) , a u.s. - led group of about 100 countries that was established in 2003 to increase international cooperation in interdicting shipments of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) , their delivery systems , and related materials .

in the past , vietnamese officials said they would not join psi because it operates outside the united nations system .

as part of vietnam's pledges at nuclear security summits , it has removed all weapons - usable nuclear material from the country .

in december 2010 , the united states and vietnam established a legal framework for u.s. - vietnam cooperation for full conversion of its heu - fueled research reactor to leu fuel , and the return of heu spent fuel from dalat to russia under the department of energy's global threat reduction initiative ( gtri ) .

as noted , fresh heu fuel was removed in 2007 .

the research reactor has been converted to leu fuel , and the last shipment of heu was completed in july 2013 .

vietnam continues to develop its export control system .

the u.s. state department's export control and border security program provides assistance to vietnam to strengthen export controls in the country .

in 2010 , vietnam issued regulations that would make any trafficking of nuclear materials in the country illegal .

when reviewing the proposed agreement with vietnam , congress may wish to examine the extent to which vietnam's export control system can prevent illicit transfers of nuclear materials and technologies .

as required by section 123b of the atomic energy act , the president announced in february 2014 his determination that a nuclear cooperation agreement with vietnam "will promote , and will not constitute an unreasonable risk to , the common defense and security. .

the white house transmitted a package of documents to the senate foreign relations committee and the house foreign affairs committee , to include the text of the agreement itself , a nonproliferation assessment statement , the presidential determination , and letters of concurrence by the secretaries of energy and state , and the nuclear regulatory commission chairman .

the nuclear cooperation agreement complies with all the terms of the atomic energy act as amended and therefore is a "non - exempt" agreement .

this means that it may enter into force after the 90 th day of continuous session ( a period of 30 plus 60 days of review ) following its submittal to congress on may 8 , 2014 , unless a joint resolution disapproving the agreement is enacted by both the house and senate .

members of congress may introduce resolutions of disapproval or approval during this time .

if no resolution of disapproval is passed into law , then the agreement would automatically be eligible to enter into force after the 90-day review period is concluded .

if a resolution of approval is passed before the 90 days have expired , then the agreement could enter into force sooner .

even before the official congressional review period , members of congress have weighed in on the debate over the u.s. - vietnam nuclear cooperation agreement and section 123 agreements generally .

in december 2013 , representatives ileana ros - lehtinen and brad sherman introduced a bill ( h.r .

3766 ) that would strengthen congressional approval procedures for agreements that did not include certain nonproliferation standards , including the pledge not to enrich or reprocess .

the senate foreign relations committee held a hearing on january 30 , 2014 , on section 123 agreements .

debate during the hearing spent some time on the issues surrounding the vietnam nuclear cooperation accord .

some senators said that a human rights bill on vietnam would need to be passed if a nuclear cooperation agreement was to go forward .

three bills have been introduced to date that would approve the agreement with vietnam .

senate foreign relations committee chairman robert menendez introduced a resolution that would approve the agreement ( s.j.res .

36 ) on may 22 .

this bill was passed by the full senate on july 31 , 2014 .

on june 9 , senator majority leader harry reid introduced s.j.res .

39 and representative adam kinzinger with ranking member of the house foreign affairs committee eliot engel introduced h.j.res .

116 .

as noted above , the 90 th day of the congressional review period was september 9 , 2014 .

since the agreement was not disapproved in that time , it may enter into force .

typically , such agreements enter into force after an exchange of diplomatic notes between the two countries .

