growing demands on the transportation system and constraints on public resources have led to calls for more private sector involvement in the provision of highway and transit infrastructure through what are known as "public - private partnerships" or "p3s. .

as defined by the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) , "public - private partnerships ( p3s ) are contractual agreements formed between a public agency and a private sector entity that allow for greater private sector participation in the delivery and financing of transportation projects. .

typically , the "public" in public - private partnerships refers to a state government , local government , or transit agency .

the federal government exerts influence over the prevalence and structure of p3s through its transportation programs , funding , and regulatory oversight , but is usually not a party to a p3 agreement .

p3s can offer a means of injecting additional resources into highway and public transportation systems while reducing costs , project delivery time , and public sector risk .

however , many individual surface transportation projects are not well suited to p3s , because , for example , they are too small to bear the transaction costs of a p3 or they offer limited opportunity for profit .

p3s have the potential to distort transportation planning by directing public funds to projects that offer opportunity for private return rather than to projects that might offer greater social benefits — to construction of a new toll bridge , for example , rather than to repairing an existing highway .

depending upon the specific arrangements , a p3 may also leave the public sector bearing risks if a project does not perform as anticipated .

a wide variety of public - private partnerships in highways and transit exists , but this report focuses on the two types that are generating the most debate: ( 1 ) the leasing by the public sector to the private sector of existing infrastructure , sometimes referred to as "brownfield" facilities ; and ( 2 ) the building , leasing , and owning of new infrastructure by private entities , sometimes known as "greenfield" facilities .

a common , though not essential , element of greater private sector participation in highway infrastructure provision is the use of tolling .

vehicle tolls provide a revenue stream to retire bonds issued to finance a project and to provide a return on investment .

highway tolling can be implemented by public authorities , but it is widely believed that the privatization of transportation infrastructure will hasten the spread of tolling and may raise toll rates .

consequently , a discussion of p3s must include , as this report does , the issue of vehicle tolling and other direct pricing mechanisms .

interest in public - private partnerships stems principally from concerns that public - sector resources are inadequate to sustain the nation's highway and transit infrastructure .

a number of reports over the past decade have concluded that substantially increased funding of surface transportation infrastructure is needed to deal with physical deterioration , congestion , and future growth in demand for passenger and freight movements .

a 2014 report by dot estimated that inflation - adjusted spending on highways needs to be between 23% and 46% above the 2010 level to improve conditions and performance , and that spending on transit systems would need to rise between 33% and 48% to expand and achieve a good state of repair .

similar problems were found by two congressionally mandated commissions .

at the same time , the main revenue mechanism at the federal level , the fuels tax , is in trouble .

the federal contribution to highway and transit infrastructure is largely derived from the highway trust fund , which relies primarily on revenue from motor fuels taxes .

the tax rates are set on a per - gallon basis and were last raised in 1993 , while a reduction in auto travel and improved vehicle fuel efficiency mean that drivers are purchasing fewer gallons of fuel .

as a result , the amount of revenue flowing into the highway trust fund has not increased in line with construction costs ( figure 1 ) .

in its most recent estimates , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) suggests that both the highway account and the mass transit account of the highway trust fund will approach a zero balance early in fy2015 absent congressional action .

the gap between fuel tax revenues and future infrastructure investment needs has stimulated interest in p3s .

yet the 2007 report of the national surface transportation policy and revenue study commission illustrated divergent views about the role p3s should play in u.s. transportation policy .

the majority view , supported by 9 of the 12 commissioners , contended that severe underinvestment is the main problem facing transportation infrastructure ; the majority urged greater use of p3s and other mechanisms to attract private capital as adjuncts to greater federal spending financed by major increases in fuels taxes .

an opposing viewpoint , expressed by three commissioners including the then u.s. secretary of transportation mary peters , asserted that "a failure to properly align supply and demand , not a failure to generate sufficient tax revenues , is the essential policy failure" in transportation infrastructure provision .

a key ingredient of change , in their view , should be market - based reforms allowing for much greater reliance on tolls and private sector participation , including p3s .

in the traditional method of providing transportation infrastructure , known as "design , bid , build," the public sector decides there is a need for a new facility , plans its development with a wide variety of community input , organizes the funding and financing , lets out contracts to design and construct the facility , and operates and maintains the facility after completion .

in contrast , a public - private partnership may involve private - sector participation in any or all phases of development and operation .

the private - sector involvement may be predicated on a revenue stream from the operation of a facility , such as vehicle tolls , or it may be attracted by the promise of future government payments .

according to dot , p3s in highway and transit infrastructure provision can be categorized into seven basic types .

of these , five have been used to construct new infrastructure .

from least to most private responsibility , they are the following: private contract fee service .

this type of partnership involves the public sector contracting for program management services involving major projects or even capital programs .

program management services include strategic planning , financial management , and coordination in the areas of environmental studies and approvals , design , and construction .

an example of this type of p3 is the louisiana timed program , which involved the widening of 536 miles of state highways , widening or new construction of three major bridges , and improvements to the port of new orleans and louis armstrong international airport .

a private partner , louisiana timed managers , was hired in 2002 to manage overall program delivery including the financing strategy , public outreach , scheduling , pre - construction activities , and construction administration .

design - build ( db ) .

this type of partnership arrangement combines two services that are traditionally separate , design and construction , into one fixed - fee contract .

the public sector retains control of the facility as well as responsibility for planning , preliminary engineering , funding and financing , and post - construction operation and maintenance .

an example of this type of p3 is the tappan zee bridge in new york .

the new york state thruway authority is paying tappan zee constructors , llc , $3.1 billion to design and build the new bridge , which will be turned over to the thruway authority upon completion .

design - build - operate - maintain ( dbom ) .

these partnerships go even further than design - build p3s by adding private - sector responsibility for operation and maintenance once a facility goes into service .

the public sector is still responsible for funding and financing , and retains the risks if operation costs more than anticipated or revenue falls short .

the 21-mile hudson - bergen light rail system in new jersey is an example of dbom .

the original fixed - price contract awarded to the 21 st century rail corporation in 1996 was for design and construction of the initial 10 miles by a specified date and then 15 years of operation and maintenance .

the contract was subsequently renegotiated for extensions to the system and to lengthen the operation and maintenance agreement .

design - build - finance ( dbf ) .

this adds short - term financing to a design - build contract .

payment by the public partner is typically deferred during the construction phase , requiring the private partner to arrange financing until the work is complete .

as with db projects , the public sector retains responsibility for planning , preliminary engineering , and operation and maintenance .

an example of a dbf project is the i - 75 expansion in florida , which began in 2007 and was completed in 2010 .

for this project , payments began during construction and final payment was received about one year after completion .

design - build - finance - operate - maintain ( dbfo m ) .

in addition to the designing , building , and operation of an infrastructure project , these types of p3s transfer to the private sector much of the long - term financing responsibility .

debt financing leveraged with a revenue stream , such as tolls , is the most common financing mechanism in this type of p3 .

however , financing may be supplemented with public - sector grants and / or in - kind contributions such as right - of - way .

the i - 635 lbj managed lanes project near dallas , tx , is an example of a dbfom .

after completion , which is expected in 2016 , the concessionaire , lbj infrastructure group , will operate and maintain the facility , including the collection of tolls , until 2062 .

in the case of existing infrastructure , dot identified two basic types of p3s .

these are the following: o&m concession .

the public agency turns over to the private sector responsibility for asset operation and maintenance , including service and management .

the anton anderson memorial tunnel in alaska , a road and rail tunnel , is an example of an o&m concession .

vms , the concessionaire , is responsible for toll collection , train and highway vehicle control , road and rail maintenance , and initial emergency response .

long - term lease agreement .

this type of partnership typically involves the leasing of an existing facility to a private company for a specified amount of time .

the private partner usually pays an initial concession fee and must operate and maintain the facility to prescribed standards .

the private company typically collects tolls on users and keeps the revenue to pay its bond holders and to generate a return on its equity investment .

examples of this type of p3 are the chicago skyway and the indiana toll road .

through most of the 20 th century , highway and transit construction were supported almost entirely by public funding , particularly from the federal government .

the private sector's role was largely limited to bidding on and building what the public sector had planned , designed , and financed .

the 1980s , however , saw federal spending on highways and transit projects grow at a slower rate than inflation , and the federal share of total capital spending on highways and transit declined .

these trends spurred interest in the use of public - private partnerships , as states and localities , particularly those in fast - growing parts of the country , searched for new ways to fund and build transportation infrastructure .

this interest was demonstrated in two state - level policy initiatives .

with developments in automated toll collection technology that reduced both the cost of collecting tolls and the associated delays for motorists , seven states approved legislation by the late 1980s to allow private investment in highway projects on which the private partners could collect tolls .

two of the earliest projects developed under these new rules were the dulles greenway in virginia and sr - 91 in california , which both opened in 1995 .

according to dot , 33 states and puerto rico currently have general p3 enabling legislation .

in transit , new revenue was sought from the development of private facilities on or over transit agency land , a process known as joint development .

for example , joint development was used in the construction of offices , retail space , and a hotel surrounding the washington metropolitan area transit authority's bethesda , md , station .

the station opened in 1984 and the mixed - use development was completed in 1985 .

the air - rights lease for this development generates $1.6 million annually in rents for the transit agency .

the widespread interest in encouraging p3s in surface transportation raises a number of important issues for congress .

these fall into two main categories: ( 1 ) the extent to which p3s can help finance the surface transportation system ; and ( 2 ) the effects of long - term concessions on the planning , operation , and use of the surface transportation system .

p3s offer a number of benefits for states and localities , but they also present a number of trade - offs and potential problems .

consequently , there is not one easily identifiable "public interest" but multiple stakeholders with overlapping interests that must be weighed against each other .

the public interest in p3s has been protected on a project - by - project basis through the terms of concession agreements .

some , including gao , have suggested that a more systematic approach to identifying and evaluating the public interest in p3s needs be developed and employed , as has been done in other countries such as australia .

as part of such an effort , the federal government might need to identify and evaluate the national public interest in highway projects that employ a p3 .

map - 21 made several changes to federal law that are likely to encourage the creation of p3s at the state and local level .

these include greatly increasing the amount of funding available for tifia loans and making tolling on federal - aid highways less restrictive .

map - 21 also required dot to provide technical support to p3s .

these changes were a move away from the policy of incremental changes and experimentation in program incentives and regulation that existed prior to map - 21 .

there are two broad policy options for expanding use of p3s .

the first would be to actively encourage p3s with program incentives , as was done in map - 21 , but with relatively tight regulatory controls .

the second would be to aggressively encourage the use of p3s through program incentives and deregulation , particularly in the areas of tolling and financing .

it should be pointed out that at the level of detailed policy prescriptions these options are not necessarily mutually exclusive , as congress could decide to deregulate in one area while enhancing regulation in another , and may add funding to one program and cut funding to another .

proponents of the first option tend to be cautious about the benefits of p3s and favor regulations designed to protect the public interest from their perceived problems .

they emphasize that many p3s involve little private money or are subsidized by the public sector , that risk transfer from the public to the private sector can be illusory , and that p3 contracts may constrain government decisions about the transportation system .

in response to such concerns , map - 21 required that best practices complied by dot "shall include policies and techniques to ensure that the interests of the traveling public and state and local governments are protected in any agreement entered into with the private sector for the development , financing , construction , and operation of transportation facilities. .

the debate over public oversight is not new .

the proposed surface transportation authorization act ( staa ) of 2009 would have made p3s involving federal - aid highway funds subject to various federal requirements , including a weighing of the costs and benefits of the p3 against traditional public delivery methods .

the proposal also contained requirements regarding public information and public involvement and a prohibition against non - compete clauses in p3 agreements .

these requirements would have been enforced by a new office of public benefit ( opb ) within fhwa to "provide for the protection of the public interest in relation to highway toll projects and public - private partnership agreements on federal - aid highways. .

the requirement that the opb review and approve a p3's compliance with new public transparency provisions raised particular concern among advocates of more widespread use of p3s , who asserted that the risk of opb disapproval late in the process would discourage project partners from investing the substantial time and money required to develop projects .

the more aggressive approach to p3s would provide program funding to encourage innovation and generally deregulate the use of tolling and private sector involvement , thereby letting states decide when and how to enter into agreements .

the federal role in such a scenario could be limited to providing guidance about instituting good practices and avoiding common pitfalls , although it might be possible to set up a federal p3 office which , in addition to providing technical advice , could also provide consulting services in a fee - for - service arrangement , and could possibly help to develop the p3 market .

such entities exist in several other countries , such as partnerships bc in british columbia , infrastructure partnerships australia , and partnerships uk .

other past proposals have linked deregulation of tolling and public - private partnerships with devolution of federal responsibilities in highways and transit to the states .

many parts of the interstate highway system have traffic levels that would make it financially viable to have toll - supported public - private partnerships .

the need for reconstructing interstates is likely to accelerate in the years ahead as many reach their approximately 50-year design life .

many of these projects are likely to be very expensive "mega - projects," running into the hundreds of millions of dollars .

although imposing tolls on "free" roads is likely to be unpopular , congress could allow states to impose tolls on an interstate after its reconstruction as a way to facilitate financing of such projects .

the tifia program has played an important role in the funding packages of several large p3s .

map - 21 greatly enlarged the program , authorizing $16 billion in loan capacity in fy2013 and fy2014 , but there have already been enough applications to almost exhaust that budget authority .

further enlarging tifia could encourage creation of p3s .

however , increased lending may also increase the likelihood that a project is unable to repay its loan .

tifia loans can be subordinate to other debt financing for the project , except , as required by statute , in the event of bankruptcy , insolvency , or liquidation ( although there are some exceptions ) .

the possibility that the federal government will claim parity with other creditors , known as a "springing lien," may discourage the completion of some p3 agreements .

abolishing the springing lien , however , may expose the federal government to greater risk of loss if a project sponsor is unable to service its debt .

private activity bonds have been another important way in which the federal government has encouraged the development of p3s in transportation .

as noted earlier , the current cap of $15 billion may be reached in fy2015 , threatening the development of new projects .

the administration's fy2014 budget proposal includes a provision to increase this amount to $19 billion .

raising the cap is not cost free , however .

this provision , if enacted , would reduce revenue by $515 million over the 2014 to 2023 budget window .

a national infrastructure bank could be designed to promote development of p3 .

the central idea of a national infrastructure bank , or "i - bank," would be to provide low - cost , long - term loans on flexible terms , much like the tifia program .

however , an i - bank might have more independence than tifia , which is controlled by the u.s. department of transportation , and as a separate organization might be able to build up a specialized staff , including expertise on the creation and oversight of p3s .

funding could come from an appropriation to pay for administrative costs and the subsidy cost of credit assistance , although in some formulations an i - bank would raise its own capital through bond issuance .

many different formulations of an i - bank have been proposed over the past few years .

three i - bank proposals that have been introduced in the 113 th congress are the national infrastructure development bank act ( h.r .

2553 ) by representative delauro , the partnership to build america act ( h.r .

2084 ) by representative delaney , and the building and renewing infrastructure for development and growth in employment ( bridge ) act ( s. 1716 ) by senator warner .

state infrastructure banks ( sibs ) already exist in 32 states .

most were created in response to a federal program enacted in 1995 ( p.l .

104-59 ) .

although they tend to provide credit assistance to small projects that do not involve a p3 , an expansion of their role may make them more supportive of projects involving a private partner .

map - 21 did not extend authority for a state to use a portion of its federal surface transportation funds to capitalize a sib .

several bills have sought to encourage sibs by allowing states to fund them from federal funds , by creating a dedicated federal funding stream , or by authorizing sibs to issue bonds that would benefit from tax credits .

