the volcker rule establishes an outright prohibition on proprietary trading by a "banking entity. .

subsequent provisions of the legislation , however , provide activities that are excluded from the definition of "proprietary trading," as well as exceptions to the general ban as long as various conditions are met .

the exact language provides a broad prohibition .

it reads , "a banking entity shall not … engage in proprietary trading , ..." under the statute , "proprietary trading" covers buying and selling of "financial instruments" by banking entities as "principal" for their "trading accounts. .

"financial instruments" include securities , derivatives , and contracts for future sale or for options on any commodity other than foreign exchange or currency , but not loans .

however , as described more fully below , certain types of financial instruments and operations are excluded .

the regulation focuses on restricting short - term trades .

it establishes a rebuttable presumption that any financial instrument held for fewer than 60 days is a banned proprietary trade unless all relevant facts and circumstances rebut the presumption .

it defines "trading account" as any account used to buy or sell one or more financial instruments "principally" for "short - term resale," to benefit from "short - term price movements," to realize "short - term arbitrage profits," or to hedge any of these .

"trading account" also covers trades by banking entities that are securities dealers and swap or swap - based securities dealers — both in the united states and abroad — as well as market risk capital transactions and hedges of such transactions by banking entities that calculate such ratios under the banking agencies' market risk capital rules .

the volcker rule regulations broadly prohibit banking entities from , "directly or indirectly , acquir[ing] or retain[ing] any ownership interest in or sponsor[ing] a covered fund," as principal for its own account , rather for a customer .

due to the customer focus of the following activities , the prohibition does not apply to holding an ownership interest in a covered fund , if the interest is acquired by a banking entity while "acting solely as agent , broker , or custodian," fiduciary , or trustee for a customer , as long as neither the banking entity nor its affiliates acquire a beneficial interest in the investments ; acting as a trustee for an employee compensation plan organized for the benefit of the banking entity's current and former employees ; and acting in the "ordinary course of collecting a debt," as long as the products are divested "as soon as practicable. .

the statute requires the federal financial regulators to issue regulations to "insure compliance with [section 619]. .

in response , the final regulations require banking entities to develop and maintain compliance programs , internal controls , and recordkeeping systems to control and monitor the risk of trading and investment activities .

compliance requirements vary in accordance with the size of the banking entity , as well as the scope , complexity , and types of trading and investment activities .

banking entities conducting no proprietary trading activity ( other than trading of federal , agency , or state and local obligations ) and having no investments in covered funds are not required to develop a volcker rule - specific compliance program but must do so if they begin to conduct such activities .

similarly , banking entities with total assets below $10 billion may fold volcker rule compliance measures into existing compliance programs .

the standard compliance requirements , which are set forth in appendix a to the regulations , apply to banking entities with assets of $10 billion or more and for those banking entities that otherwise are required to do so by the financial regulators .

in addition to complying with the standard compliance program , banking entities with assets of $50 billion or more are subject to enhanced minimum standards , which are set forth in appendix b to the regulations .

the standard compliance program includes requirements for ( 1 ) written policies and procedures documenting compliance and verifying exemptions , ( 2 ) internal control systems , ( 3 ) management frameworks , ( 4 ) independent testing and review , ( 5 ) personnel training , and ( 6 ) recordkeeping .

for banking entities subject to the standard compliance program , the final regulations also require and establish methods of calculating quantitative measurements that banking entities must furnish for seven aspects of each trading desk: ( 1 ) risks and position limits and usage , ( 2 ) risk factor sensitivities , ( 3 ) value - at - risk and stress value - at - risk , ( 4 ) position limits and usage , ( 5 ) comprehensive profit and loss attribution , ( 6 ) inventory turnover and aging , and ( 7 ) customer facing trade ratio .

appendix a sets forth non - exclusive recordkeeping and reporting requirements , including quantitative metrics , for banking entities with "significant trading assets and liabilities. .

the preamble to the final regulations make clear , however , that these are not safe harbors for banking entities , but that , helpful as these metrics may be , "banking entities [must ensure] that they have robust measures in place to identify and monitor the risks taken in their trading activities , to ensure the activities are within the risk tolerances established by the banking entity , and to monitor for compliance with proprietary trading restrictions in the proposed rule. .

the enhanced minimum standards include instructions as to the specific ingredients of the entity's policies and procedures applicable to its trading desks and to its covered fund activities or investments .

for the trading desks of banking entities that are subject to the heightened compliance program , there are specific requirements regarding how the trading desk "identif[ies] , authoriz[es] , and document[s] financial instruments to be purchased or sold" ; "types and amounts of risks allocated" to each trading desk ; how those risks will be measured ; why those risks are appropriate ; "the process for setting new or revised limits" ; "the process for identifying , documenting and approving new products , trading strategies , and hedging strategies" ; types of permissible customers and counterparties ; and compensation arrangements .

there are also provisions on describing the firm's risks and risk management process ; how it authorizes risks , specific instruments , and products ; what its hedging policies and procedures are ; the specifics of its analytical policies and procedures and quantitative measurements ; as well as how it will remediate violations .

for covered fund activities or investments , the enhanced minimum standards requirements include management involvement in reviewing and testing the identification and documentation of all covered funds sponsored or organized by components of the organization ; identification of the lines of authority with respect to such funds ; explanations of monitoring for and prohibition of material conflicts of interest , threats to safety and soundness , or exposure to high - risk assets or trading strategies ; documentation of plans for seeking unaffiliated investors to meet investment limits ; board of director and senior management involvement ; and ceo attestation .

generally , the regulations require any banking entity engaging in any activity or making an investment in violation of the volcker rule to terminate the activity and divest the investment promptly .

they also authorize the agencies to "take any action permitted by law to enforce compliance ... , including directing the banking entity to restrict , limit , or terminate any or all activities under this part and dispose of any investment. .

the statute generally requires divestiture of nonconforming activities within two years of the rule becoming effective and provides the frb with authority to extend this two - year period one year at a time , not to exceed an aggregate of three years .

under the frb's recent extension , the conformance date is july 21 , 2015 .

this means that a company that was a banking entity or a subsidiary or affiliate of a banking entity on july 21 , 2010 , must bring its activities into conformance before july 21 , 2015 .

for a company that was not a banking entity or a subsidiary or affiliate of a banking entity on that date , conformance is required before the later of july 21 , 2015 , or two years after the date on which the company becomes a banking entity or a subsidiary or an affiliate of a banking entity .

a company becoming a banking entity on july 21 , 2015 , thus , would have two years , until july 21 , 2017 , to conform its activities and investments .

banking entities are expected to engage in good faith efforts to be in compliance with the rules by july 21 , 2015 , by not expanding covered activities or expecting more time to conform , developing an appropriately specific conformance plan , and immediately terminating any stand - alone proprietary trading operations .

during the conformance period , banking entities with significant trading operations will remain subject to the data reporting and recordkeeping requirements of the rule that are discussed in the previous section of this report .

the july 15 , 2015 , conformance date may be extended by the frb for one - year periods , not to exceed two additional years .

in addition to a two - year extension , if a banking entity is required by contract to take or retain its ownership interest in , or provide additional capital to , an illiquid fund , the entity may apply to the frb for an extension which may be granted for no more than five years ; at the end of which divestiture would be required either at the end of the five years or on the contractual date — whichever is earlier .

