in august 2007 , asset - backed securities ( abs ) , particularly those backed by subprime mortgages , suddenly became illiquid and fell sharply in value as an unprecedented housing boom turned into a housing bust .

losses on the many abs held by financial firms depleted their capital .

uncertainty about future losses on illiquid and complex assets led to firms having reduced access , sometimes catastrophically , to the private liquidity necessary to fund day - to - day activities .

in september 2008 , the crisis reached panic proportions .

fannie mae and freddie mac , government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) that supported a large proportion of the mortgage market , were taken into government conservatorship .

lehman brothers , a major investment bank , declared bankruptcy .

the government acquired most of the equity in american international group ( aig ) , one of the world's largest insurers , in exchange for an emergency loan from the federal reserve ( fed ) .

these firms were seen by many , either at the time or in hindsight , as "too big to fail" firms whose failure would lead to contagion that would cause financial problems for counterparties or would disrupt the smooth functioning of markets in which the firms operated .

one example of such contagion was the failure of a large money market fund holding lehman brothers debt that caused a run on many similar funds , including several whose assets were sound .

the federal government took a number of extraordinary steps to address widespread disruption to the functioning of financial markets .

initially , the government approach was largely an ad hoc one , attempting to address the problems at individual institutions on a case - by - case basis .

the panic in september 2008 convinced policymakers that a larger and more systemic approach was needed , and congress passed the emergency economic stabilization act ( eesa ) to create the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) in october 2008 .

in addition to tarp , the federal reserve and federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) implemented broad lending and guaranty programs .

because the crisis had so many causes and symptoms , the response tackled a number of disparate problems , and can be broadly categorized into programs that increased institutions' liquidity ( access to cash and easily tradable assets ) , such as direct lending facilities by the federal reserve or the fdic's temporary liquidity guarantee program ( tlgp ) ; provided financial institutions with equity to rebuild their capital following asset write - downs , such as the capital purchase program ( cpp ) ; purchased illiquid assets from financial institutions in order to restore confidence in their balance sheets in the eyes of investors , creditors , and counterparties , such as the public - private partnership investment program ( ppip ) ; intervened in specific financial markets that had ceased to function smoothly , such as the commercial paper funding facility ( cpff ) and the term asset - backed securities lending facility ( talf ) ; used public funds to prevent the failure of troubled institutions that were deemed by some "too big to fail" ( tbtf ) because of their systemic importance , such as aig , fannie mae , and freddie mac .

one possible schematic for categorizing the programs discussed in this report into these categories is presented in table 1 .

these programs all stopped extending credit years ago , soon after financial conditions normalized , and most have been wound down .

a few still have legacy principal outstanding that has not yet been repaid , however .

although many arguments could be made for one particular form of intervention or another , the position could also be taken that the form of government support was not particularly important as long as it was done quickly and forcefully because what the financial system lacked in october 2008 was confidence , and any of several options might have restored confidence if it were credible .

some critics dispute that view , arguing that the panic eventually would have ended without government intervention , and that some specific government missteps exacerbated the panic .

congress exercises oversight responsibilities for the government's crisis response , through existing oversight committees and newly created entities such as a special inspector general for the tarp ( sigtarp ) , a congressional oversight panel , and a financial crisis inquiry commission .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the government accountability office ( gao ) were also tasked by statute with reporting on various aspects of the crisis response .

this report reviews the costs of new programs introduced , and other actions taken , by the treasury , fed , and fdic .

figure 1 presents the programs discussed in this report by organization , with programs in the overlapping circles denoting joint programs .

it does not cover long - standing programs , such as the fed's discount window , mortgages guaranteed and securitized by the federal housing administration ( fha ) and ginnie mae , respectively , or fdic deposit insurance and receivership of failed banks .

the primary goal of the various interventions was to end financial panic and restore normalcy to financial markets .

in this sense , the programs were arguably a success — based on traditional measures of market turbulence , such as the "ted spread" ( the difference between the 3-month libor [london interbank offer rate] and the 3-month treasury rates ) , overall financial conditions significantly improved in late 2008 and returned to precrisis levels by mid - 2009 , although some specific markets took longer to rebound .

the goal of intervening at zero cost to the taxpayers was never the best measure of success because nonintervention would likely have led to a much more costly loss of economic output that indirectly would have worsened the government's finances .

further , the goal of maximizing return ( or minimizing risk ) to the government could work at odds with other policy goals , such as restoring investor confidence in the programs' recipients and encouraging voluntary participation in the government programs .

nevertheless , an important part of evaluating the government's actions is evaluating whether financial normalcy was restored at a minimum cost to the taxpayers .

one can distinguish in the abstract between funds provided to solvent companies and those provided to insolvent companies .

for insolvent firms with negative net worth at the time of intervention , the government's chances of fully recouping losses are low .

for solvent firms , it should be possible , in principle , to provide funds at a low ultimate cost , or even profit , to the taxpayers .

in a panic , investors typically refuse to provide funds to firms because they are unable to distinguish between healthy and unhealthy firms , and so they err on the side of caution .

for those private investors who perceive profitable opportunities to lend or invest , not enough liquidity may be available to do so .

in this situation , the government can theoretically provide those funds to healthy firms at what would normally be a profitable market rate of return .

in practice , the challenge is that the government is arguably no more able to accurately distinguish between healthy firms and unhealthy firms than private individuals are , so some widely available lending facilities are likely to be accessed by firms that will ultimately prove to be insolvent , and this is a possible source of long - term cost for a widely available facility .

at different times , news sources put the "potential cost to taxpayers," "amount taxpayers are on the hook for," and "taxpayer exposure" as a result of the financial crisis as high as $23.7 trillion .

these totals were reached by calculating the maximum potential size of programs or using the total size of markets being assisted when the programs have no announced potential size , and by further ignoring that at least some of the money that the government outlaid would eventually be paid back .

even official estimates that accounted for expected future repayment initially projected large losses .

for example , in march 2009 , cbo projected that the government would ultimately pay a subsidy of $356 billion on tarp funds .

actual financial results were quite different from these headlines and from the more sober early estimates ; unlike typical government programs , outlays in most of the programs countering the financial crisis were paid back in full with interest .

altogether , the financial crisis programs covered in this report brought back more in principal repayments and income than was paid out .

the vast majority of individual programs , including all federal reserve facilities , have already taken in more money than was paid out by the government ( see table 2 ) .

even in those programs where losses were realized on specific transactions , such as the capital purchase program , income from other transactions was more than sufficient to absorb those losses and still produce a net gain for the government .

programs in table 2 include both broadly based liquidity programs that could conceptually be structured to minimize the potential for losses , such as fed lending facilities , and direct assistance to troubled companies , such as aig , that were expected to generate losses .

four programs still have assistance outstanding .

of those four programs , three ( gse preferred shares , cpp , and gse debt purchases ) have already generated net income in excess of remaining principal outstanding ( see table 2 ) .

in other words , even if the value of all outstanding principal were written down to zero , these programs would still generate positive net income to the government .

the gse assistance remains outstanding because their government conservatorship , initiated in september 2008 in response to their financial difficulties , has not yet been addressed .

the other program , the treasury's community development capital initiative , may ultimately generate positive net income for the government , but to date , the net income does not exceed the outstanding principal ( see table 3 ) .

three programs realized net losses when assistance was exhausted ( see table 4 ) .

note that while two of those recipients ( gm and chrysler ) failed during the financial crisis and received funding through emergency financial programs , they were not financial institutions .

thus , when limited to programs to aid the financial sector , only one program has realized losses for the government , whereas 19 have realized gains .

altogether to date , realized gains across the various programs exceed realized losses by tens of billions of dollars .

note that generating positive net income does not necessarily mean that these programs made an economic profit for the government .

the government had to borrow , incurring interest payments , to finance these programs .

for this reason , for example , $1 lent out in 2008 was worth more than $1 repaid later would be , which tables 1 , 2 , and 3 do not account for .

the government also faced significant risks at the time that money would not be fully repaid , even if it turned out after the fact that money was repaid .

an economist would determine whether government programs generated economic profits by comparing the government's terms to what a private investor would require for the same investment .

making these adjustments would reduce the gains to the taxpayer shown in table 1 , and could even show losses on certain programs — although it is fair to question what terms should be used for a hypothetical private investor in the depths of the financial crisis , when private credit markets were not functioning .

cbo , which adjusts for borrowing costs and risk , estimated in march 2018 that the nonhousing programs in tarp would approximately break even .

this compares to a cash accounting gain of approximately $13.4 billion .

there are no up - to - date official estimates for the other programs covered in this report .

another long - term , and more amorphous , cost may be an increased likelihood of future rescues due to increased private - sector risk - taking brought on by the expectation that the government will provide a rescue again .

in economic terms , this is referred to as "moral hazard," and the problem is particularly acute when assistance is provided to insolvent firms , at below market rates , or on similar terms to both risky and prudent firms .

for each program below , the congressional research service ( crs ) reports the latest data on government holdings or guarantees of assets or loans ; the peak amount for the same measure ; income earnings of the program from dividends , interest , or fees ; estimates of the program's profits or losses ; the dividend or interest rate charged by the program ; warrants received in the transactions ; subsequent modifications to the assistance ( if any ) ; and the expiration date for the program .

treasury reacted quickly after the enactment of eesa , announcing the tarp capital purchase program on october 14 , 2008 ; several other programs followed .

listed below are the programs that were run primarily under tarp .

capital purchase program ( cpp ) .

unlike the plan most commonly envisioned in the tarp legislative debate , the cpp did not purchase the mortgage - backed securities that were seen as toxic to the system , but instead purchased preferred shares in banks .

the resulting addition of capital , it was hoped , would allow banks to overcome the effect of the toxic assets while the assets remained on bank balance sheets .

the cpp is now closed with no additional disbursements possible under the current program .

of the approximately $205 billion disbursed , $0.04 billion remains outstanding , $5.2 billion has been written off or recognized as a loss , and $27.1 billion in income has been received .

community development capital initiative ( cdci ) .

the cdci provided for lower dividend rates on preferred share purchases from banks that target their lending to low - income , underserved communities and small businesses .

many of the participants in the cdci converted into the program from the cpp .

this program is closed , with no additional disbursements possible under the current program .

of the $0.57 billion disbursed , $0.06 billion is still outstanding , $0.03 billion has been written off or recognized as a loss , and $0.07 billion in income has been received .

public - private investment program ( ppip ) .

this program provided funds and guarantees for purchases of mortgage - related securities from bank balance sheets .

purchases and management of the securities were done by private investors who have provided capital to invest along with the tarp funds .

all of the $18.6 billion in disbursed ppip funds have been repaid with $3.85 billion in income received and no realized losses .

section 7 ( a ) securities purchase program .

this program supported the small business administration's ( sba's ) section 7 ( a ) loan program through purchases of pooled sba guaranteed securities to increase credit availability for small businesses .

it is now closed with $0.36 billion repaid out of the $0.37 billion in disbursed funds and $0.01 billion in income received .

automobile industry support .

this program initially provided loans to support general motors ( gm ) and chrysler and later included preferred share purchases from the auto financing company gmac ( since renamed ally financial ) and a loan for chrysler financial .

the program ultimately resulted in majority government ownership of gm ( 60.8% ) and gmac / ally financial ( 74% ) , and minority government ownership of chrysler ( 9.9% ) .

the u.s. government's ownership stake in gm was sold to gm itself and to the public between december 2010 and december 2013 .

the ownership stake in chrysler was sold to fiat in may 2011 .

the government's stake in gmac / ally financial was sold to the public in 2014 .

no outstanding amount is left of the $79.7 billion total in disbursed funds .

the automobile industry support program combined resulted in $16.6 billion in recognized losses and $7.4 billion in income received .

housing assistance programs .

these programs are unlike the other tarp programs in that they do not result in income - generating assets with resale value in return for the tarp funding and thus will not be a focus of this report .

a total of $28.4 billion has been disbursed out of $33.4 billion obligated .

as of august 1 , 2018 , treasury reported obligations under tarp totaling $450.5 billion authorized , with $440.1 billion disbursed .

of that total , $376.4 billion of funds paid out have been returned to the treasury and $35.3 billion have been written off or recognized as lost .

$0.1 billion is still outstanding .

tarp was originally authorized to outlay up to $700 billion ; however , this amount was reduced to $475 billion by congress in july 2010 .

authorization to take on new commitments under tarp expired on october 3 , 2010 ; however , outlays can continue under then - existing commitments and treasury has indefinite authority to continue to hold and manage assets acquired under tarp .

setting aside the housing assistance , tarp overall generated positive net income , as income received ( $48.7 billion ) exceeds recognized losses ( $35.3 billion ) and remaining outstanding funds ( $0.1 billion ) .

as noted above , this outcome was not anticipated when the legislation authorizing tarp was debated .

table 5 provides a breakdown of the overall tarp results .

programs consisting solely of tarp funds are discussed immediately below , and those involving other agencies , such as the federal reserve and fdic , are discussed under the heading " joint interventions . .

beginning in december 2007 , the federal reserve introduced a number of emergency credit facilities to provide liquidity to various segments of the financial system .

most , but not all , of these facilities made short - term loans backed by collateral that exceeds the value of the loan , with recourse to the borrower's other assets if the borrower defaults .

these facilities were widely available to all qualified participants .

 ( fed assistance to individual companies is discussed separately below. ) .

since the fed's creation 100 years ago , the fed has always made short - term collateralized loans to banks through its discount window .

in the years before the crisis , loans outstanding through the discount window were consistently less than $1 billion at any time .

at the peak of the crisis , total assistance outstanding would peak at more than $1 trillion .

another attribute that distinguished these new facilities from the fed's traditional lending was the fact that many served nonbanks that were not regulated by the fed .

profits or losses on fed lending accrue to the taxpayer similar to if the loans had been made by the treasury .

the fed generates income from its assets ( securities and loans ) that exceed its expenses .

any income that remains after expenses , dividends , and additions to its surplus is remitted to the treasury .

if its profits rise because a lending facility is more profitable than alternative uses of those funds , more funds would be remitted to the treasury .

if it suffers losses on a facility , its remittances to the treasury would fall .

the risk to most of the fed's broad credit facilities was relatively low since the loans are short - term , collateralized , and the fed had the right to refuse borrowers it deemed to be not credit - worthy .

 ( as discussed below , the fed's assistance to firms deemed "too big to fail" was significantly riskier. ) .

fed remittances to the treasury have risen from $35 billion in 2007 to more than $75 billion annually since 2010 .

in that sense , taxpayers have profited from the creation of the fed's lending facilities , although that was not their purpose and those facilities were not risk free .

the fed has standing authority to lend to banks and buy certain assets , such as gse - issued securities .

for many new programs , the fed relied on broad emergency authority ( section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act ) that had not been used since the 1930s .

the fed is self - financing and does not receive any appropriated funds to finance its activities .

all credit outstanding under these facilities has been repaid , most as soon as financial firms could return to private sources of funding once financial conditions improved .

most emergency facilities expired on february 1 , 2010 , after multiple extensions , and most had no outstanding balance after that point .

the fed reported no losses and positive income on all of these facilities .

estimating a subsidy rate on fed lending is not straightforward , and some would argue is not meaningful .

the fed's loans are usually made at some modest markup above the federal funds rate ; in that sense they can be considered higher than market rates — whether the markup is high enough to avoid a subsidy depends on the riskiness of the facility .

but the fed controls the federal funds rate , even though it is a private market for overnight interbank lending .

during the crisis , the fed drove the federal funds rate gradually down from 5.25% in september 2007 to nearly zero in december 2008 by creating the liquidity needed to avert a crisis ; as a result , its direct loans were made at a very low rate .

because the purpose of the fed is to supply financial markets with adequate liquidity , which has some characteristics of what economists call a "public good" that cannot always be provided by the private sector , it is not clear that reducing the federal funds rate should be classified as a subsidy .

further , the fed would argue that it was only providing credit because there was no private sector alternative during the crisis , and borrowing from the fed fell relatively quickly in 2009 once financial conditions began to normalize .

the fed reports extensive data on its activities .

outstanding balances for each facility are available on a weekly basis from the h.4.1 data release , factors affecting reserve balances of depository institutions .

detailed information on the number of borrowers , concentration of loans , types of collateral , and overall earnings for each facility is available on a monthly basis in the federal reserve system monthly report on credit and liquidity programs and the balance sheet .

the fed disclosed details of specific transactions , notably the identities of recipients and specific collateral posted , on december 1 , 2010 , as required by the dodd - frank act ( p.l .

111-203 ) .

in addition , oversight reports have been produced by the government accountability office and the fed's inspector general .

the fdic has undertaken a significant role in the financial crisis through its standing authority to resolve failed banks and administer the federal guarantees on individual deposits ( actions that are beyond the scope of this report ) .

in addition , the fdic has carried out several exceptional measures , including a broad guarantee program on debt issued by banks and supporting combined interventions in citigroup and bank of america ( see " joint interventions " ) .

prior to the passage of eesa and the implementation of tarp , the treasury had comparatively little authority to intervene in financial markets .

it did , however , implement one program intended to end the money market run .

interventions to stem the 2007-2009 financial crisis were undertaken by the treasury , the federal reserve , and the fdic , separately and jointly .

because the crisis had many causes and symptoms , the response tackled a number of disparate problems , and can be broadly categorized into programs that increased institutions' liquidity , provided financial institutions with equity to rebuild their capital , purchased illiquid securities , intervened in specific financial markets that had ceased to function smoothly , or prevented the failure of large troubled institutions that some deemed "too big to fail. .

the primary goal of the various interventions was to end the financial panic and restore normalcy to financial markets .

in this sense , the programs were arguably a success .

a goal of intervening at zero cost to the taxpayers was never the best measure of success , because nonintervention would likely have led to a greater loss of economic output that indirectly would have worsened the government's finances .

nevertheless , an important part of evaluating the government's performance is whether financial normalcy was restored at a minimum cost to the taxpayers .

in exchange for its outlays , the government generally received some combination of financial assets , warrants , and loans that could be sold or require repayment in the future and that generated income to the government in the form of dividends , fees , and interest .

measuring the cost of the program by the government's cash outlay to initially acquire the financial asset ( whether it be a common stock , preferred share , or loan ) is misleading because it does not take into account the value of the asset that the government receives in exchange , which gives the government legal claims on the future earnings of the company .

the true net cost to the government of these programs is the difference in present value between the initial outlay to acquire or guarantee the asset or make the loan , and the money recouped by the government from income payments and subsequent sale or repayment , taking into account the risks that the government was exposed to in the transaction .

ultimately , the cost to the government will be much smaller than the initial outlay , and if the income payments or the asset's resale price is high enough , the government could ultimately make a profit on these outlays ( i.e. , the present value of revenues could exceed initial outlays ) .

although estimates of the economic profits or losses accruing to the government are not consistently available , on a cash - flow basis , most government interventions — including all federal reserve programs — generated positive net income for the taxpayers over the life of the program .

only three interventions generated net losses for the government , two of which were assistance to companies that were not financial firms ( the automakers ) .

for most programs where principal is still outstanding ( including tarp's capital purchase program and assistance to the gses ) , net income has already exceeded , or is expected to eventually exceed , initial outlays .

altogether , these interventions have yielded tens of billions of dollars of net income for the taxpayers on a cash - flow basis , comp ared with initial estimates that they would cost taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars .

another long - term , and more amorphous , cost may be a greater expectation that the government will provide rescues in response to financial instability again .

perversely , economic theory predicts that this expectation — whether or not it is warranted — would result in increased private sector risk - taking that would lead to an increased risk that systemically disruptive financial difficulties at firms occur again .

in economic terms , this is generally referred to as "moral hazard," and the problem is particularly acute when assistance is provided to insolvent firms , is provided at below market rates , or is provided on similar terms to both risky and prudent firms .

 table a - 1 presents a brief summary of selected government interventions to assist private firms in past crises , and includes information on the type of assistance , initial outlay , and final cost to the treasury .

the table does not include all historical bank or thrift resolutions that required the use of government funds .

