during the legislative process , many documents are prepared by congress and its committees .

governmental and nongovernmental entities track and record congressional activities , and many more entities chronicle and analyze the development of public policy .

the wide availability of such information can be daunting to those involved in policy and legislative research .

the purpose of this report is to assist congressional staff in identifying and accessing key resources used during such research .

the resources' titles and access information are presented in eight tables .

the tables provide information on how to find congressional documents ( table 1 ) ; information on tracking legislative activity ( table 2 ) ; executive branch documents and information ( table 3 ) ; information about legislative support agencies ( table 4 ) ; congressional news sources ( table 5 ) ; policy and scholarly research sources ( table 6 and table 7 ) ; and research - related training and services for congressional staff ( table 8 ) .

this report does not define or describe the purpose of the various information resources and documents ; that information can be found in companion crs report rl33895 , researching current federal legislation and regulations: a guide to resources for congressional staff .

additional reports on congressional operations are available in the " congressional process , administration , & elections " page on crs.gov , at http: / / www.crs.gov / iap / congressional - process - administration - and - elections .

this report is not a comprehensive catalog of resources for conducting policy and legislative research ; instead , it provides a selection of widely used electronic resources .

some of the resources mentioned are available only with a paid subscription , whereas others are free ; this availability is noted in the report along with the access points for congressional staff .

print resources for time periods not covered by the resources listed in the tables may be available from the congressional research service ( crs ) , the law library of congress , or the house and senate libraries .

the inclusion of resources in this report does not imply endorsement by crs of the content or the products listed .

in addition , crs does not acquire or manage congressional offices' access to subscription resources .

crs is available for consultation on policy and legislative research or to perform such research upon request .

crs can also advise congressional staff on the use of the resources listed in this report , including advice on how to select the best resource to use , how to search for information within a resource , or how to develop the most effective research methodology .

 table 1 serves as a reference guide for locating congressional documents using both freely available and subscription - based resources .

the first column of the tables lists documents commonly used in policy and legislative research and typical citations for such documents .

the second column lists resources where these documents can be accessed .

the third column contains explanatory notes .

table 2 provides information about how to access house and senate committee schedules , floor schedules , calendars , and floor proceedings , all of which can be helpful in tracking congressional activities .

access to subscription resources can vary among crs , senate , and house offices .

see the notes within the tables for more information .

crs subscriptions can be accessed through the crs la follette congressional reading room ( locations and hours of operation are available in table 8 ) .

unless otherwise indicated , all other resources are freely available .

table a - 1 provides additional information on the resources in table 1 , including more detailed descriptions and urls linking directly to the resources ( when available ) .

 table 3 serves as a reference guide for locating executive branch documents and information using freely available resources .

the first column of the table lists documents or information commonly used in policy and legislative research and typical citations for such documents , where applicable .

the second column lists resources where these materials can be accessed .

the third column contains explanatory notes .

table a - 1 provides additional information on the resources in table 3 , including more detailed descriptions and urls linking directly to the resources ( when available ) .

the legislative support agencies are designed to be nonpartisan , objective , and impartial .

the agencies each serve the congress in different ways .

contact information for each agency and a description of each agency and its services is outlined in table 4 , below .

 table 5 , table 6 , and table 7 serve as finding aids for selected resources covering news , scholarly , and policy research that may be related to congress and the legislative process .

resources in these tables may contain editorial content and analysis .

inclusion of these resources does not imply endorsement of the views held by the publications listed .

please note that these tables are meant to serve as suggested starting points rather than comprehensive lists of news , scholarly , and policy resources .

congressional users may also access databases subscribed to by the library of congress such as proquest , lexisnexis , factiva , ebscohost , and many others , onsite in the crs la follette congressional reading room and the public reading rooms at the library of congress .

additionally , requests for literature searches and full text of specific articles can be submitted to crs .

congressional users also have access to various databases through the house library and the senate library .

 table 8 contains a list of locations where congressional staff can obtain training and other services on capitol hill .

 table a - 1 provides an alphabetical listing of , and additional details about , the resources listed in table 1 , table 3 , and table 4 .

