a streetcar is a type of light rail public transportation that operates mostly in mixed traffic on rail lines embedded in streets and highways .

streetcar service is typically provided by single cars with electric power delivered by overhead wires known as catenaries , although streetcars can also draw power from underground cables or from batteries .

compared with non - streetcar light rail , streetcar lines tend to be shorter and the stops more frequent .

because of the short distance between stops and the overall operating environment , streetcars are slow compared with non - streetcar light rail and other types of rail public transportation , such as commuter rail and heavy rail .

streetcar systems can be categorized into four different types: 1. legacy systems , lines that have been in operation for many years , but are the remnants of more extensive past systems ( eg , new orleans ) ; 2. heritage systems , new or revived systems using historical equipment ( eg , memphis ) ; 3. replica systems , new or revived systems using equipment built to replicate historical systems , but sometimes with modern amenities such as air conditioning ( eg , tampa ) ; 4. modern systems , new systems using modern equipment ( eg , portland , or ) .

in early 2014 , there were 12 operating streetcar systems , 7 new systems under construction , and approximately 21 new systems in the planning stages ( figure 1 ) .

not included in these figures are several short streetcar lines associated with museums ( eg , issaquah , wa ) or primarily oriented to tourists ( eg , san pedro , ca ) .

additionally , a few systems already in operation have extensions in construction or being planned .

because they are often controversial , streetcar systems that are being planned may not be built .

the streetcars systems with the largest ridership include those in philadelphia ; new orleans ; san francisco ; portland , or ; tacoma ; memphis ; and seattle .

streetcars are intended to provide high - quality transit service for traveling short distances in urban environments .

as part of this service , streetcars can link to other transportation modes as part of the "last mile" of a trip , as in salt lake city , where a new streetcar line links to light rail and bus lines .

streetcars are often promoted as a means of increasing transit ridership by offering a better quality of service than buses , including such things as frequency of service , predictability of trip time , passenger capacity , and comfort .

additionally , streetcars can more easily accommodate wheelchairs and bicycles .

service quality , however , is not better in all cases: streetcars can be delayed by problems that would not affect buses , such as fallen catenaries or vehicles double - parked on the tracks .

greater capacity in modern streetcars may in part come at the expense of seating .

overall , there is no clear evidence as to whether streetcars attract new riders to transit .

in some circumstances , streetcars can help attract and focus development by providing a more permanent transportation investment than buses and by promoting a walkable environment .

for example , the greater permanence of a streetcar may improve the coherence of the urban environment , and may reduce the risk for developers of offices , residences , and retail , spurring job creation .

the proximity of a streetcar may also reduce some costs that would otherwise confront private developers , such as the need for a large numbers of parking spaces .

according to one study , the area within a quarter - mile of the little rock streetcar system , opened in 2004 , has had a capital investment of $800 million in new businesses , residences , and other activities between 2000 and 2012 .

in addition , during construction , streetcars tend to be less disruptive of existing activities than other forms of rail systems .

however , it is possible that development spurred by streetcar lines is merely shifted from other parts of the urban area .

this is a concern in analyzing the effects of rail transit in general , but there is little empirical research on this question for streetcars specifically .

in addition to the expense of the streetcar itself , development along streetcar lines has sometimes benefited from other subsidies .

not all streetcar lines have succeeded in stimulating property development .

the city planning literature suggests that if a streetcar is to spur development , the host locality needs to at least provide supportive land use laws , such as permitting higher - density , mixed - use developments along a corridor .

one study found that government support in the form of such things as incentives , zoning changes , and marketing is the leading factor determining whether or not development occurs around investment in public transportation .

the same study found that both light rail transit , including streetcars , and bus rapid transit ( brt ) led to development , but that brt leveraged much more private investment per dollar of transit expenditure .

streetcar systems can be much less costly to build than light rail systems , and may be particularly attractive in small and medium - size cities where a larger and more expensive rail system is not appropriate .

capital costs per mile can vary dramatically , however , depending on the specific circumstances of projects , including the need for major new infrastructure .

a study of 21 light rail , streetcar , and brt lines found that streetcars were middling in terms of capital cost per mile .

while the 21 projects ranged from below $10 million per mile to over $80 million per mile , the two streetcar projects analyzed , portland , or , and seattle , cost about $30 million per mile and $60 million per mile to build , respectively ( in 2010 dollars ) .

although conventional buses do not provide some of the advantages of brt and rail transit , including streetcars , regular bus service improvements are likely to be the least costly of all measures to increase transit capacity .

operating costs , including such things as drivers' salaries , fuel , and track and vehicle maintenance , are difficult to compare among modes because of differing service characteristics .

a government accountability office ( gao ) analysis of operational costs , for example , showed no consistent advantage for brt or light rail .

a comparison of operating costs of streetcar and bus service in seven cities found that costs per trip were higher for streetcars in only two cities .

but measured by cost per passenger mile , streetcar operating costs were significantly higher than bus operating costs .

there are currently three main sources of funding available for the construction of streetcar systems: ( 1 ) the tiger grant program ; ( 2 ) the new starts and small starts program ; and ( 3 ) flexible federal - aid highway program funds , including funding from the surface transportation program and the congestion mitigation and air quality improvement ( cmaq ) program .

the costs of operating transit service include such functions as vehicle operation and maintenance , maintenance of stations and other facilities , general administration , and purchase of transportation from private operators .

in general , federal law prohibits transit operators in urbanized areas of 200,000 or more residents from using federal transit funds for operating expenditures , including annual distributions of federal public transportation funds by formula .

federal support in urbanized areas of this size is limited to capital expenditures .

however , the definition of transit capital expenses includes some items traditionally considered to be operating expenses , such as preventive maintenance .

in some circumstances , cmaq funds can be used to support the operating expenses of streetcars .

as the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) notes , "projects designed to attract new riders , typically by providing new transit facilities or services , are eligible for cmaq funds .. .

projects can include both constructing and operating new facilities. .

among other things , cmaq funds may be used to provide fare subsides .

however , fhwa also notes that cmaq funds typically provide short - term help to launch new or expanded service .

relatively recent changes in federal programs , should they be maintained , are likely to lead to greater support for streetcars in the coming years .

these changes include the creation of the tiger program in fy2009 and its continued funding through fy2014 , and reforms to the evaluation of projects in the new starts and small starts program that favor streetcars .

increased funding of these programs may lead to even greater federal support for building new streetcar lines , although this would depend on the competition for funds from other types of projects .

another way to increase federal support for streetcar construction would be to direct more existing funding to these types of projects .

one way for congress to accomplish this would be to reinstitute the set - aside of new starts and small starts funding for small starts projects , those requesting $75 million or less in federal assistance and costing $250 million or less in total .

prior to map - 21 , $200 million of the program's funding was reserved for small starts projects .

this again would not guarantee the funding of streetcars because small starts grants also go to other types of projects , such as brt , but it would limit the competition for these funds .

congress might also consider supporting streetcar systems by allowing the use of federal transit funds to pay for operating costs .

the federal government generally prohibits the use of federal transit funds for operating expenses in urbanized areas over 200,000 .

however , small bus operators in these larger urbanized areas were provided support in map - 21 .

operators of small fixed - guideway systems , such as streetcars , might be afforded the same opportunity .

alternatively , congress might decide to reduce or eliminate the use of federal funds for streetcar construction and operation .

this could be accomplished by reducing or eliminating funding for the tiger program , the new starts and small starts program , and flexible highway programs , or by prohibiting the use of program funds for streetcars .

in the case of the new starts and small starts program it might be easier to reinstitute evaluation criteria that are unfavorable to streetcar projects .

this might entail requiring the use of time savings or passenger miles , not passenger trips , as a measure of mobility benefits .

