the president's budget for fy2020 consists of a multivolume set of materials issued by the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

the materials contain information on new budget proposals , summ ary tables , detailed financial information on individual programs and accounts , economic analysis , historical data , explanations of the budget processes , and supporting documents .

every year the president submits these materials to congress at the start of the budget cycle for the next fiscal year .

the president's submission is required on or after the first monday in january , but no later than the first monday in february ( 31 u.s.c .

ยง1105 ( a ) ) .

however , incoming presidential administrations do not generally release multivolume budget sets in february .

this year the president released the budget submission , in two installments , on march 11 , and march 18 , 2019 .

other budget - related documents include the annual economic report of the president , issued by the council of economic advisors , and the budget and economic outlook , an annual publication issued by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) .

details on these publications are included in this report .

both omb and the government publishing office ( gpo ) provide internet access to the main and supporting budget documents , spreadsheet files , the public budget database , and budget amendments and supplementals proposed by the president ; see http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / budget and https: / / www.govinfo.gov / app / collection / budget , respectively .

omb provides additional summary table information on agency budgets and key issues in the form of fact sheets , available at https: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / fact - sheets / .

information on purchasing print copies of these documents appears below , along with a brief description of the contents of each document .

this year's annual economic report of the president was submitted by the council of economic advisers and transmitted to congress in march 2019 .

it presents the administration's economic policies and contains the annual report of the council of economic advisers .

it also presents an overview of the nation's economic progress using text and extensive data appendices .

appendix b of the economic report includes current and historical statistics on major aspects of economic activity ( pp .

625-705 ) .

statistics include national income and expenditures , government finance , population , employment , wages , productivity , prices , debt measures , corporate finance , and international statistics .

the report is also available from the gpo website at https: / / www.govinfo.gov / app / collection / erp / .

a searchable database of the economic report of the president for each year from 1995 to the present is also available at this site .

spreadsheet files from appendix b of the report can be accessed at the link above .

 ( gpo stock number and ordering information not yet available ) .

after the president's budget documents are released , congress begins to hold hearings on agency budget requests .

agencies must submit their budget justifications to the appropriations subcommittees holding the hearings .

budget justifications generally contain more detailed descriptions of an agency's proposals and programs than are provided in the president's budget documents .

as mandated by omb in section 22.6 of the 2006 edition of circular a - 11 and subsequent editions , executive agencies are required to post their congressional budget justification materials on the internet within two weeks of transmittal to congress .

typically , administration budget requests appear along with actual numbers for the previous fiscal year .

the content and structure of these submissions may vary and some materials may not correspond exactly with the data and information provided to congress in other fiscal years .

a short overview on the agency budget justification request can be found within crs report rs20268 , agency justification of the president's budget , by michelle d. christensen .

printed copies of budget documents are available for purchase from gpo by the following methods: online at the gpo website , at http: / / bookstore.gpo.gov / catalog / budget - economy / federal - budgets - year ; by telephone , [phone number scrubbed] or [phone number scrubbed] ; by fax , [phone number scrubbed] ; or , by mail using the gpo order form ( check or money order ) , addressed to u.s. government publishing office , p.o .

box 979050 , st. louis , mo 63197-9000 .

budget documents are often available for reference use at large public or university libraries , or any library participating in the federal library depository program .

addresses of the depository libraries can be obtained through a local library ; from gpo's customer services department , [phone number scrubbed] or [phone number scrubbed] ; or online from the gpo website at https: / / www.gpo.gov / askgpo / .

the congressional research service ( crs ) has developed ( for members of congress and their staffs ) web pages covering the budget and appropriations process .

appropriations and budget analysis .

for crs products on appropriations status , jurisdictions , processes , current appropriations bills , and other budget - related resources , members and congressional staff can access the crs website http: / / www.crs.gov / iap / appropriations .

the crs appropriations status table , a table which tracks the progress of major actions related to appropriations bills , is available at http: / / www.crs.gov / appropriationsstatustable / index .

crs products on the federal budget process .

explanations of budget concepts , terminology , congressional and executive budget process , congressional budget timetable , budget resolutions and reconciliation , the authorization and appropriations process , entitlements and discretionary spending , the budget enforcement act , sequestration , and surpluses / deficits are available from the crs website .

the public may access congress.gov , the legislative website produced by the library of congress .

the site includes a status of appropriations legislation for the current year and several previous fiscal years , which include links to bills , committee and conference reports , and votes for the 12 regular , and any supplemental , appropriations bills .

the congress.gov status table of appropriations is available at https: / / www.congress.gov / resources / display / content / appropriations+and+budget .

a public version of the crs appropriations status table is available at https: / / crsreports.congress.gov / appropriationsstatustable .

