in recent years , congressional attention has been drawn to the roles and responsibilities of u.s. ambassadors who serve as chiefs of mission in u.s. embassies abroad .

the death of ambassador christopher stevens in benghazi , libya , in september 2012 highlighted the dangers that ambassadors may encounter as the front - line face of u.s. diplomacy , and the availability of resources , leadership , and communication relative to those dangers .

the ongoing debate on interagency reform for missions abroad stresses the need to improve coordination among all u.s. agencies , a key responsibility of u.s. ambassadors .

the state department and united states agency for international development ( usaid ) 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) emphasized the need to equip ambassadors to better perform that role .

in addition to these specific concerns , congressional interest stems from congress's part in selecting u.s. ambassadors ( as the u.s. senate advises and consents on their appointment ) , providing the resources they need to accomplish their missions , and overseeing their conduct of those missions .

this report addresses the role and effectiveness of u.s. ambassadors and others who serve as a chief of mission ( com ) abroad , particularly their responsibility for coordinating interagency activities and their control over u.s. forces operating in their countries of assignment .

after a background section on the history of com roles and a section on the sources of com legal authority , this report addresses four commonly asked questions regarding the scope and exercise of com authority .

it concludes with a discussion of two prominent congressional concerns: ( 1 ) how effective is com authority in practice ? .

and ( 2 ) how might the exercise of com authority be improved ? .

it will be updated as warranted .

"chief of mission," or com , is the title conferred on the principal officer in charge of each u.s. diplomatic mission to a foreign country , foreign territory , or international organization .

usually the term refers to the u.s. ambassadors who lead u.s. embassies abroad , but the term also is used for ambassadors who head other official u.s. missions and to other diplomatic personnel who may step in when no ambassador is present .

the u.s. constitution authorizes the president to appoint ambassadors with the advice and consent of the senate , that is to say , subject to senate confirmation .

in circumstances where no presidentially appointed ambassador is currently serving at a u.s. mission abroad , legislation further authorizes the president to appoint a career u.s. foreign service officer as a chargé d'affaires or "otherwise as the head of a mission ... for such period as the public interest may require. .

an ambassador or other foreign service official may hold the com position within a given u.s. mission abroad .

appointed by the president , each com serves as the president's personal representative , leading diplomatic efforts for a particular mission or in the country of assignment under the general supervision of the secretary of state and with the support of the regional assistant secretary of state .

the role of the com has expanded considerably since world war ii .

with the postwar expansion of u.s. foreign assistance around the world , coms assigned to head u.s. embassies or other country - based diplomatic missions abroad have been charged with responsibility for overseeing nearly all u.s. government activities in their country of assignment , with the primary exception of military operations .

most often , they exercise this authority through their leadership of the embassy's "country team," the membership of which includes the chief representative of each u.s. government agency undertaking activities in a host country or other mission .

the state department / usaid 2010 quadrennial diplomacy and development review ( qddr ) casts ambassadors as chief executive officers or "ceos" of multi - agency missions , not only conducting traditional diplomacy , but also leading and overseeing civilians from multiple federal agencies in other work .

the qddr highlights the key role of country teams and ambassadors in the conduct of foreign policy and assistance , and sets forth ways in which the obama administration would try to improve the knowledge and skills of coms and their ability to lead country teams .

civilian agencies "possess some of the world's leading expertise on issues increasingly central to our diplomacy and development work," the qddr states .

"the united states benefits when government agencies can combine their expertise overseas as part of an integrated country strategy," when "implemented under chief of mission authority , and when those agencies build lasting working relationships with their foreign counterparts. .

at the time of the qddr's release , then - secretary of state clinton also announced that chiefs of mission were to play a role in integrating country - level strategic plans and budgets .

the authorities and responsibilities of coms are explained primarily in the foreign service act of 1980 , as amended ( fsa 1980 ; p.l .

96-465 ) .

 ( this legislation also explains the responsibility of all u.s. government officials operating under a u.s. mission abroad to report to the com and abide by com directives. ) .

section 207 of fsa 1980 serves as a codification in legislation of many of the provisions in previous executive orders setting out and developing com authority as u.s. government activities abroad increased throughout the latter half of the 20 th century .

com authority is also shaped by executive branch directives , which include executive orders and other presidential directives and state department regulations , some of which provide more extensive authority than fsa 1980 .

according to state department regulations , com authority derives originally from the president's general constitutional powers in foreign affairs .

because of this constitutional basis for com authority , according to the state department , the president's letter of instruction ( see " letter of instruction ," below ) providing greater detail to coms is of greater significance in determining a com's authority than the pertinent legislative provisions relating to such authority .

a number of questions are often raised regarding the scope and exercise of com authority .

this section responds to four of the most common questions: 1 .

does com authority extend to department of defense ( dod ) personnel ? .

2. who exercises com authority in a country without a u.s. embassy or u.s. diplomatic presence ? .

3 .

is com authority in effect in countries where the united states is engaging in hostilities ? .

4 .

what is the com's authority over members of congress , legislative branch employees , and congressional foreign travel ? .

congress plays an important role in setting standards for the exercise of com authority and providing coms with the resources — training , personnel , monetary — to promote its effective exercise .

the following two sections address current concerns regarding the effectiveness of com authority in practice and possible options to improve com performance .

u.s. ambassadors and others exercising com authority are by law the cornerstone of u.s. foreign policy coordination in their respective countries .

their jobs are highly complex , demanding a broad knowledge of the u.s. foreign policy toolkit and the ability to oversee the activities and manage the representatives of from many u.s. government entities , which in some embassies number about 40 u.s. departments and agencies .

understanding the position and core authorities of u.s. chiefs of mission is a key element to appreciating the conduct of u.s. foreign policy abroad .

moreover , members of congress may wish to examine whether current efforts to improve com effectiveness in ensuring interagency coordination are sufficient .

specific questions might include whether ( 1 ) the two - week fsi training course required for new ambassadors is adequate ; ( 2 ) interagency experience should be a standard expectation for prospective coms ; ( 3 ) fsi career - long leadership training courses are sufficient to build effective leaders and managers at the com and deputy com level ; ( 4 ) agency representatives on country teams , and their supervisors in washington , fully understand and comply with their obligations to the com ; and ( 5 ) state department leaders provide the needed backing , support , and resources .

