child welfare services are intended to prevent the abuse or neglect of children ; ensure that children have safe , permanent homes ; and promote the well - being of children and their families .

as the u.s. constitution has been interpreted , states have the primary authority to ensure the welfare of children and their families .

at the state level , the child welfare "system" consists of public and private child protection and child welfare workers , public and private social services workers , state and local judges , prosecutors , and law enforcement personnel .

these agents of various state and local entities assume interrelated roles while carrying out child welfare activities , including promoting child and family well - being through community - based activities ; investigating , or otherwise responding to , allegations of child abuse and neglect ; providing services to families to ensure children's safety in the home ; removing children from their homes when that is necessary for children's safety ; supervising and administering payments for children placed in foster care ; ensuring regular case review and permanency planning for children in foster care ; helping children leave foster care to permanent families via reunification with parents or , when that is not possible , via adoption or legal guardianship ; offering post - permanency services and supports to maintain families ; and helping older children in foster care , and youth who leave care without placement in a permanent family , to become successful adults .

federal involvement in child welfare is primarily tied to the financial assistance it provides to states and most federal dollars dedicated to child welfare purposes are provided to state child welfare agencies for the provision of foster care .

as a condition of receiving these foster care and certain other child welfare program funds , states must typically provide nonfederal resources of between 20% and 50% of the program costs , and they are required to abide by a series of federal child welfare policies .

those policies are designed to ensure the safety and well - being of all children and families served .

however , the most specific and extensive federal requirements concern the protection of children in foster care , especially to ensure them a safe and permanent home .

federal child welfare funding is primarily provided as part of the annual appropriations bill for the departments of labor , health and human services ( hhs ) , and education and is included in the hhs , administration for children and families ( acf ) account .

these funds are provided on both a mandatory and a discretionary basis and are administered by the federal children's bureau , which is a part of the administration on children , youth , and families ( acyf ) within the acf .

separately , discretionary funding for several child welfare programs authorized by the victims of child abuse act is provided in the annual appropriations bill for the departments of commerce and justice .

those program funds are administered at the federal level in the department of justice ( doj ) , office of justice programs ( ojp ) .

table 1 summarizes child welfare funding provided in recent years .

apart from the child welfare - specific ( dedicated ) federal funding shown in table 1 and provided for programs described in this report , state child welfare agencies tap significant program resources — as much as $5.0 billion — from other federal funding streams .

often these include the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant , the social services block grant ( ssbg ) , and medicaid .

these federal funding streams have federal statutory goals , or support activities , that overlap with child welfare purposes .

however , they are not solely dedicated to child welfare purposes , and states are not necessarily required to use them for those specific purposes .

neither do states need to meet federal requirements specific to the conduct of their child welfare programs as a condition of receiving this "non - dedicated" funding .

this report begins with an overview of fy2018 appropriations activities for child welfare programs through mid - january 2018 , followed by a discussion of final appropriations actions for fy2017 .

it then includes a discussion of how annual funding levels are determined for child welfare programs and briefly discusses the effect of sequestration on that child welfare funding .

the remainder , and largest part , of the report provides descriptions of each federal child welfare program , including its purpose and recent ( fy2013-fy2017 ) funding levels .

federal child welfare programs are described below .

each description includes program purposes , the final funding level in each of fy2013-fy2017 , and the type and status of the program's funding authority .

unless otherwise specified , the term states refers to the 50 states and the district of columbia , and the term territories refers to puerto rico , guam , american samoa , northern mariana islands , and the u.s. virgin islands .

title iv - b of the social security act principally authorizes support for child welfare activities that is provided to states , territories , and tribes under two formula grant programs .

separately it authorizes funding for related research , training , and other projects ; this funding is competitively awarded to eligible entities .

legislation authorizing these title iv - b programs and activities is handled by the house committee on ways and means and the senate committee on finance .

title iv - e of the social security act principally entitles states , tribes , and territories with an approved title iv - e plan to reimbursement of part of their costs of providing foster care , adoption assistance , or kinship guardianship assistance on behalf of eligible children .

each of the 50 states and the district of columbia has an approved iv - e plan .

puerto rico has long been the only territory with such a plan ; however , effective with fy2017 , the u.s. virgin islands also has received approval of a title iv - e plan .

additionally ( as of november 2017 ) , 10 tribal entities have an approved title iv - e plan ( see appendix c ) .

title iv - e also authorizes capped mandatory funding for support of services to children who are expected to leave foster care because they "age out" of care rather than because they are returned home or placed in a new permanent family , youth who have aged out of care , and youth who leave care at age 16 or older for adoption or legal guardianship .

authorized under the chafee foster care independence program , any state , tribe , or territory with an approved title iv - e plan is entitled to a part of this capped mandatory funding .

additionally , title iv - e provides annual capped mandatory funding for technical assistance related to providing child welfare services to tribal children , and this includes competitive grants to tribes to support development of a title iv - e plan .

finally , provisions included in title iv - e also authorize discretionary funding for incentive payments to states and territories ( with an approved title iv - e plan ) that increase adoptions and / or legal guardianships of children from foster care .

legislation authorizing these title iv - e programs and activities is handled by the house committee on ways and means and the senate committee on finance .

capta was enacted in 1974 ( p.l .

93-247 ) at a time of growing awareness and concern about abuse of children in their own homes .

it has been reauthorized many times since then , most recently by the capta reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-320 ) .

capta authorizes formula grant funding to states to improve their child protective services ( state grants ) ; competitively awarded funds to support research , technical assistance , and demonstration projects related to prevention , assessment , and treatment of child abuse and neglect ( discretionary activities ) ; and funding to all states for support of community - based activities to prevent child abuse and neglect ( community - based grants ) .

further , it incorporates program authority for what are commonly referred to as "children's justice act grants. .

legislation authorizing these programs and activities in capta is handled by the house education and the workforce committee and the senate health , education , labor and pensions ( help ) committee .

title ii of the crime control act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-647 ) created the victims of child abuse act ( vcaa ) .

that act authorizes several child welfare programs that are administered by the office of juvenile justice and delinquency programs ( ojjdp ) , an agency within the office of justice programs ( ojp ) at doj .

apart from these three programs , the vcaa includes provisions requiring specified professionals to report suspected child abuse or neglect that they learn about while carrying out their profession on federal land or in federally operated facilities , and provides criminal penalties for those failing to make such reports .

additionally , it requires federal agencies and agencies operated or contracted to operate by the federal government to ensure criminal background checks are conducted for any individual hired by the agency or facility to provide a wide range of care or services to children .

the legislation establishing the vcaa was handled by the senate and house judiciary committees .

additional child welfare programs are included in separate acts as described below .

legislation authorizing these programs and activities is handled by the house education and the workforce committee and the senate help committee .

first enacted in 1978 , the adoption opportunities program requires hhs to have an administrative structure that allows for centralized planning across all departmental programs and activities affecting foster care and adoption .

it requires hhs to support adoption recruitment activities , including through a "national adoption information exchange" and to support a national resource center on special needs adoptions .

additionally , it authorizes federal funds to support projects or other activities that encourage and facilitate adoption of older children , children who are members of minority groups , and others with "special needs ; " aim to eliminate barriers to cross - jurisdictional ( including interstate ) placement of children in need of adoption ; and provide postadoption supports .

postadoption supports are described by the law as including individual , group , and family counseling ; respite care ; day treatment ; case management ; assistance to support groups for adoptive parents , adopted children , and siblings of adopted children ; assistance to adoptive parent organizations ; and training of public and private child welfare personnel , mental health professionals , and others to provide postadoption services .

adoption opportunities funds are used by hhs to achieve program purposes , either directly or by competitive award of contracts , grants , or other agreements .

depending on the activity authorized , eligible entities include states , local government entities , public or private child welfare or adoption agencies , other public or private agencies or organizations , adoptive family groups , and adoption exchanges .

some of the adoption opportunities "major" program activities have included developing and implementing a national adoption information exchange system ( which includes an online web portal known as adoptuskids featuring a national photo listing of children available for adoption as well as information about prospective foster or adoptive parents ) ; developing and implementing an adoption training and technical assistance program ( current projects include the quality improvement center on adoption / guardianship support and preservation and support for adoption - related information on the child welfare information gateway ) ; conducting ongoing , extensive recruitment efforts on a national level to encourage the adoption of older children , minority children , and special needs children ( current work includes support for the national resource center for diligent recruitment of foster and adoptive parents and a series of public service announcements intended to encourage adoption of children , especially older children and children who are part of sibling groups ) ; increasing states' effective use of public and private agencies for the recruitment of adoptive and foster families and assistance in placement of children ; promoting programs to increase the number of older children adopted from foster care ; providing for programs aimed at increasing the number of minority children ( in foster care and with the goal of adoption ) who are placed in adoptive families , with a special emphasis on recruitment of minority families ; and providing for postadoption services for families who have adopted children with special needs , and promoting programs that effectively meet the mental health needs of children in foster care , including addressing the effects of trauma .

reducing interstate barriers to placement of children has been a long - running concern of the program , and hhs has recently used adoption opportunities funding to extend support for the national electronic interstate compact enterprise ( neice ) project for three years .

six states initially participated in a neice pilot , which enabled electronic exchange of data needed to process interstate placement of children .

evaluation of the pilot found reduced placement time and other improved efficiencies .

by funding a continuation of this project through may 2018 hhs hopes to extend use of the system to all states .

as of june 2017 , 15 of the 50 states and the district of columbia were participating .

annual discretionary funding for the adoption opportunities program was authorized at $40 million for fy2010 and "such sums as necessary" for each of fy2011 through fy2015 .

congress chose to continue appropriations for the program in fy2016 , and again in fy2017 .

 ( see table 14 for final adoption opportunities funding in fy2013-fy2017. ) .

report language intended to guide agency use of fy2017 adoption opportunities funding encourages hhs / acf to "fund activities to improve hospital - based adoption support services for pregnant and expectant mothers , including training for hospital staff and doctors .

such activities would help ensure that mothers who wish to make an adoption have access to trained staff and comprehensive supports throughout the adoption process. .

the abandoned infants assistance act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-505 ) responded to congressional concerns about the number of infants who remained in hospital care beyond their medical need to do so and who , often because of parental drug use , were born with exposure to drugs , human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) , or both .

the act authorized funding for local demonstration projects to prevent and respond to the abandonment of infants and young children .

congress last provided funding for this program ( $11 million ) in fy2015 .

for purposes of this program , the terms abandoned and abandonment of infants or young children refer to infants or young children who are "medically cleared for discharge from acute - care hospital settings , but remain hospitalized because of a lack of appropriate out - of - hospital placement alternatives. .

to address the needs of these infants and young children it authorizes local demonstration projects to provide services to biological family members for any condition that increases the probability of the abandonment of infants and young children ; identify and address the needs of abandoned infants and children ; assist abandoned infants and young children so they can live with biological family members , or , if appropriate , in a foster family home — or , if neither of those is possible , by carrying out residential ( group ) care programs for them ; recruit , train , and retain foster parents for abandoned infants and young children ; provide respite care services to families and foster families of abandoned infants and young children who are infected with hiv , had perinatal exposure to hiv and / or a "dangerous drug," or who have a life - threatening illness or other special medical need ; provide model programs offering health , educational , and social services for abandoned infants and young children at a single site ; and recruit and train health and social services personnel to work with families , foster care providers , and residential care programs serving abandoned infants and young children .

hhs awarded funds to public and private nonprofits seeking to carry out these local projects .

grantees were required to agree to give priority for services to abandoned infants or young children who are infected with hiv , had perinatal exposure to hiv or a controlled substance , or who have a life - threatening illness or other special medical need .

from fy1991 through fy2015 , hhs funded the national abandoned infants assistance resource center , which disseminated findings from evaluations of the project ( as required by the act ) and offered training and technical assistance to local project grantees .

the center is now closed .

survey data from the mid - 2000s suggest that the number of infants who remain in hospital care beyond their date of medical discharge , as well as the number of infants in hospitals who are not yet medically cleared to leave the hospital but who are considered unlikely to do so with their biological parent ( s ) , has declined .

in 2006 , the combined national estimate of such infants was a little less than 12,900 .

this was substantially fewer than the estimates of more than 30,600 such infants in 1998 , and 21,600 in 1991 .

however , the 2006 survey found that while these infants used to be concentrated in urban area hospitals , they were now more widely dispersed across the nation , appearing in hospitals serving suburban and rural counties as well as those in urban areas .

the 2006 survey concluded that positive trends it identified , including a decline in the number of infants "boarded" in the hospital and reduced lengths of stay for those who did stay beyond their medical need to do so , might be attributable to hospitals and child welfare agencies becoming more responsive to needs of these infants , including through better interagency coordination .

several legislative efforts were cited as possible contributors .

these included an increased focus on timely permanency planning ( a major focus of the adoption and safe families act [asfa] of 1997 ) , required communication between health care providers and child protection agencies for children born with substance exposure ( added to capta as part of its 2003 reauthorization , p.l .

108-36 ) , and more than 20 years of federal support , provided under the abandoned infants assistance act ( p.l .

100-505 , as amended ) , for local projects to serve abandoned infants and children , and their families in communities across the nation .

beginning with its extension in 1996 , funding for abandoned infants assistance has been a part of legislation that reauthorizes capta .

most recently the capta reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-320 ) extended discretionary funding authority for the program at $45 million for fy2010 and "such sums as may be necessary" for each of fy2011 through fy2015 .

congress has not provided funding for this program since fy2015 .

 ( see table 15 . ) .

while noting the program's success , the obama administration in its fy2016 budget sought authority to use these program funds on behalf of a broader range of at - risk infants and toddlers .

congress , instead , chose not to provide funding for this program for fy2016 .

the senate appropriations committee in its report on labor - hhs - education appropriations for fy2016 stated the following: the committee recommendation does not include funding for this program .

the budget request proposes significantly changing the focus of this program as part of a reauthorization proposal .

the abandoned infants assistance program was created in 1988 as a response to an acute child welfare crisis associated with the crack cocaine and hiv / aids epidemics of the 1980s .

specifically , the program funded demonstration projects to prevent the abandonment of infants and young children impacted by substance abuse and hiv .

as the budget request discusses , over the last several decades , in part because of these demonstration projects , states have implemented more effective community responses to infants and families in these circumstances , the goal of these demonstration projects .

appendix a .

recent funding by program table a - 1 shows the funding amounts appropriated ( or obligated ) based on the part of the social security act in which they are authorized ( title iv - b or title iv - e ) or their location outside of the social security act ( other programs ) .

this mirrors the broad categories included in table 1 .

for more detail on funding for programs for which the amount shown below is a total of multiple activities or program components , see table 3 and table 4 ( promoting safe and stable families program ) ; table 7 ( title iv - e foster care , adoption assistance , and kinship guardianship assistance ) ; table 9 ( chafee foster care independence program , including education and training vouchers ) ; table 11 ( child abuse prevention and treatment act , or capta , including state grants , discretionary activities , and community - based grants ) ; and table 13 ( victims of child abuse act , or vcaa , including children's advocacy centers , court - appointed special advocates , and child abuse training for judicial personnel ) .

appendix b .

child welfare programs by type of funding authority and sequestration status the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) included a combination of measures affecting discretionary and mandatory spending that are designed to reduce the federal deficit by a certain amount .

with regard to discretionary spending , the bca established certain spending caps for fy2012-fy2021 .

the caps provide limits on the total dollar amount of federal spending congress may appropriate on a discretionary basis .

if those caps are exceeded , automatic spending cuts called sequestration must be applied .

the bca has been amended several times .

most recently the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) increased the level of discretionary spending permitted for both fy2016 and fy2017 .

the bca of 2011 also included certain targets for reductions in mandatory spending and provided that if congress did not achieve deficit reductions through other means , sequestration must be used to achieve those targets .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) extended the required sequestration of mandatory spending through fy2025 .

sequestration determinations by fiscal year for fy2013 only , sequestration was applied to both discretionary and mandatory accounts .

for that year , the sequestration percentage determined necessary to bring nonexempt , nondefense discretionary - funded program spending under the statutory spending cap was 5.0% .

separately , to achieve the deficit reduction targets set in the law , sequestration of nonexempt , nondefense mandatory - funded program accounts was 5.1% .

for each of fy2014 through fy2017 , omb determined that discretionary appropriations did not exceed the discretionary spending caps for nondefense program .

therefore , sequestration was not required for these discretionary programs .

however , sequestration was required for mandatory - funded programs in each of those same years .

the omb issued sequestration orders , effective on the first day ( october 1 ) of each of those fiscal years , which reduced spending for each nonexempt , nondefense mandatory program account by the following amounts: 7.2% for fy2014 ; 7.3% for fy2015 ; 6.8% for fy2016 ; and 6.9% for fy2017 .

sequestration status by child welfare program table b - 1 lists each child welfare program described in this report by its type of funding authority ( mandatory or discretionary ) and notes whether program funds may be subject to sequestration .

if the program is listed as one that may be subject to sequestration , it is referred to as "nonexempt" and is subject to automatic spending cuts in any fiscal year for which omb determines spending has exceeded the statutory limit .

if a program may not be subject to sequestration , it is referred to as "exempt," and automatic spending cuts do not apply to that program in any year .

appendix c. tribes with an approved title iv - e plan beginning with fy2010 , tribes with a title iv - e plan approved by hhs may receive direct federal reimbursement for eligible costs related to providing foster care , adoption assistance , and , if they choose , kinship guardianship assistance .

as of november 2017 , the following 10 tribes / tribal entities had such an approved plan: port gamble s'klallam tribe ( kingston , wa ) confederated salish and kootenai tribes ( pablo , mt ) south puget intertribal planning agency ( shelton , wa ) keweenaw bay indian community ( baraga , mi ) navajo nation ( window rock , az ) chickasaw nation ( ada , ok ) eastern band of cherokee indians ( cherokee , nc ) pascua yaqui tribe ( tucson , az ) tolowa dee - ni' nation ( near smith river , ca ) salt river pima - maricopa indian community ( scottsdale , az ) appendix d. states with approval to extend title iv - e assistance up to age 21 beginning with fy2011 , states and any other jurisdiction operating a title iv - e program were permitted to amend their title iv - e plans to allow federal assistance ( foster care , adoption assistance , or kinship guardianship assistance ) to be provided to otherwise eligible youth up to their 19 th , 20 th , or 21 st birthday .

to be eligible for this extended title iv - e assistance , a youth must be in foster care or must have left foster care for adoption or guardianship at age 16 or older .

as of april 2017 , 29 jurisdictions , including 23 states , the district of columbia , and 5 tribal entities had received approval to extend title iv - e assistance to older youth .

indiana extends title iv - e assistance to a youth's 20 th birthday .

all other jurisdictions listed below currently extend title iv - e assistance to a youth's 21 st birthday .

otherwise eligible youth may continue to receive title iv - e assistance after their 18 th birthday provided they meet additional eligibility requirements related to participation in education , work , or work preparation ( or be documented as unable to participate due to a medical condition ) .

wisconsin only extends support beyond age 18 if the youth is in high school , and west virginia , only does so if the youth is in high school or college .

all other jurisdictions listed below extend support to older age if youth meets any one or more of the education , work , other participation , or disability criteria .

states that choose to extend title iv - e foster care assistance beyond a youth's 18 th birthday must also provide title iv - e adoption assistance and title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance ( if the state offers that kind of title iv - e assistance ) to the same older age ( and under same eligibility requirements ) for any child who was aged 16 or older when he or she left foster care for adoption or guardianship .

appendix e. states with child welfare demonstration ( waiver ) projects twenty - eight jurisdictions , including 26 states , the district of columbia , and the port gamble s'klallam tribe , are currently approved to operate 28 child welfare demonstration projects .

these demonstrations are often referred to title iv - e waiver projects .

five states ( california , florida , illinois , indiana , and ohio ) have been operating their waiver projects for roughly a decade or longer .

the remaining jurisdictions received approval to operate a waiver project between september 2012 and september 2014 , and as of april 2017 have been implementing them for anywhere from a few months to several years .

three states that were approved to implement a title iv - e waiver project between fy2012 and fy2014 ( idaho , montana , and texas ) subsequently opted not to implement the project , or ended implementation early .

although the exact reasons varied , competing priorities for the child welfare agency and cost concerns appear to have played a role in each state .

table e - 1 below lists each state with a title iv - e waiver project operating as of april 2017 and lists the focus of the project as well as its start and ( scheduled ) end date .

for additional information on current projects , see the following resources: detailed summary table ( updated march 2017 ) showing by jurisdiction each waiver project's core interventions , target population ( s ) ( eg , may be limited by age , service need , part of state ) , key outcomes to be followed , and cost neutrality methodology ; https: / / www.acf.hhs.gov / sites / default / files / cb / waiver_summary_table_active.pdf .short report ( august 2016 ) summarizing and categorizing current waiver projects by proposed intervention and evaluation design ; includes some discussion of findings from previous waiver projects along with preliminary findings from the current round of projects ; http: / / www.acf.hhs.gov / sites / default / files / cb / cw_waiver_summary2016.pdf .

additional resources , including findings from past projects , are also available from the children's bureau waiver site: http: / / www.acf.hhs.gov / cb / programs / child - welfare - waivers .

appendix f. jurisdictions with approval to provide title iv - e kinship guardianship assistance as of june 2017 , jurisdictions ( including 35 of the 50 states , the district of columbia , and 8 tribal entities ) have received hhs approval to provide kinship guardianship assistance under their title iv - e plans .

appendix g. adoption and legal guardianship incentive payments in september 2017 , hhs announced incentive payments earned by states for their performance in fy2016 .

as shown below , states earned more than $55.2 million in incentive payments , a record for the program .

however , at the time of its announcement hhs had only about $5.3 million on hand to make these payments .

this amount was distributed to states on a prorated basis ( so that each state received roughly 10% of the amount it earned for its fy2016 performance ) .

the $5.3 million awarded to states in september 2017 was the total of program funds that remained after hhs completed awarding states $41.1 million for their success at increasing the rate of adoptions and legal guardianships during fy2015 .

that amount was paid out in september 2016 ( using $8.6 million in fy2016 program funding ) and in june 2017 ( using $32.5 million in fy2017 funding ) .

table g - 1 shows the amount of incentive funding earned in fy2016 by state for each incentive category .

the next to the last column shows the total earned for all categories in fy2016 ( $55.2 million ) , and the final column shows the amount of that total that was paid as of september 30 , 2016 ( $5.3 million ) .

assuming full - year fy2018 appropriations for adoption and legal guardianship incentive payments are made later this year , hhs may provide more of the outstanding incentive payments earned by states for fy2016 performance .

however , unless fy2018 funding for the payments exceeds the recent annual appropriations level of $37.9 million , hhs will not be able to pay the full $49.9 million in outstanding payments earned .

