the united states and the republic of the philippines maintain close ties stemming from the u.s. colonial period ( 1898-1946 ) , a history of extensive military cooperation , the bilateral security alliance bound by the mutual defense treaty of 1951 , and common strategic and economic interests .

other pillars of the bilateral bond include shared democratic values , enduring cultural affinities , and close people - to - people ties .

filipino americans number nearly 4 million , making them the second - largest asian american group after chinese americans , and comprise the largest foreign - born group in the u.s. armed forces .

an estimated 350,000 americans live in the philippines .

despite general agreement on the importance of u.s. - philippine relations , the potential for bilateral friction remains as interests and perceptions occasionally diverge regarding u.s. obligations under the alliance , philippine sovereignty , human rights , trade , and other issues .

although the united states closed its military bases in the philippines in 1992 ( subic naval base and clark air base ) , the two sides have maintained military cooperation through joint exercises and counterterrorism efforts aimed at maintaining inter - operability , addressing internal and external security threats , and achieving humanitarian objectives .

joint counterterrorism efforts , in which u.s. forces play a non - combat role , have helped to reduce terrorist threats in mindanao and the sulu archipelago in the southern philippines .

since 2012 , the philippines has played a key role in the obama administration's "rebalance" of foreign policy priorities toward asia , particularly as maritime territorial disputes in the south china sea have intensified .

on november 16 , 2011 , u.s. secretary of state hillary clinton and philippine secretary of foreign affairs albert f. del rosario signed the "manila declaration," which reaffirmed the bilateral security relationship and called for multilateral talks to resolve maritime disputes in the region .

the obama administration pledged greater security assistance to the philippines as joint exercises began to focus on maritime security .

in march 2014 , the two sides held the fourth bilateral strategic dialogue , in which they discussed typhoon haiyan ( known in the philippines as yolanda ) recovery efforts , enhanced defense cooperation , economic ties , u.s. foreign aid programs , and other issues .

during the past year , washington and manila have discussed the framework for an increased , non - permanent u.s. military presence in the philippines .

on april 28 , 2014 , as president obama visited the philippines as part of a four - nation tour in asia , the two sides announced an accord on the increased u.s. military presence , the enhanced defense cooperation agreement ( edca ) .

observers called the announcement a centerpiece of the president's asia trip .

the 10-year , renewable arrangement represents a milestone in u.s. military engagement in the philippines and the administration's rebalance policy .

however , it does not alter the principles of the visiting forces agreement that has governed u.s. - philippines military activities since 1998 .

the philippines is a vibrant democracy with a robust civil society .

however , the country faces significant challenges to political stability and economic growth , including pervasive corruption , a weak judicial system , armed groups and insurgencies in parts of the country , extra - judicial killings committed by security forces , and violence against journalists .

under president benigno aquino iii , the philippine government has become somewhat more transparent and accountable , it has reached a settlement with the moro islamic liberation front ( milf ) in the south , and the economy has experienced solid growth .

however , the philippines continues to struggle with corruption , poverty , localized political violence , and a "culture of impunity," all of which continue to hinder development , feed political instability , and breed pockets of ideological extremism .

u.s. public and private support to the philippines following typhoon yolanda ( haiyan ) , which struck the central part of the country on november 8 , 2013 , bolstered the already strong bilateral relationship .

such assistance included approximately $87 million in u.s. disaster aid and $59 million in private sector contributions , a massive u.s. military humanitarian effort , public expressions of sympathy , and a flurry of diplomatic activity .

on november 10 , 2013 , president obama made a statement expressing sympathy and support to the people of the philippines .

on november 21 , the senate expedited the confirmation of the new u.s .

ambassador to the philippines , philip goldberg , so that he could help coordinate u.s. humanitarian assistance there .

u.s. secretary of state john kerry travelled to the philippines on december 17 , 2013 , where he met with president aquino and visited the city of tacloban , which had been devastated by the storm .

both the humanitarian and military aspects of ongoing u.s. engagement were brought to bear after the storm and augur well for future humanitarian and military contingencies , according to many observers .

some observers opined that the response of the united states significantly boosted its soft power in the philippines and the region , particularly in comparison to that of china , which offered relatively little aid .

some philippine leaders and political commentators argued that the u.s. military response to the disaster strengthens the case for an enhanced u.s. military presence in the country .

many aspects of institutional democracy are practiced to the fullest in the philippines .

citizens generally can exercise political and civil rights with few restrictions , openly criticize national leaders , and enjoy academic freedom and religious liberties .

the country has a robust civil society and a lively press .

however , the state often has been unable to stand above or control competing interests .

patterns of patronage and cronyism ; entrenched socioeconomic elites ; the influence of local clans and power holders ; the lack of civilian control over the security forces ; muslim and communist insurgencies ; and a weak judicial system have allowed corruption to thrive , undermined governmental effectiveness , and led to human rights abuses .

in 2013 , the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) ranked the philippines 69 th out of 167 countries in terms of its level of democracy ( up from 75 th in 2012 ) , placing it in the "flawed democracy" category , along with other asian countries such as indonesia , thailand , and malaysia .

although the eiu ranked the philippines high on the electoral process and civil liberties , the country received a relatively low score on political culture .

the ability of the philippine government to carry out policies effectively is often further frustrated by the fragmented nature of the country's politics .

the legislature acts as a "watchdog" against the executive branch , but historically has had difficulty articulating and carrying out broad policy objectives and programs .

political parties and groupings tend to be tenuous and shifting , driven more by individual personalities and interests than by unifying ideologies , policy platforms , and goals .

president benigno aquino iii retains high public approval ratings four years into his presidency , deriving from his reputation for eschewing corruption and his family's lasting popularity .

the former senator and son of former president corazon aquino and democratic leader benigno aquino jr. was elected president in 2010 by a large margin .

to many observers , aquino's presidency has represented a political and cultural shift in the philippines — a move toward cleaner government , greater sensitivity to political and economic grievances , and less emphasis upon eradicating muslim and communist insurgencies through military means .

in may 2013 , aquino's liberal party performed strongly in mid - term parliamentary and local elections , giving the president a stronger political mandate .

philippine presidents serve a single six - year term and are barred from seeking re - election , so aquino cannot seek the presidency when the next polls take place in 2016 .

analysts note that while he has retained his personal popularity much longer into his term than have many philippine presidents , he now is nearly two - thirds of the way through his presidency , and aspirants for the next presidential elections are likely to begin campaigning in the months ahead .

given the highly personalized character of philippine politics , many experts believe it may become more difficult for aquino to pursue new legislative initiatives or to undertake deeper anti - corruption measures than he has thus far in his presidency .

indeed , since july 2013 , analysts say aquino has struggled to keep his own anti - corruption image intact , given allegations that several legislators , including some of his own allies , had misused millions of dollars in discretionary government funds .

although the philippine government generally upholds freedoms , it often is unable to protect the rights of some citizens , particularly at the local level .

a weak judicial system and lack of security , particularly in southern regions of the country , have led to human rights abuses by the military , private militias , and powerful political families or local clans .

extrajudicial killings by the military of individuals linked to muslim insurgents and leftist groups and politically motivated acts of violence against journalists and other media figures remain serious problems , although incidents of such violence have decreased in recent years .

human rights groups have called the philippines one of the most dangerous places in the world for journalists .

the committee to protect journalists ranked the country "third worst" on its 2013 impunity index due to the low rate of convictions related to the murder of journalists .

reporters without borders ranked the philippines 149 th out of 180 countries for press freedom in 2014 , just ahead of russia , due to violence against media personnel .

according to various reports , between 8 and 14 journalists were killed in 2013 .

in many instances , local power holders targeted journalists , broadcasters , or political commentators who had rented "block time" on the radio , during which they openly criticized local elites , exposed corruption and crime , or raised human rights issues .

the state department refers to "a dysfunctional criminal justice system notable for poor cooperation between police and investigators , few prosecutions , and lengthy procedural delays.... " according to experts , the philippine justice system is underfunded , understaffed , and backlogged .

the police and courts have been accused of failing to conduct proper investigations and prosecute those responsible for the violence , while higher levels of government have been blamed for their political ties to corrupt local power holders .

more than five years after the maguindanao massacre , perhaps the worst mass political killing since philippine independence , there have been no convictions , although president aquino has pressured the department of justice to convict the principal accused by the end of his term in office in 2016 .

 ( see t extbox . ) .

the philippines has experienced steady economic growth during the past decade , averaging annual growth rates of about 5% .

though its long - term economic expansion has been slower than that of some southeast asian neighbors , growth has accelerated substantially over the past two to three years , with some observers describing the philippines as one of the strongest performing economies in the region .

the economy is forecast to expand by 6.7% in 2014 , slightly less than the estimated 6.9% growth of 2013 .

according to some analysts , gdp growth is expected to continue to be strong despite the costs of typhoon yolanda ( haiyan ) , estimated at $13 billion .

foreign direct investment ( fdi ) also has improved .

although fdi in the philippines remains low by regional standards , it has been growing at a faster rate than that in neighboring countries — 185% in 2012 , to $2.8 billion .

both moody's and standard & poor's upgraded the country's credit rating to full investment - grade in 2013 .

last year , the world bank's international finance corporation ranked the philippines 108 th out of 189 economies in the world for "ease of doing business," an improvement of 30 places compared to 2012 .

among the major obstacles to stronger economic performance and greater fdi are poor revenue collection , inadequate spending on social services and infrastructure , and government corruption and instability , although the aquino government has taken some successful steps to reverse these problems , say experts .

legal obstacles and an opaque business environment dominated by familial oligarchs also have discouraged foreign investment .

transparency international ranked the philippines 94 th out of 177 countries in terms of perceived levels of public sector corruption in 2013 , up from 105 th in 2012 .

filipino workers continue to leave the country for jobs overseas despite economic growth at home .

the philippines is the world's fourth - largest recipient of remittances , after india , china , and mexico .

remittances from roughly 1.8 million overseas filipino workers ( ofw ) totaled an estimated $26 billion in 2013 , representing about 10% of gdp and the largest source of foreign exchange after exports .

while this source of income is a boon to the economy and provides a lifeline following natural disasters such as typhoon yolanda ( haiyan ) , some observers argue that it promotes consumption over long - term investment .

furthermore , the flight of educated professionals represents a brain drain as well as the depletion of the middle class , which has long been considered the bulwark of democracy in the philippines .

two - way goods trade between the united states and the philippines totaled $14.5 billion in 2013 .

the principal trading partners of the philippines are china ( including hong kong ) , japan , and the united states .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

the philippines incurs surpluses with all three major trading partners .

its largest export items include wood and wood products , electrical machinery , and other items to japan ; electrical and other machinery , apparel , and other items to the united states ; and machinery , electronics , minerals , and other items to china .

the united states long has been the largest source of foreign investment in the philippines , with $6 billion in cumulative fdi at the end of 2012 .

other large investors in the country are japan , south korea , the united kingdom , the netherlands , and taiwan .

the philippines is now the world's second - largest location for business process outsourcing , after india , with the industry employing an estimated 800,000 workers , and it has the world's largest call center industry .

in the past decade , the philippines has been one of the largest recipients of u.s. foreign assistance in southeast asia , including both military and development aid .

over half of u.s. assistance to the country has supported development programs in muslim areas of mindanao and sulu , with the aim of reducing the economic and political conditions that make radical or extremist ideologies and activities attractive .

major u.s. assistance programs include strengthening the rule of law , streamlining the process of obtaining business permits , improving government services in mindanao , expanding access to health care , and bolstering the afp's capacity to patrol and govern the country's maritime domain .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

the philippines is a treaty ally of the united states under the 1951 mutual defense treaty .

the two nations have common strategic interests , and the philippines relies heavily upon the united states for its external security .

the philippines and the united states long have conducted joint military activities to bolster the afp's ability to respond to security threats and to cooperate with u.s. military forces .

following the terrorist attacks in the united states in september 2001 , the bush administration proclaimed the philippines , with its muslim insurgency and islamist terrorist networks , as a front - line state in the global war on terrorism .

the united states designated the philippines as a major non - nato ally on october 6 , 2003 , after president gloria macpagal - arroyo announced manila's support for the u.s. - led invasion of iraq .

the philippines , like several other asian nations , has long - standing maritime territorial disputes with china .

these tensions raise security concerns for the united states , given the strategic and economic importance of the south china sea — through which around half the world's trade passes — and the potential that increasingly frequent maritime incidents could escalate into conflict .

a more recent driver of the disputes has been competition over resources , including fish and other maritime resources and potential oil and gas reserves .

the south china sea ( referred to by filipinos as the west philippine sea ) is ringed by china and taiwan to the north , vietnam to the west , malaysia , brunei , and indonesia to the south , and the philippines to the east .

the people's republic of china and the republic of china ( taiwan ) have demarked extensive but vaguely defined maritime claims , citing historical maps that include a dashed line covering around 80% of the south china sea .

this area includes hundreds of small land features , including the spratly islands chain and scarborough shoal ( panatag ) .

china , taiwan , and vietnam all assert possession over the entire spratly islands group , while the philippines , malaysia , and brunei each claim some land features .

china , vietnam , the philippines , and malaysia each occupy several to a dozen islands or geographical features ( islands , shoals , coral outcrops , and sand bars ) .

some of the contested region contains oil and natural gas reserves as well as marine resources that lie within the 200 nautical mile exclusive economic zone ( eez ) to which the philippines is entitled under the u.n. convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) .

 ( see figure 2 . ) .

bilateral tensions flared in the mid - 1990s when china seized a small atoll in the spratly islands group previously occupied by the philippines , known as mischief reef ( panganiban ) .

since 2011 , tensions between manila and beijing have reached particularly high levels as the two nations have had several clashes , including one in april 2012 over scarborough shoal , a set of islets approximately 12 miles west of the philippine island of luzon .

following the philippine boarding of a chinese vessel that was engaged in illegal fishing in the shoal , philippine and chinese ships engaged in a protracted standoff .

after weeks of negotiations aimed at de - escalating the situation , and despite a reported verbal agreement that all vessels would leave the area , philippine vessels left the shoal but chinese ships returned and proceeded to cordon off parts of the atoll , resulting in effective chinese control of the islets .

sino - philippine maritime tensions have continued since that incident .

since february 2013 , china reportedly has sent naval vessels to the second thomas shoal ( ayungin ) , in the spratly islands group , in an apparent attempt to isolate and bring about an end to the philippines presence there .

since 1999 , the afp has stationed several troops on the brp sierra madre , a u.s. world war ii - era naval vessel which the philippines acquired in 1976 and intentionally ran aground in the shoal in order to maintain its claim to the area .

in march 2014 , two chinese coastguard ships reportedly blocked two philippine supply ships from reaching the sierra madre , claiming that they were carrying construction materials .

counterterrorism efforts have significantly reduced the strength of islamist terrorist groups and networks in the philippines , and the prospect of a political settlement between manila and the muslim separatist movement in the south has brought hope of greatly reduced violence in that region .

nonetheless , many of the historical , political , and economic grievances that have contributed to the decades - old separatist and communist insurgencies remain .

islamist and communist groups continue to carry out sporadic armed attacks and small - scale bombings .

roughly 250,000 filipino soldiers and guerrilla fighters served under or alongside united states armed forces during world war ii .

according to many observers , the roosevelt administration promised them citizenship and veterans' benefits .

since 1946 , congress has passed legislation providing health and other benefits to filipino world war ii veterans while denying many of them "active military" status which would entitle them to full u.s. veterans' benefits .

furthermore , the citizenship granted to filipino soldiers was not extended to their families , thereby causing many families to be separated .

there are approximately 6,000 surviving filipino veterans .

in 2009 , the obama administration established a $198 million filipino veterans equity compensation ( fvec ) fund , which provided one - time payments of $15,000 to eligible filipino veterans living in the united states and $9,000 to those living in the philippines .

however , many surviving veterans have complained that existing programs did not provide adequate coverage or that their claims for ( fvec ) benefits were denied .

members of the 113 th congress have proposed a number of bills in support of filipino veterans ( see t extbox , below ) .

the purposes of these bills include facilitating the determination of eligibility of filipino veterans or acknowledging their service as "active military" for receiving full veterans' benefits ; allowing veterans who are lawful u.s. residents but who are living in the philippines to receive benefits ; and exempting children of naturalized filipino world war ii veterans from worldwide or numerical immigrant limitations under the immigration act of 1990 .

