one facet of the broader debate over aliens who are present in the united states in violation of federal immigration law has been their eligibility for driver's licenses and other forms of government - issued identification documents ( ids ) .

the issuance of driver's licenses has historically been considered a state matter , and states have taken a variety of approaches here .

some states , responding to concerns about national security , the rule of law , or the presence of "illegal aliens" within their jurisdiction , have adopted measures that directly or indirectly bar such aliens from obtaining driver's licenses and other state - issued id .

in contrast , other states , motivated by concerns related to community policing or the welfare of immigrant communities , have adopted measures that permit unlawfully present aliens to obtain driver's licenses and other id .

while these licenses may — or may not — be visually distinct from the licenses issued to u.s. citizens and lawfully present aliens , some states do not purport to restrict the license's use for id purposes , a widely recognized function of driver's licenses .

yet other states , seeking to promote traffic safety by screening drivers , but not wishing to issue driver's licenses to unlawfully present aliens , have adopted measures that permit these aliens to obtain "certificates for driving" ( cfds ) or "driving privilege cards" ( dpcs ) , but not driver's licenses .

these cfds or dpcs note , on their face , that they are valid for driving , but not for purposes of identification .

there has been similar divergence in terms of whether local governments provide alternate forms of id to unlawfully present aliens , and in state and local approaches to recognizing consular ids ( eg , mexico's matrícula consular ) .

the federal government has generally not intruded on state control over the issuance of driver's licenses , although the real id act of 2005 will , when fully implemented , bar federal agencies from accepting , "for any official purpose," licenses or id cards issued by states that do not meet specific requirements .

congress also regulates immigration , which some have claimed means that state measures regarding the issuance of driver's licenses to unlawfully present aliens are preempted .

in particular , congress has enacted legislation that restricts unlawfully present aliens' eligibility for state and local public benefits , a term that has been defined to include certain state - issued licenses , as well as "assistance" provided by state agencies or state funds .

this report provides an overview of key legal issues raised by state laws regarding the denial or issuance of driver's licenses and other forms of id to unlawfully present aliens .

it also addresses the legal issues raised by local governments issuing id cards to unlawfully present aliens , as well as by state and local approaches to recognizing foreign - issued id documents .

state measures that would deny or provide driver's licenses and other forms of government - issued id to unlawfully present aliens have been challenged on various grounds .

these grounds can vary depending upon the specific statute or practice in question .

however , the grounds most commonly asserted appear to be violations of the equal protection and supremacy clauses of the u.s. constitution .

thus , these provisions are the focus of discussion in this report , and the following paragraphs provide an overview of the basic principles implicated in discussions of equal protection and preemption .

several states have adopted measures that bar unlawfully present aliens from obtaining driver's licenses and other state - issued id .

sometimes , the prohibition is explicit , as is the case with arizona , which has enacted legislation barring the state motor vehicle division from issuing or renewing a license or id to a "person who does not submit proof satisfactory to the department that the applicant's presence in the united states is authorized under federal law. .

in other cases , the denial may be effectuated by requiring that applicants for driver's licenses provide social security numbers , which generally cannot be issued to unlawfully present aliens .

legal challenges have been brought against both types of measures on the grounds that they violate the equal protection clause by abridging the fundamental right to interstate travel and impermissibly distinguishing between aliens and citizens .

challenges have also been brought claiming that these measures are per se preempted because they regulate immigration and impliedly preempted by the real id act .

to date , these legal challenges have generally failed .

the one apparent exception involves challenges to recent state practices of issuing driver's licenses to some , but not all , aliens granted deferred action or employment authorization documents ( eads ) by the federal government .

in contrast to states seeking to deny unlawfully present aliens driver's licenses ( see " denying driver's licenses and other id " ) , several states have adopted measures that would permit unlawfully present aliens to obtain driver's licenses .

sometimes , the state permits such aliens to obtain a license that looks like those issued to citizens , lprs , and eligible lawful nonimmigrants , as new mexico does .

at other times , the state issues licenses to unlawfully present aliens that are visually distinguishable from the licenses issued to u.s. citizens and foreign nationals with lawful immigration status , although the state does not purport to restrict their usage for identification purposes .

some have suggested that such measures are per se preempted by federal law because they regulate immigration , or are impliedly preempted by the real id act or prwora .

however , such claims do not appear to have resulted in any judicial holdings or findings on the issue , perhaps because of limitations on who has standing to challenge such measures .

moreover , even if a plaintiff were found to have standing to challenge these measures , the argument that they are preempted by federal law could be difficult to maintain given that ( 1 ) state measures denying driver's licenses to unlawfully present aliens have generally not been viewed as regulations of immigration ; ( 2 ) the real id act contemplates states issuing driver's licenses and other id that are not recognized by federal agencies ; and ( 3 ) prowra expressly permits states to provide public benefits to unlawfully present aliens by enacting legislation that affirmatively provides for their eligibility .

a few states , seeking to promote traffic safety by screening drivers , but not wishing to issue driver's licenses to unlawfully present aliens , have adopted measures that permit such aliens to obtain "certificates for driving" ( cfds ) or "driving privilege cards" ( dpcs ) , but not driver's licenses .

utah is one such state , issuing dpcs to persons who cannot "provid[e] evidence of lawful presence in the united states. .

tennessee formerly had a similar provision that permitted "[p]ersons whose presence in the united states has [not] been authorized by the federal government" to obtain cfds .

in both cases , the documents issued by the state expressly note , on their face , that they are for driving purposes only , but not for id purposes .

this restriction is arguably significant , in that driver's licenses and other state - issued id have been widely recognized to play an important role in establishing identity for purposes of various everyday transactions ( eg , opening bank accounts , obtaining employment ) .

partly because cfds and dpcs would not necessarily be recognized for such purposes , and partly because of the perceived "stigma" associated with having a cfd or a dpc instead of a driver's license , some have alleged that these measures are impermissible , and that states must grant unlawfully present aliens' driver's licenses like those that issued to citizens and lprs .

these arguments were rejected by a federal district court in the case of league of united latin american citizens [lulac] v. bredesen , in a ruling that was upheld by the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit ( "sixth circuit' ) .

in this case , the district court's found that a tennessee measure , permitting unlawfully present aliens to obtain cfds but not driver's licenses , did not run afoul of the equal protection and supremacy clauses .

in so finding , the district court held that ( 1 ) "illegal aliens" are not a "suspect class" ; ( 2 ) heightened scrutiny , like that applied in plyler , is unwarranted because the aliens denied driver's licenses "do[] not resemble the class of children described in plyler " ; and ( 3 ) aliens' right to travel is more limited than citizens' right .

however , due in part to the unique nature of the state document at issue in the case , which granted aliens documents that were valid for driving , but not for id , the reviewing district court touched upon issues not addressed in other decisions .

for example , the district court expressly rejected the argument that there is a "constitutional right to a state - issued identification card acceptable to third - parties. .

it also rejected the plaintiffs' due process claim that the tennessee measure created an unconstitutional irrebuttable presumption that aliens holding cfds are "threats to homeland security" because the plaintiffs' failed to show that the state's distinctions between documents issued to unlawfully present aliens and other persons were not rationally related to the state's legitimate interest in promoting homeland security .

the issuance of cfds and dpcs to unlawfully present aliens has also been criticized by those who would also deny driver's licenses to unlawfully present aliens .

however , such criticisms do not appear to have resulted in legal challenges , and any such challenges to the granting of cfds and dpcs to unlawfully present aliens would likely be subject to the same analysis given to measures granting driver's licenses to such persons .

some cities have also adopted measures that provide unlawfully present aliens with municipal id cards for use in their dealings with the city .

for example , the san francisco board of supervisors passed an ordinance on november 20 , 2007 , authorizing the county clerk's office to issue "sf city id cards" to all san francisco residents , regardless of their immigration status .

all city agencies and "other entities receiving [c]ity funds" are required to accept the cards as proof of identity and residence , unless state or federal law requires otherwise .

this includes the police department , department of public health , public utilities commission , and child support services , among others .

the card can also be used as a library card at the city's public libraries ; a form of identification to open a checking account at participating banks ; or to open a "family account" with the recreation and parks department .

some commentators have expressed concerns about such practices that are akin to those raised about state measures granting driver's licenses to unlawfully present aliens .

however , for the reasons previously discussed , this practice may be unlikely to be found to be barred by federal law ( see " granting driver's licenses and other id " ) .

it is also important to note that municipal id card measures would arguably not override existing federal restrictions upon the receipt of federal , state , or local public benefits by unlawfully present aliens .

federal law bars unlawfully present aliens from receiving federal public benefits — a term that encompasses any benefit provided using federal funds , even if the program is administered by a state or local government .

this general prohibition upon the provision of federal public benefits to unlawfully present aliens would continue to apply , even if a local agency were otherwise "required" to accept municipal id cards , because federal law preempts inconsistent provisions of state and local law .

similarly , where state and local public benefits are concerned , the state would arguably need to have enacted legislation that "affirmatively provides" for unlawfully present aliens' eligibility in order for the local agency to provide such benefits to such aliens .

a foreign consulate's issuance of consular ids to its country's nationals has been a long - standing practice .

however , the number of ids issued to foreign nationals residing in the united states , and the recognition of these ids as a legitimate form of identification by government and private institutions , has grown significantly in recent decades .

some states and localities have adopted measures that recognize consular ids , including as a form of identification to obtain a driver's license , while others have limited or prohibited their acceptance by government and private entities .

measures restricting or permitting the acceptance of consular ids by government entities generally seem unlikely to give rise to preemption concerns .

restrictions on the acceptance of consular ids by government authorities , particularly in relation to applications for a state - issued driver's license or id , appear to be consistent with federal law , and the adoption of such restrictions seems to be encouraged by the real id act .

the act effectively prohibits states , when issuing driver's licenses or state id cards , from accepting for purposes of personal identification foreign documents other than valid passports , if such driver's licenses or id cards are to be accepted for federal purposes .

accordingly , a state id would not comport with real id act standards if an applicant for the state id document were allowed to submit a consular id as verification of his or her identity .

on the other hand , it also does not appear that the real id act bars states from recognizing consular ids , including for purposes of verifying the identity of an applicant for a state - issued id .

as previously discussed , the real id act appears to still permit states to issue driver's licenses and other ids that do not comply with the act's issuance standards , though non - compliant ids may not be accepted by federal agencies for official purposes .

accordingly , a state that opts to accept consular ids as a form of identification , including as part of an application for a state - issued form of id , would not appear to be preempted from doing so .

while it might generally be permissible for state or local governments to deny recognition of consular ids without coming into conflict with federal law , a limited exception might exist in the context of law enforcement .

the united states is a party to the vienna convention on consular relations ( vccr ) , a multilateral agreement codifying consular practices originally governed by customary practice and bilateral agreements .

pursuant to article 36 of the vccr , when a national of a signatory state ( i.e. , country ) is arrested or otherwise detained in another signatory state , appropriate authorities within the receiving state must inform him "without delay" of his right to have his consulate notified .

arguably , possession of a consular id by an arrested person may assist law enforcement in verifying that the person is a foreign national and assist police in identifying the appropriate foreign consulate to contact on the foreign national's behalf .

a state or local restriction on police acceptance of such documents could be subject to a preemption challenge on the grounds that the policy conflicts with or frustrates the purposes of the vccr's consular notification requirements .

state or local restrictions on private entities' acceptance of consular ids have been subject to legal challenge , and the single reviewing federal court that considered such a challenge found that the restriction raised preemption and other concerns .

in 2011 , a federal district court in buquer v. city of indianapolis preliminarily enjoined enforcement of an indiana statute that made the offering or acceptance of a consular id as a form of identification ( other than for law enforcement purposes ) a civil infraction .

while the parties stipulated that a state could decline to recognize consular ids as a legitimate form of identification , the district court agreed with plaintiffs' argument that the indiana statute's "sweeping prohibition" conflicted with the rights afforded to foreign consulates under the vccr , and also had the potential to directly interfere with the executive's conduct of foreign affairs .

while the district court noted that the state law did not bar foreign consulates from issuing consular ids ( which the court opined would have been a direct violation of the vccr ) , it characterized the indiana statute as making the issuance of consular ids "meaningless as [the restriction] prohibits almost every use for which the documents are ordinarily issued , including for identification purposes in private commercial transactions that are conducted between private parties. .

the court also deemed it important that the state department had cautioned against action from being taken against consular ids that might lead other countries to establish similar limitations on u.s. citizens' usage of consular ids within their territories .

finally , the court noted u.s. treasury department regulations which permit ( but do not require ) financial institutions to accept consular ids as a legitimate form of identification .

while the court did not believe the indiana measure directly conflicted with this regulation , it stated that the regulation provided "further evidence of the federal government's overarching and legitimate interest in proceeding with caution with regard to regulating the use" of consular ids .

the buquer court also found that the plaintiffs were likely to succeed on their due process and equal protection challenges to the statute , as indiana had failed to establish a rational relation between the statute's prohibition and a legitimate governmental interest .

while indiana had argued that the statute helped to ensure the prevention of fraud and the reliability of identification of individuals within the state , the court concluded that , after "examination of the admittedly limited evidence before it," consular ids were at least as reliable forms of documentation as other types of id that were not singled out for sanction by indiana .

