children in foster care are more likely to have mental health care needs than children generally .

they are also more likely than other children to receive psychotropic medications , which are prescribed drugs that affect the brain chemicals related to mood and behavior .

psychotropic medications are used to treat a variety of mental health conditions including attention disorders , depression , anxiety , conduct disorders , and others .

on the one hand , prescription of psychotropic medication for foster children may be appropriate , given their mental health needs .

still , the evidence on the safety and efficacy of psychotropics in children is limited .

congress has taken a strong interest in how states are monitoring and regulating use of these medications .

federal child welfare law requires states to have a plan for overseeing prescription drug use among children in foster care , including the use of psychotropic medications .

this report first provides background on the mental health needs of children in foster care , and the prevalence of psychotropic medication use among these children .

the next section of the report discusses congressional oversight of psychotropic medication , and efforts by the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) to provide assistance to states in ensuring appropriate use of psychotropic medications for children in care .

following this is a brief discussion of state monitoring of the use of these medications for foster children .

child welfare agencies become involved with families when investigating abuse or neglect of children by their parents or guardians .

some children may remain in their homes following the investigation , while some are removed from their homes into foster care .

children in foster care are placed in another setting that is designed to provide round - the - clock care ( eg , foster family home , group home , child care institution ) .

placement in foster care means that a judge has determined that the child's removal from his or her home was necessary because the home was "contrary to the welfare" of the child and , accordingly , the judge has given responsibility for the child's "care and placement" to the state child welfare agency .

most children enter foster care because of neglect or abuse experienced at the hands of their parents , although a child's behavior problem may also be a factor in foster care placement .

this is especially true for children entering care at an older age .

foster care is intended to be a temporary placement until a child can be reunited with his or her parent ( s ) , or when this is not possible , until a permanent placement with relatives , an adopted family , or a legal guardian can be found .

while working to find them permanent homes , states must attend to the safety and well - being of children in foster care , including their physical and mental health .

during fy2015 , some 671,000 children spent at least one day ( 24 hours ) in foster care and 243,000 left the system , resulting in nearly 428,000 of those children remaining in care on the last day of that fiscal year .

although there is variation at the state level , the national foster care caseload has generally been in decline for more than a decade .

across the nation , there were about 77,000 fewer children in foster care on the last day of fy2015 as compared to the last day of fy2006 ( when 505,000 were in care ) .

children in foster care have higher mental health service needs than children generally .

the abuse or neglect children experience before entering foster care can have serious mental health outcomes .

maltreatment by a parent or other caregiver is stressful for children and may alter how their brains develop in ways that lead them to have more difficulty regulating their emotions and interpreting cues and communication from others .

this negatively affects their socialization and may result in a tendency to violence or aggression towards others , among other problem behaviors .

in a national survey conducted in 2008 and 2009 , more than 4 in 10 ( 43% - 46% ) children ( aged 18 months to 17 years ) who were placed in a foster family home following an investigation of alleged child abuse and neglect in their families were found at risk of a behavioral or emotional problem and potentially in need of mental health services .

among children of that same age group who were placed in a foster care group home or institution , as many as 7 in 10 ( 61% - 70% ) were at such risk .

these rates are much higher than those found in the general population .

in separate surveys , about 7% to 11% of all children ( in roughly the same age range ) were identified as having emotional and behavioral problems .

in recent years , children whose medicaid eligibility is based on their "foster care" status have been increasingly more likely to be given mental health diagnoses .

this is also true of children generally .

such diagnoses include attention disorders , anxiety , autism , bipolar disorders , conduct disorders , depression , and schizophrenia .

nearly all children who are in foster care are eligible for health care services funded via medicaid , which is a means - tested entitlement program administered by the federal government in partnership with the states and authorized under title xix of the social security act ( and discussed further in the next section ) .

from 2002 to 2007 , the share of children whose medicaid eligibility is based on their "foster care" status who were diagnosed with mental health disorders increased for most of these conditions .

the most common diagnoses varied by age and older children were more likely to be given one of these diagnoses .

in 2007 , children ages 3 to 5 were most likely to have diagnoses of conduct disorder ( 7.4% ) and attention disorders ( 6.7% ) ; children ages 6 to 11 were most likely to be diagnosed with attention disorders ( 52.5% ) and conduct disorders ( 26.8% ) ; and children ages 12 to 18 years old were most likely to be diagnosed with conduct disorders ( 67.3% ) and depression ( 44.4% ) .

figure 1 ( below ) shows , for 2002 and 2007 , rates of major mental health diagnoses by age group ( 6 to 11 years and 12 to 18 years ) among children whose medicaid eligibility is based on their "foster care" status .

the figure indicates that these rates went up across all diagnoses for both age groups , except for depression among children ages 6 to 11 and schizophrenia among both age groups .

between 16% and 33% of children in out - of - home care may be using psychotropic medication on any given day , although the rate of use varies significantly based on certain factors , including the child's age , placement setting , and length of involvement with the child welfare agency .

rates of psychotropic medication use among children in foster care far exceed the rates among children generally , which is about 6% .

children whose medicaid eligibility is based on their foster care status have been found to receive psychotropic medication at three to nine times the rate of all other children served by medicaid , and at a level that is somewhat comparable to ( but still higher than ) older children ( ages 13 to 18 ) with a diagnosed mental disorder or neurodevelopmental disorder .

at the same time , research based on a national study of the use of outpatient mental health services found that children living in non - relative foster family homes were no more likely than child - welfare involved children living in their own homes to be prescribed psychotropic medication .

 ( importantly , this study does not include children in foster care group settings or residential treatment facilities , who tend to have higher rates of psychotropic use. ) .

because children in foster care tend to have greater mental health service needs than other children , they may be more likely to benefit from psychotropic medications .

still , as mentioned previously , psychotropic medications may not be effective in treating the mental health needs of some individuals .

children in care may more readily receive psychotropics due to the paucity of psychosocial services available .

this lack of services could be due to a number of factors , including a shortage of mental health providers generally and of those who have clinical understanding of the complex trauma many children in foster care may have experienced and / or who specialize in therapies that have proven to be effective .

while the rate of prescribing psychotropics has decreased in recent years , the use of certain classes of these drugs — namely antipsychotics , used for the off - label treatment of children who have bipolar disorders and schizophrenia , and used to treat certain other behavioral conditions — has steadily grown .

as discussed , the share of children in foster care prescribed antipsychotic medication increased from 2005 ( 8.7% ) to 2008 ( 9.3% ) , with a slight decrease to 9.0% in 2010 among children in medicaid with "foster care" status .

this overall upward trend could be due to a number of factors , including more research ( albeit limited ) on the efficacy of these medications in children and the role of pharmaceutical companies marketing drugs to prescribers and consumers .

further , children generally have increasingly been prescribed certain psychotropic medications in recent years .

the use of psychotropics by children in foster care has come under growing scrutiny by policymakers and stakeholders in the child welfare field .

although there is an expanding body of research on psychotropic use among children with mental health disorders , few studies show that they are safe and effective for this population .

a review by hhs of research on one class of psychotropics , antipsychotics , found that most studies had insufficient evidence to draw a conclusion about the safety of these drugs in addressing child mental health disorders generally — not just those occurring among foster youth .

further , little to no evidence was available for certain conditions such as disruptive behavior disorders , obsessive compulsive disorders , or eating disorders ( i.e. , anorexia nervosa ) .

according to the analysis , the median study duration of eight weeks was insufficient to evaluate some long - term outcomes .

the analysis also found that most of the studies had a high risk of bias because missing data were not handled and reported properly , study participants were not randomly assigned to the treatment groups , and / or the studies were funded by pharmaceutical companies that manufacture the psychotropic medication .

other research has shown that antipsychotics are associated with harmful health outcomes in some children , including high cholesterol levels , weight gain , and type - 2 diabetes .

despite these concerns , some children in foster care may benefit from psychotropic medication for managing symptoms and issues associated with mental health and behavior concerns stemming from their exposure to complex trauma , particularly if this treatment is coupled with psychosocial services .

stimulants for the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( adhd ) , a common childhood disorder , appear to be among the best researched of the antipsychotic classes .

multiple studies with research methodologies that used randomized control trials have found that some stimulants are very effective at reducing the core symptoms of adhd , including hyperactivity , impulsivity , inattention , and aggression .

further , children in foster care are more likely to have a mental health diagnosis than children generally , including children who are low income .

a 2011 gao report on psychotropic medication use by children in foster care cited statements from state officials and child psychiatrists that higher levels of psychotropic drug use may be appropriate to deal with the increased prevalence and greater severity of mental health conditions among this population .

in addition , multiple foster care placements and inconsistent state oversight practices for managing their care may contribute to the likelihood that psychotropics are used to respond to the mental health needs of these children .

congress has taken an interest in oversight of prescription medications used by children in foster care .

in 2005 , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources held a hearing to examine the enrollment of children in foster care in clinical drug trials .

the hearing followed media reports concerning use of foster children in clinical aids drug trials and addressed the extent to which states properly oversee prescription drug use by children in foster care .

as part of the child and family services improvement act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-288 ) , congress required state child welfare agencies , as a condition of receiving certain child welfare funding , to describe how they actively consulted with physicians or other medical professionals in assessing the health and well - being of children in foster care and in determining appropriate medical treatment for them .

the issue of oversight of psychotropic medication use for children in foster care in particular was briefly discussed at a 2007 congressional hearing on health care oversight for children in foster care , and it was the sole topic of a 2008 hearing .

both hearings were held by the ways and means subcommittee on income security and family support .

subsequently , as part of the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-351 ) , congress expanded on the requirement that states consult with medical professionals on the health and well - being of children in foster care .

specifically , states are required through their child welfare and medicaid agencies , and in consultation with appropriate medical professionals , to develop a coordinated strategy and oversight plan to ensure access to health care , including mental health services for each child in foster care .

the 2008 law directed states to ensure this coordinated strategy provided for oversight of drugs prescribed to children in foster care .

in october 2011 , the child and family services improvement and innovation act ( p.l .

112-34 ) amended this provision to further stipulate that the coordinated strategy must include protocols for use of psychotropic medication for children in foster care .

in december 2011 , the senate homeland security and governmental affairs subcommittee on federal financial management , government information , federal services and international security held an oversight hearing that focused on the results and recommendations of the aforementioned study by the government accountability office .

gao reviewed state policies and regulations for oversight of prescribing psychotropic medications in six states .

the study compared state policies against best practice guidelines for prescribing psychotropics for foster children and other vulnerable child populations .

these best practice guidelines were developed by the american academy of child and adolescent psychiatry ( aacap ) with support and funding from hhs's samhsa .

overall , gao found that each of the six state programs fell short of providing comprehensive oversight as defined by aacap .

for example , though all six states implemented some practices consistent with the guidelines for consent procedures , only one state ( texas ) fully implemented these procedures .

according to the report , states that do not incorporate consent procedures similar to aacap's guidelines may increase the likelihood that caregivers are not fully aware of the risks and benefits associated with the decision to use psychotropic medications .

gao made recommendations that hhs consider endorsing guidance to state medicaid and child welfare agencies on best practices for monitoring psychotropic medications for children in foster care .

according to gao , this recommendation was implemented ( see next section on executive branch actions ) .

witnesses at the hearing spoke about the role of hhs and the state medicaid programs in increasing cooperation and communication between the agencies and discussed how hhs could increase the guidance on best practices to assist states in preparing plans for psychotropic medication oversight .

further , a 12-year - old former foster youth described being given multiple mental health diagnoses and side effects he experienced from multiple psychotropic medications that were prescribed to him while in foster care .

he also testified that a therapist that he saw with his adoptive parents was most helpful to him .

additionally , in april 2013 the senate finance committee convened a roundtable discussion with senate staff and child welfare stakeholders to address issues associated with the prescription of psychotropic medications for children in foster care and to highlight alternative strategies to effectively respond to trauma experienced by children and youth in foster care .

at the roundtable , current and former foster youth shared their experiences with psychotropic medication and some noted that therapy ultimately helped them transition from psychotropic medications .

the youths' stories sometimes highlighted the importance of an invested caregiver or other knowledgeable professional in ensuring that appropriate mental health treatment is identified and provided .

child welfare stakeholders discussed the prevalence of psychotropic medication use among subpopulations of youth ; the role of the federal government in promoting alternatives to psychotropics ; tools for determining whether youth should be prescribed medications ; and the roles of schools , the mental health system , and foster parents in engaging with youth on whether psychotropic medications should be prescribed .

in may 2014 the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources held a hearing on the use of psychotropic medications among children in foster care and the efforts of states and the federal government to ensure that such medications are used appropriately .

witnesses included the associate commissioner of hhs's children's bureau ; gao ; a researcher who focuses on psychotropic medication use among children in care ; and dr. phil mcgraw , who has sought to bring greater awareness to the issue .

at the may 2014 hearing , staff from gao focused remarks on the agency's work from 2011 to 2014 related to psychotropic medication prescription among children in care .

following their december 2011 senate hearing testimony and report , gao examined prescribing rates among children in foster care in five states , including the extent to which documentation supported the use of psychotropics among a sample of 24 children in care .

gao contracted with two child psychiatrists who conduct mental health research and work on issues related to foster care to examine the sample of cases .

these experts found varying quality in the documentation supporting the use of psychotropics .

for example , experts found that in most cases medical pediatric exams were mostly supported by documentation ; however , they found that documentation was partially supported for about half to slightly more than half of the cases examined with regard to the dosage amount of medications and concurrent use of multiple medications .

gao recommended that hhs issue guidance to states regarding oversight of medication to third - party managed care organizations ( mcos ) , which increasingly are administering medicaid benefits ( including prescription benefits ) for children in foster care .

as noted in the subsequent section , hhs has since issued guidance to state child welfare and medicaid agencies on oversight of psychotropic medication use among children in care .

according to gao , this guidance has not addressed the role of third - party mcos in oversight of psychotropic use among foster children .

gao subsequently issued a report in january 2017 that examined how child welfare agencies and medicaid agencies in seven states monitor psychotropic use among children in care and the results of these state efforts .

state officials reported to gao that they developed a variety of practices to better support the appropriate mental health diagnoses and treatment for children in foster care , including initial mental health screenings and monitoring children after they are prescribed medications .

for example , all seven states developed guidelines on prescribing psychotropic medications and on promoting the use of psychosocial services ( eg , requiring or recommending psychosocial services prior to or concurrently with psychotropic medication ) .

officials in all seven states reported that several factors — strong collaboration among child welfare , medicaid , or other partnering agencies ; state outreach to stakeholders such as physicians about the requirements ; and gradual rollout of new practices — were critical in implementing their oversight work .

gao did not examine the effectiveness of state practices , state compliance with state or federal policies , or whether there are controls in place to ensure that required practices are followed .

state officials reported to gao that they use a variety of measures to gauge the results of their efforts , including physician prescribing practices ( eg , type and amount prescribed ) ; state oversight practices ( eg , reviewing case and health records ) ; and monitoring child outcomes ( eg , placement disruptions for children on psychotropic medications ) .

gao also looked into the ways that hhs has supported states in their oversight work since 2014 , noting that hhs has not convened meetings with stakeholders engaged in state oversight of psychotropic medication use for children in care .

 ( some of these efforts are described in the next section. ) .

gao recommended that hhs consider cost - effective ways to convene state stakeholders to share information and collaborate on psychotropic medication oversight .

hhs has implemented the federal requirements that states have protocols in place for monitoring psychotropic medication use .

in addition , several federal agencies have worked both together and independently to help gain a better understanding of psychotropic medication use among children ( especially children in foster care ) .

as part of their efforts to promote interagency cooperation , they have publicized best practices and successful state strategies related to the oversight of psychotropic medication use for children and the development of alternative strategies for children with mental health needs .

for multiple years , the obama administration proposed expanding funding for oversight of psychotropic medications as part of its annual budgets , including for fy2017 ( as of the date of this report , a final fy2017 appropriations law has not been enacted ) .

the research literature has focused on the role of states in overseeing the use of psychotropic medication for children in foster care .

for example , some research has addressed the issue of obtaining consent for using psychotropics or examining how certain states are carrying out their monitoring procedures .

researchers have also conducted surveys of states to learn about their policies related to the oversight of psychotropic medications .

some of these surveys predate the specific requirement for oversight of prescription medications and others have been conducted since then ; however , none of these surveys address how states have responded to the federal provision ( added to the law in september 2011 ) on oversight of psychotropic medications specifically .

in 2009 and 2010 , researchers surveyed states to learn about the status of policies and guidelines for overseeing the use of psychotropic medication by children in foster care , as well as related challenges and solutions that were identified by states .

researchers collected information from 48 states , including the district of columbia .

of the states surveyed , more than half ( 58.7% ) rated psychotropic medication use to be of high concern ( a rating of 8 to 10 on a scale of 1 to 10 ) .

about a quarter of the states rated the issue of moderate concern ( a rating of 5 to 7 ) , and about 13% rated it of low concern ( a rating of 1 to 4 ) .

at the time of the survey , 26 of the 48 states had a written policy or guideline regarding psychotropic medication use ; 13 states were currently developing a policy or guideline ; and 9 states had no policy or guideline .

slightly more than half of states used at least a "red flag" marker to identify problems with the safety and quality of psychotropic drug use .

red flags that states described using included the use of psychotropic medications in young children , the use of multiple medications before the use of a single medication , use of multiple psychotropic medications simultaneously , use of multiple medications within the same class for longer than 30 days , and dosage exceeding current maximum recommendations .

researchers concluded that states were implementing a wide variety of approaches , and that there was little evidence that these approaches were being implemented or studied in a systematic way to identify which approaches helped improve outcomes for children in foster care .

researchers have more recently raised concerns about the availability of policies and procedures that respond to psychotropic medication use .

as reported in a 2014 study , researchers reviewed the statutes , rules , and statements of policies on oversight of psychotropic drug use among children in care from 16 states ( which have 72% of all children in care nationally ) .

they were unable to locate many of the policies that had been reported in other studies , and when they did exist , the policies were "extremely underdeveloped and failed to include many of the 'red flag' criteria that both experts and states identified as essential to protecting children , such as the use of psychotropic medication for young children , dosage level , and whether multiple psychotropic medications were prescribed simultaneously. .

still , states have taken steps to more systematically address oversight of psychotropic medication use among children in foster care .

as noted , state representatives from child welfare , medicaid , and mental health agencies convened working groups as part of an hhs summit .

further , some states are working collaboratively to improve oversight .

for example , the center for health care strategies , a policy organization , worked with six states from 2012 to 2015 as part of the psychotropic medication quality improvement collaborative .

this collaborative included representatives of state child welfare , mental health , and medicaid agencies .

they worked together to define common terms and common measures on data about the utilization of psychotropic medication among foster youth , including sub - groups of foster youth .

they also developed best practices in psychotropic medication oversight and monitoring , with each state establishing a set of individual goals .

the states have implemented protocols in four areas: gaining consent , obtaining real - time data on psychotropic utilization , developing a protocol for reviewing "red flags," and developing monitoring processes that are tailored to the needs of localities .

with support from samsha , the center for health care strategies is providing technical assistance to states generally on oversight of psychotropic medications .

appendix a .

use of psychotropics among children in families investigated for abuse or neglect the national survey of child and adolescent wellbeing ( nscaw ) ii looked at rates of psychotropic medication use among a sample of children ( 5,873 ) who came into contact with the child welfare agency because of an investigation of child abuse or neglect in their families .

initial ( baseline ) survey data were collected in 2008-2009 approximately four to six months after that investigation .

with regard to use of psychotropic medication , data cover children who at the time of the initial survey were at least 18 months of age and up to 17 years old .

a follow - up survey looked at psychotropic medication use among these same children at approximately 18 months after the investigation of abuse or neglect , and a third survey looked at those children at 36 months following the investigation .

 ( some of the children followed had reached age 18 or older by the second or third collection of data. ) .

table a - 1 shows psychotropic medication use by age , and whether or not the child was in a foster care setting for the initial survey and for the follow - up at 18 months and 36 months .

for purposes of this analysis , a foster care setting includes children who were placed in a non - relative foster family home , children placed with kin on a formal basis , and children placed in a group or residential setting .

by contrast , children included in the "in home" category includes children living with their biological or adoptive parents , as well as children who were in informal kinship care settings .

statistical significance the percentage differences shown by the initial survey in use of psychotropic medication ( between children in foster care and those who were not in foster care ) were not statistically significant overall or for any specific age group shown in table a - 1 .

however , the differences shown for these groups at the 18-month and 36-month follow - up were statistically significant , with children in foster care more likely to be using psychotropic medications .

for children under age 6 , there was no statistical significance found in the percentage differences shown for children in foster care versus those living at home in any of the surveys ( initial , 18-month or 36-month ) .

for children ages 6 to 10 , the percentage difference shown between the in - home and foster care groups at the 18-month follow - up was found to be statistically significant but not those shown at the initial survey or at the 36-month follow - up .

for children ages 11 through 17 years , there was not statistical significance found between the in - home and foster care groups at the initial survey but the differences shown at the 18-month and 36-month follow - up were significant .

