bolivia is a country rich in cultural diversity and natural resources , whose political and economic development have been stymied by chronic instability , poverty , corruption , and deep ethnic and regional cleavages .

in 1825 , bolivia won its independence from spain , but then experienced frequent military coups and counter - coups until democratic civilian rule was established in 1982 .

as a result of the war of the pacific ( 1879-1883 ) with chile , bolivia lost part of its territory along the pacific coast and has no sovereign access to the ocean , a source of lingering resentment among bolivians .

bolivia does have preferential rights of access to the chilean ports of antofagasta and arica and the peruvian port of ilo .

as a result of the chaco war with paraguay ( 1932-1935 ) , bolivia lost access to the atlantic ocean by way of the paraguay river and significant territory .

bolivia possesses the second - largest natural gas reserves in latin america after venezuela and significant mineral deposits , yet at least 42% of bolivians live in poverty ( down from 64% in 2005 ) .

some sources point to a higher figure , nearing 60% .

bolivia has been deemed as having an "acute" level of vulnerability to natural disasters ; recent flooding has disproportionately affected poor communities in rural areas .

bolivia's population of 10.5 million people is among the most ethnically diverse in south america .

quechua and aymara are the two predominant indigenous groups , together comprising some 55% of the population .

despite the national revolution of 1952 , in which the bolivian indigenous peoples benefitted from land reform and expanded suffrage , indigenous groups have historically been under - represented in the bolivian political system and disproportionately affected by poverty and inequality .

in the 1980s , indigenous - based political parties and movements emerged in bolivia , and by 2006 some 17% of members of the bolivian congress self - identified as indigenous .

since the mid - 2000s , indigenous representatives have used the legislature as a forum to advocate for indigenous rights , equitable economic development , and the preservation of indigenous land and culture .

nevertheless , indigenous communities continue to engage in large - scale protests to ensure that their interests are met .

bolivia has been a major producer of coca leaf , the main ingredient in the production of cocaine .

although coca leaf is legal in the country for traditional uses and is grown legally in some parts of the country , its cultivation for illegal purposes increased in the 1970s and 1980s .

by the early 2000s , cultivation levels had decreased to half of the levels of the 1990s as a result of aggressive , u.s. - backed policies to eradicate illicit production .

these policies , and the way in which they were implemented , caused social unrest and economic hardship in the two main coca - growing regions .

opposition to forced eradication policies led to the rise of coca growers' trade unions and an associated political party , the movement toward socialism ( mas ) .

since taking power in january 2006 , evo morales and his leftist movement toward socialism ( mas ) party have presided over a period of relative political stability and economic expansion .

after being governed by six different presidents between 2001 and 2005 , bolivians have repeatedly gone to the polls to reaffirm their support for morales and the mas ; the party now has majorities in both chambers of the legislature .

president morales has expanded state control over the economy by renegotiating contracts with some companies to increase the taxes and royalties they pay , and by expropriating other companies .

these policies have angered foreign investors , but have brought the government substantial revenue .

president morales has used that influx of revenue to expand social programs and provide cash transfers to the elderly , families with children , and pregnant women .

buoyed by record prices for its gas and mineral exports , economic growth in bolivia has averaged 4.5% per year during the morales administration , according to the world bank .

from the late 1980s through the mid - 2000s , u.s. relations with bolivia centered largely on controlling the production of coca leaf and coca paste , much of which was usually shipped to colombia to be processed into cocaine .

in support of bolivia's counternarcotics efforts , the united states provided significant interdiction and alternative development assistance , and forgave all of bolivia's debt for development assistance projects and most of the debt for food assistance .

bolivia , like peru , had been viewed by many as a counternarcotics success story , with joint air and riverine interdiction operations , successful eradication efforts , and some effective alternative development programs .

others , however , view the forced eradication policies that u.s. antidrug efforts emphasized as a social and political disaster that fueled popular discontent , worsened bolivia's chronic instability , and contributed to human rights violations .

prior to the december 2005 elections , most analysts predicted that a morales victory would complicate u.s. relations with bolivia .

after the election , u.s. state department officials congratulated evo morales but noted that "the quality of the relationship between the united states and bolivia will depend on what kind of policies they [morales and the mas government] pursue. .

despite an initial openness to dialogue , u.s. - bolivian relations became tense soon after president morales took office .

u.s. officials expressed concerns about the morales government's commitment to combating illegal drugs , its ties with venezuela and cuba , and its nationalization of bolivia's hydrocarbons industry .

tensions in u.s. - bolivian relations flared during the fall of 2007 as bolivian authorities ( including president morales ) complained that some u.s. assistance was going to support opposition groups seeking to undermine the mas government .

in 2008 , u.s. - bolivian relations deteriorated from what analysts described as "tenuous" at best in the summer , to extremely tense by the fall .

u.s. - bolivian relations hit their lowest point in modern times in september 2008 , when president morales accused the u.s .

ambassador to bolivia of supporting opposition forces and expelled him from the country .

the u.s. government responded by expelling bolivia's ambassador to the united states .

on september 16 , 2008 , president bush designated bolivia as a country that had failed to live up to its obligations under international narcotics agreements .

that decision was closely followed by the suspension of bolivia's trade preferences under the andean trade preferences act ( atpa ) for a lack of counternarcotics cooperation .

on november 1 , 2008 , bolivian president morales announced an indefinite suspension of u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) operations in bolivia after accusing some dea agents of espionage .

the peace corps also suspended operations in bolivia that fall due to "growing instability" in the country and has since closed the program .

it is unlikely that the agency would resume operations until and unless the u.s. government has more of a diplomatic presence in the country .

periodic efforts to repair relations in subsequent years have failed for different reasons .

after two years of high - level negotiations , on november 7 , 2011 , the u.s. and bolivian governments signed a framework agreement to guide relations that said both governments looked forward to the "early return of ambassadors to both washington and la paz. .

however , after the united states requested bolivian approval of a nominee to serve as u.s .

ambassador in la paz ( through the diplomatic procedure known as agrément ) in november 2012 , the bolivian government leaked the name of the u.s. nominee to the press .

president morales then said in february 2013 that he no longer had an interest in exchanging ambassadors .

two events that occurred in 2013 resulted in the end of most , if not all , u.s. foreign aid to bolivia .

in may 2013 , president morales asked the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to end its operations in bolivia after 52 years in the country .

he claimed that usaid had funded opposition forces that had sought to undermine his government , charges that usaid vigorously denied .

as usaid began shutting down its operations , the state department decided to close its international narcotics and law enforcement affairs office in bolivia in december 2013 due to a lack of adequate cooperation from bolivian authorities .

another source of tension in the relationship has been the case of new york flooring contractor jacob ostreicher , who launched a rice farm in bolivia in 2008 .

the bolivian government arrested mr. ostreicher on suspicion of money laundering in june 2011 , imprisoned him for 18 months in what was termed pre - trial detention , and then placed him under house arrest even though he was never formally charged with a crime .

several bolivian officials in the interior ministry and attorney general's office reportedly were jailed for allegedly attempting to extort ostreicher in exchange for his release .

corruption and inefficiency in bolivia's judicial system has been identified as a serious human rights problem in the country .

congress held multiple hearings pushing for mr. ostreicher to be freed ; he eventually escaped house arrest and returned to the united states in december 2013 .

the bolivian government considered mr. ostreicher a fugitive .

as the united states criticized bolivia's handling of the ostreicher case , bolivia protested the u.s. government's 2012 denial of its request for former president gonzalo sánchez de lozada , currently living in the united states , to be extradited to bolivia to stand trial for civilian deaths that occurred when he ordered government security forces to respond to violent civilian protests in the fall of 2003 .

economists predict that bolivia is likely to enjoy steady economic growth averaging roughly 4% in the coming years ( 2015-2018 ) .

even if prices or demand for its commodity exports were to fall , neither of which is likely , bolivia's significant reserves should cushion its economy from economic shocks .

economic growth and improving social indicators should enable president morales and the mas to continue dominating the bolivian political system for the foreseeable future , despite periodic protests from disgruntled interest groups .

with presidential elections expected to be held in october , the morales government is unlikely to make overtures to improve relations with the united states .

at the same time , none of the issues that usually draw u.s. interest to particular latin american countries — proximity , counternarcotics concerns , or trade — are particularly salient with bolivia .

bolivia is a landlocked country in south america that supplies only 1% of u.s. cocaine and whose primary trade partner is brazil .

and , although bolivia is a member of the nine - member venezuelan - led bolivarian alliance of the americas ( alba ) , it does not possess the same ambitions to serve as a regional counterweight to the united states as venezuela .

nevertheless , there is always a chance that president morales could change his mind regarding a desire to improve relations with the united states and eventually exchange ambassadors .

he reportedly expressed a willingness to do so within an environment of "mutual respect" during a meeting with a recent u.s. senate delegation to bolivia .

it remains to be seen what type of conditions either government might place on efforts to improve relations .

