the dramatic increase in u.s. and canadian crude oil production in recent years , coupled with the increase in crude oil transport by rail , has raised questions about whether properties ( eg , flammability ) of these crude types — particularly bakken crude oil from north dakota and canada's oil sands — differ sufficiently from other crude oils to warrant any additional handling considerations .

the u.s .

pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration ( phmsa ) recently fined several oil companies for improperly classifying their crude oil rail shipments .

potential safety concerns have similarly been raised over pipeline shipments of crude oil from canada's oil sands projects .

crude oil is highly variable and can exhibit a wide range of physical and chemical properties .

in fact , crude oil samples drawn from the same oil field can vary significantly .

lighter oils may be prone to ignite more readily than heavier crude oils depending on the range of light hydrocarbons they contain .

in addition to flammability , other factors such as specific gravity ( density ) and entrained gases may also play important factors in rail car loading , and corrosivity and sulfur content may affect rail car structural integrity .

bakken crude oil ( traded as north dakota light ) is a light sweet crude oil high in light - end paraffinic range hydrocarbons , as well as heavy - end asphaltic range hydrocarbons .

light sweet crudes , like bakken , are easier to process directly into gasoline and middle - distillate fuels ( eg , diesel ) than heavier crude oils .

phmsa has issued a safety alert to notify emergency responders , shippers , carriers , and the public that recent derailments and resulting fires indicate that the type of crude oil transported from the bakken region of north dakota may be more flammable than traditional heavy crude oil .

under phmsa's "operation classification," as it is officially known , tank car inspections will determine whether a tank car's contents are properly classified based on factors that include volatility , corrosivity , hydrogen sulfide content and the composition or concentration of entrained gases inside the contents .

phmsa is reinforcing the requirement to properly test , characterize , classify , and , where appropriate , sufficiently degasify hazardous materials prior to and during transportation .

"operation classification" will be an ongoing effort , and phmsa will continue to collect samples and measure the characteristics of bakken crude as well as oil from other locations .

this report discusses the properties that phmsa addressed in its safety alert , provides background on the composition of various u.s. crude oils , and compares bakken crude oil to other crude oil produced or transported in the united states .

for further background on crude oil transport by rail , see crs report r43390 , u.s. rail transportation of crude oil: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crude oils differ in density ( mass per unit volume ) , and are typically measured in terms of degrees api gravity ( api refers to the american petroleum institute ) .

higher api gravity corresponds with lighter density .

light crude oils generally exceed 38" api , intermediate crudes fall in the range of 22 to 38" api gravity , and heavy crudes fall below 22" api gravity .

bakken crude ranges from 39.7 to 42.2 " api gravity .

light sweet crude has less than 0.5% sulfur .

crude oil futures contracts traded on the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) are based on west texas intermediate ( wti ) , a particular grade of light sweet crude oil .

wti ranges from 37 to 42" api gravity , has sulfur less than 0.42% by weight , and tan of 0.28 mgkoh / g .

bakken is comparable to wti in terms of "api gravity and sulfur ( see table 1 ) .

its sulfur content is less than 0.25% by weight , making it a sweet crude oil .

its tan is less than 0.1 mgkoh / g , making it relatively non - corrosive and comparable to wti .

figure 1 displays various crude oils produced in the united states by api gravity , and sulfur .

bakken ( north dakota light sweet ) represents the lighter range of crude oil currently produced in the united states , but by no means the lightest .

that title belongs to texas eagle ford crude oil .

as shown in table 2 , bakken's api gravity is slightly higher than wti , 2% higher in condensates ( light end hydrocarbons ) , but lower than wti's upper rvp limit ( leaving comparative volatilities open to interpretation ) .

however , bakken does fall within the upper and lower range of eagle ford rvp , which is the lightest crude oil produced in the united states .

dot - 111 type tanks cars are "non - pressure" tank cars designed to carry a wide range of products including hazardous and non - hazardous materials .

generally , they cannot exceed 34,500 gallons in capacity or 263,000 lbs .

in gross weight on rail .

however , the associate administrator for safety , federal railroad administration ( fra ) can approve a non - pressure tank car loaded up to 286,000 lbs .

in gross weight on rail , if it does not contain "poisonous - by - inhalation" material , and operates under controlled interchange conditions agreed to by participating railroads .

a tank car becomes overloaded when it exceeds either the maximum gross weight on rail or maximum filling limit .

an overloaded rail car can cause its axles to break , or cause the car to exceed the maximum time a car can take to achieve maximum braking .

a crude oil shipper has two options in meeting the weight agreement with the rail carrier: provide either a weight from a certified scale , or a weight estimate based on calculations .

to calculate the weight limit , the shipper must consider the "light weight" of the tank car ( the unloaded or tare weight ) and consider the density ( api gravity ) of the crude oil to be loaded .

for illustrative purposes , figure 2 shows how increasingly heavier api gravity reduces the volume of crude oil that can be loaded into a tank car in order to not exceed the gross rail weight limit .

at 50"api , the tank car can hold its maximum volume of 31,800 gallons and not exceed the 286,000 lb .

gross weight on rail limit .

at 47.3"api , the shipper must begin reducing volume of crude oil loaded into the tank car .

at bakken's highest density of 39.7"api , the tank car can only hold 30,488 gallons — a volume reduction of roughly 1,300 gallons .

the reduced volume also creates free space at the top of the tank car , which provides the opportunity for entrained gases to release from crude oil .

as crude oil density ( and thus api gravity ) is temperature dependent , volume will increase as temperature increases .

thus , shippers may have to reduce the volume of crude oil loaded in order to accommodate expansion during shipping .

crude oil shipments by rail have increased in recent years with the development of oil fields in north dakota .

with several derailments and releases of bakken crude oil , regulators and others are concerned that it contains chemical constituents that exacerbate its volatility and thus its flammability .

absent new pipeline capacity , rail provides the primary "takeaway" capacity for bakken producers .

unit train shipments of bakken crude now supply refineries on both the east and west coasts .

however , the u.s. gulf coast ( texas and louisiana ) constitutes the most prolific region of domestic crude oil production , and the crude oils produced ( wti , eagle ford , and louisiana light sweet , among others ) rival bakken in the characteristics the phmsa alert has called into scrutiny .

the gulf coast does benefit from existing pipeline infrastructure ; however , producers are relying on rail to access new markets , as evidenced by eagle ford crude oil moving from east texas to st james , louisiana by rail .

all crude oils are flammable , to a varying degree .

further , crude oils exhibit other potentially hazardous characteristics as well .

the growing perception is that light volatile crude oil , like bakken crude , is a root cause for catastrophic incidents and thus may be too hazardous to ship by rail .

however , equally hazardous and flammable liquids from other sources are routinely transported by rail , tanker truck , barge , and pipeline , though not without incident .

a key question for congress is whether the characteristics of bakken crude oil make it particularly hazardous .

conversely , does focusing so much attention on the commodity distract from other causes of transport incidents , such as maintenance practices , safety standards and human error ? .

a further policy question is whether bakken crude oil significantly differs from other crude oils that the standard practices do not apply , and if so , what policy steps should be taken to remedy safety concerns ? .

