federal forestry activities and programs historically have been associated with agriculture , and with agriculture legislation .

forestry programs have been addressed in past periodic omnibus farm bills and other agriculture legislation .

these include programs to support management of nonfederal forests , forestry research , and management of federal forests .

research and forestry - specific assistance programs for private landowners — in contrast to agriculture conservation programs that include forestry activities — are primarily administered by the forest service ( fs ) , an agency within the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the fs also administers 193 million acres of the national forest system .

this report provides a brief background on the congressional committee jurisdiction over forestry , with examples of bills addressed by the committees .

it then presents information on forestry in the 2014 farm bill , the agricultural act of 2014 .

the report concludes with some forestry issues that were debated and that might be discussed in future legislation .

appendix a contains information on forestry provisions in previous farm bills .

appendix b includes a side - by - side description of the enacted provisions compared to then - current law .

both the house committee on agriculture and the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition , and forestry have jurisdiction over "forestry in general" and acquired national forests .

jurisdiction over national forests established from the public domain lies with the house natural resources committee and the senate energy and natural resources committee .

past farm bills have included provisions addressing forestry .

however , stand - alone forestry legislation has also passed through the agriculture committees .

the agriculture committees have exerted considerable influence over federal forestry activities over the years .

for example , the forest and rangelands renewable resources planning act of 1974 ( rpa ) and the national forest management act of 1976 ( nfma ) , which guide forest service ( fs ) planning and management , were both initially referred to the agriculture committees .

in addition , the healthy forests restoration act of 2003 ( hfra ) was referred to and reported by the agriculture committees .

in addition to issues related to the general management of the national forests , the agriculture committees have jurisdiction over forestry research and forestry assistance to states and to private landowners .

these three programs — forest management , forestry research , and forestry assistance — have traditionally been the three principal branches of usda's forest service .

forestry assistance is governed largely by the cooperative forestry assistance act of 1978 ( cfaa ) , which revised and updated the clarke - mcnary act of 1924 .

forestry research is governed largely by the forest and rangeland renewable resources research act of 1978 , which revised and updated the mcsweeney - mcnary act of 1928 .

both laws were originally referred to and reported by the agriculture committees .

for nearly three years , congress considered an omnibus farm bill — which included a forestry title — to establish the direction of agriculture and food policy for the next several years .

many provisions of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( the 2008 farm bill ) expired in fy2012 , but were extended for an additional year in the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 .

the 112 th congress began work on a new farm bill but did not complete action before the conclusion of the congress , requiring new bills to be introduced in the 113 th congress .

the house ( h.r .

2642 ) and senate ( s. 954 ) bills passed their respective chambers by the end of september 2013 .

a conference agreement was reached in late january 2014 ; it was approved by both chambers within eight days and was signed into law ( p.l .

113-79 ) by the president on february 7 , 2014 .

title viii of the enacted 2014 farm bill repeals , creates , modifies , and reauthorizes several forestry programs .

both the house - passed ( h.r .

2642 ) and senate - passed ( s. 954 ) versions of the 2014 farm bill contained a forestry title .

while many of the provisions were similar across the chambers — for example , both bills proposed to repeal three of the same programs — there were some differences that were resolved in the conference agreement .

the various provisions can be sorted into four groups: program repeals , program reauthorizations , provisions affecting national forest management , and miscellaneous forestry provisions .

a brief overview of forestry - related provisions in other titles is also presented .

forestry - related provisions were also included in other titles of the enacted 2014 farm bill , including title ii ( conservation ) , title vii ( research ) , title ix ( energy ) , and title xii ( miscellaneous ) .

the need to reauthorize many of the agricultural programs is a prime reason for periodic farm bills .

even though many forestry programs are permanently authorized , some have raised forestry issues other than the authorization levels for possible discussion within future legislation , such as wildfire protection ; conservation issues for private forest owners ; outreach , education , research , and market opportunities for traditional forest products and for forest products for renewable energy sources ; and continued efforts to eradicate invasive species and improve forest resiliency to disturbance events .

in addition , several of the forestry issues that were debated but ultimately not included in the enacted 2014 farm bill could be debated again in future farm bills or legislation .

for example , some proposed to eliminate the permanent authorizations for several programs by establishing a sunset date .

the house - passed version of the farm bill proposed to eliminate the permanent authority of the forest legacy program and the community forest and open space conservation program to receive annual appropriations , and instead would have authorized the programs through fy2018 .

the final enacted 2014 farm bill did not include these provisions , but funding authority issues could resurface .

other examples include issues related to how the forest service should address deteriorating forest resiliency conditions and future risks within both the national forest system and nonfederal forests .

although the 2014 farm bill includes several provisions related to these issues , this may continue to generate debate , particularly in terms of wildfire response and providing technical assistance for climate change adaptation and mitigation .

appendix a .

brief history of forestry provisions in previous farm bills past farm bills also have included forestry provisions , primarily addressing the forestry assistance programs .

the first to contain a separate forestry title was the 1990 farm bill ( the food , agriculture , conservation , and trade act of 1990 ) , which: created four new forestry assistance programs ; revised two existing forestry assistance programs ; amended two forestry assistance programs ; revised the administrative provisions for forestry assistance ; created five special forestry research programs ; amended three existing forestry research programs ; authorized a private , nonprofit tree planting foundation ; and created a new fs branch: international forestry .

the 1996 farm bill ( the federal agriculture improvement and reform act of 1996 ) included only a few forestry provisions — extending the authorization for the one expiring assistance program and adding a new funding option within an existing program .

the 2002 farm bill ( the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ) contained a separate forestry title .

the conference could not resolve many of the differences between the house - and senate - passed forestry provisions , and thus the conference report contained fewer provisions than either bill .

 ( some of the disputed provisions were enacted one year later in hfra. ) .

the 2008 farm bill ( the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ) included a forestry title and several forestry provisions in other titles .

the forestry title: established national priorities for private forest management and assistance ; required statewide forest assessments and strategies for assistance ; provided for competitive funding for certain programs ; created new programs for open space conservation and for emergency reforestation ; established a fs tribal relations program for cultural and heritage cooperation and a competitive grants program for hispanic - serving institutions ; reauthorized four existing programs , but did not reauthorize several other programs , including the forest land enhancement program ; amended the lacey act amendments to prohibit imports of illegally logged wood products ; and modified three national forest boundaries and certain timber contract provisions .

in addition , the 2008 farm bill conservation title revised the definition of conservation actions to include forestry activities for several conservation programs .

the statute required special reporting on softwood lumber imports , to assure implementation of the 2006 u.s. - canada softwood lumber agreement .

three provisions altered tax treatments for forests and landowners .

finally , the energy title of the 2008 farm bill included two new woody biomass energy programs .

appendix b .

enacted forestry provisions of the 2014 farm bill forestry titl .

