in recent years , financial data breaches have exposed a variety of personal information concerning finances , personally identifiable information ( pii ) , health care , legal issues , and more .

the theft of this information was accomplished by outsiders hacking computer systems , insiders with and without authorized access to the files , loss of laptops and other physical media , and accidental publication .

according to one source , 78% of all records compromised during the first six months of 2014 were exposed as the result of outsiders .

recent large financial data breaches affecting the payment system include target: 2013 , 40 million payment cards , 70 million records of customer names , addresses , telephone numbers , and email addresses ; adobe: 2013 , 152 million customer names , encrypted passwords , encrypted payment card information ; home depot: 2014 , 56 million customer email addresses and payment cards ; heartland: 2009 , 130 million payment card records ; and tjx: 2007 , 94 million payment card records ( credit card numbers and transactions ) .

this report concentrates on the loss of financial data , but there have also been nonfinancial data breaches , including sony corporation ( playstation network ) : 2011 , 77 million names , addresses , email addresses , and other personal information ; sony picture entertainment: 2014 , a large , but unknown number of files reportedly containing personal information , internal sony discussions , and unreleased movies , and other ; jpmorgan chase & co. ( jpmorgan ) : 2014 , 76 million household customer names , telephone numbers , and other information and 7 million small business records ; and tricare management activity: 2011 , 4.9 medical records lost .

breaches have also occurred in other nations , including korea ( 2014 ) , the theft of 220 million records containing personal information and passwords , and china ( 2012 ) , 150 million records stolen from shanghai roadway & marketing .

this section looks at the costs reported by companies in three data breaches: target , home depot , and jpmorgan .

these costs typically include only direct costs , such as hiring consultants and staff to end the breach and to prevent future breaches , and contractually agreed compensation to business partners ( such as payment card companies ) for their losses .

not all companies include the savings from the tax deductibility of these costs or insurance claims .

many costs , especially those resulting from legal action against the companies , will not be known for many years after the data breach .

the payment card system encompasses cards that can be used as payment for purchases .

credit cards , debit cards , automatic teller machine ( atm ) cards , and prepaid cards are the most widely used payment cards .

the two basic approaches to payment card systems differ in the number of parties to the transaction .

the most common is the four - party system , which is used by mastercard and visa .

this system involves a merchant , an acquirer ( the merchant's bank ) , the issuer ( the customer's bank ) , and the cardholder .

the alternative called the three - party system — used by companies such as diners club , discover , and american express — consists of the merchant , the payment card company , and the cardholder .

there are economic , technological , and strategic reasons why payment card breaches continue to occur .

the crime can be profitable and those involved are thought to have relatively little risk of arrest .

for a group with an inclination toward crime , using the internet to steal financial data would appear to offer large rewards , little cost , and relatively little risk of arrest .

obtaining cardholder information has been profitable , and obtaining the information on thousands or millions of cardholders has been even more profitable .

although law enforcement authorities try to identify , arrest , and prosecute those responsible , international cooperation can be less than what might be desired , which reduces the risks to those responsible for the breaches .

merchants , banks , and payment cards share costs and benefits , but the desire to minimize costs , including the cost of a new technology to deter payment card breaches , may involve shifting the expense to someone else .

cyber technology and business efficiencies for merchants , banks , payment cards , payment processors , and cybercriminals are constantly evolving .

many types of costs affect merchants , banks , payment cards , payment processors , consumers , and the party whose information is compromised .

the response of those affected has an impact on the cost per record and the total cost .

in 2007 , forrester research surveyed 28 companies and estimated data breach costs of $90 to $305 per record .

if this estimate is accurate for the target case , the cost to target's 40 million cards compromised could result in costs of $3.6 billion to $12.2 billion .

according to research by the ponemon institute , factors influencing the losses in data breaches include industry , existence of a privacy and data protection security policy , the type of information handled , the most likely cause of a data breach , whether data are stored on laptops or removable devices , whether data are encrypted , whether there is a full - time information security manager , number of employees , where in the world the company operates , policies concerning remote access to sensitive data , user authentication technology , headquarters location , and the number of sensitive records .

table 1 summarizes various estimates of the cost to target its data breach .

these estimates range from $4.9 billion down to target's reported losses of $11 million after insurance and taxes .

ponemon estimated that a 2013 data breach in the retail sector would cost an average of $122 per record as compared with an average of $254 per card in the financial sector , and $304 in the health care sector .

costs included hiring outside experts , hiring a call center , the cost of cardholder credit monitoring , providing discounts to cardholders , reduced sales , and the cost of the staff response .

if target's cost turns out to be $122 per record , the total cost of the target breach would be $4.9 billion .

to date , target has reported losses after insurance and taxes of $11 million .

this section of the report continues by looking at who bears the various costs of the payment breach in the first instance .

it looks at the costs unique to merchants , banks , the payment processor , and consumers .

it also examines the costs to the party breached .

ultimately private contracts among the various parties in the payment system and lawsuits can reallocate these costs .

the cost of reversing fraudulent transactions follows the entire chain of processing a payment card transaction , but — assuming that the funds can be recovered — this cost is likely to be relatively small .

in data breaches such as target's , who is liable for the costs associated with such data breaches depends on a web of individual contracts among retailers , the banks that issue cards and handle payments , credit card companies such as visa and mastercard , payment processors authorized by the credit card companies to process payments at the point of sale , and even contracts between a retailer and its third - party service provider ( such as target's hvac contractor ) .

these contracts allocate liability , the right to indemnification for breaches , and set certain duties and standards for cybersecurity protections , such as in the individually negotiated "representations and warranties" sections of such contracts .

generally , the issuing financial institution pays the cost of card reissuance and for fraudulent charges made on compromised cards .

banks may sue the retailer for employing inadequate data security systems .

a number of smaller financial institutions have filed class action lawsuits against target under minnesota state law , which reportedly has strict standards on data breach notification and minimum cybersecurity standards .

 ( target is headquartered in minnesota. ) .

the financial institutions claim damages , among other things , for costs associated with notifying customers of issues related to the target data breach , closing out and opening new customer accounts , reissuing cards , and refunding customer losses resulting from unauthorized charges .

in some past data breach cases , merchants accused of using lax systems have paid significant costs of their own .

for example , a data breach at t.j. maxx was discovered in late 2006 and involved about 45 million debit and credit cards .

to cover the eventual expenses of the breach , t.j. maxx set aside $5 million in fy2007 and $198 million in fy2008 , for a total of $203 million .

by way of comparison , t.j. maxx's profit was $1.4 billion in fy2007 and $1.6 billion in fy2008 .

in sum , courts have been called upon to play key roles in deciding who should bear losses from data breaches like target's .

this is often done on a case - by - case basis , and often litigated under a variety of state laws .

this has led to a lack of uniformity in the outcomes .

this situation has led to calls from some academics and media observers for congress to examine the issue of who ultimately is responsible for the losses and who is in the best position to prevent losses .

some have also called on congress to craft policy solutions allocating liability to those best able to minimize the threat of cybercrime and thereby protect consumers at the least cost .

because of the shared responsibility for cybersecurity over consumers' data , however , it may not be easy to determine which parties are in fact in the best position to minimize the threat of cybercrime and protect consumers .

this is because customers' data are necessarily shared by retailers , payment card companies , payment processors , and financial institutions .

because breaches may occur at any point along this chain , deciding who should bear the cost of cybersecurity may not be straightforward .

to date , congressional hearings on the target breaches have tended to focus more on policy solutions , such as notifying consumers that data breaches have occurred , and increasing or clarifying the ftc's authority to sanction lax data security practices .

they have not focused on whether or how to allocate shared responsibility to the parties best positioned to protect against cyber breaches .

this section discusses selected policy options that have been raised in congressional hearings held on data security and breaches following the target breach .

crs's reports on cybersecurity issues are in issues before congress: homeland security and terrorism , cybersecurity at http: / / www.crs.gov / pages / subissue.aspx ? cliid=4300&parentid=28&preview=false .

crs report r42619 , cybersecurity: crs experts , by [author name scrubbed] , lists crs's experts in various aspects of cybersecurity .

