congress is involved in the long - running and costly decision regarding the future production of "pits" ; a pit is the plutonium core of the primary stage of a nuclear weapon .

when imploded by high explosives , a pit becomes so compressed that it results in a nuclear explosion that provides the energy to detonate the weapon's main ( secondary ) stage .

during the cold war , the rocky flats plant ( co ) made pits on an industrial scale , sometimes over 1,000 pits per year ( ppy ) .

rocky flats ceased pit production in 1989 .

since then , the united states has made at most 11 ppy despite several failed attempts to build a facility able to produce pits at a higher rate .

yet the department of defense ( dod ) requires the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , the separately organized component of the department of energy ( doe ) in charge of the u.s. nuclear weapons program , to have the capacity to make 50-80 ppy by 2030 .

u.s. policy is to "not develop new nuclear warheads … or provide for new military capabilities. .

however , weapon components age , so life extension programs ( leps ) are underway or planned for each existing weapon type in sequence .

some leps will use a weapon's original pit , and other leps may use retired pits from other weapon types .

still other leps may use newly manufactured pits , such as to replace original pits that have deteriorated or to incorporate new safety and security features .

some experts argue that additional pit manufacturing capacity is needed to replace pits that encounter problems out of sequence or to hedge against unanticipated geopolitical developments .

others reply that a capacity much less than 80 ppy would suffice .

while there is debate over what capacity is needed , this report has a different focus: how to achieve a capacity of 80 ppy .

this report summarizes the much more detailed crs report r43406 , u.s. nuclear weapon "pit" production options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

pit production involves precisely shaping plutonium , a hazardous , radioactive , physically quirky metal .

production also requires supporting tasks , notably analytical chemistry ( ac , defined below ) .

currently , los alamos national laboratory ( lanl ) ( nm ) produces pits at its pf - 4 building , and conducts ac and other supporting tasks at its chemistry and metallurgy research ( cmr ) building .

several terms are essential for understanding pit production options: material at risk ( mar ) : doe defines this term as "the amount of radioactive materials … available to be acted on by a given physical stress. .

for lanl , earthquakes pose the most severe anticipated physical stress .

each building using radioactive material has a mar allowance specific to that building .

hazard category ( hc ) : a categorization of buildings based on the amount of radioactive material a building is designed to hold .

the hc system defines the construction type and safety systems needed to keep radiation dose to persons within limits defined by doe in the event of an accident or building collapse .

radiological facility: the lower limit for radioactive material in a building in the hc system is about 26 grams of weapons - grade plutonium ( wgpu ) , which contains mostly plutonium - 239 but also other isotopes of plutonium .

buildings with less than this quantity are "radiological facilities. .

they require no special security measures because they have so little material .

security category ( sc ) : a categorization of buildings based on the amount and form of radioactive material in a building .

the intent of the sc system is to determine what level of security a building needs based on the "attractiveness" of its materials , especially to terrorists .

for example , wgpu in metallic form , in quantities sufficient to make a bomb , would be highly attractive , and a building containing large quantities of it requires armed guards , intrusion detection systems , special fencing , and the like .

in contrast , wgpu dissolved in a large quantity of acid is much less attractive , so requires much less security .

analytical chemistry ( ac ) : ac analyzes many plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its manufacture .

ac determines the isotopic composition of wgpu , the amount of other materials added to wgpu , and the amount of impurities .

most ac uses tiny samples , such as a few milligrams of plutonium dissolved in a small amount of acid , so it is low - mar and low - sc .

on the other hand , ac requires a substantial amount of laboratory floor space .

plutonium - 238 ( pu - 238 ) : pu - 238 is highly radioactive .

is main use is to power space probes .

it bears on pit production options because it occupies 9,600 sf in pf - 4 out of 60,000 sf , and accounts for 40% of pf - 4's mar allowance .

the basis for the following options is that pf - 4 is the only u.s. building able to produce pits , as it has high security , a high mar allowance , and pit production equipment .

increasing its capacity to 80 ppy would entail more production equipment and more mar .

thus higher capacity requires making mar and space available .

some space is currently available ; more might be as well .

three main tasks contribute to mar in pf - 4: pu - 238 work , pit fabrication , and recovery of plutonium from acid solution .

of these , only pu - 238 may plausibly be moved to another site .

there are two sources of demand for ac capacity .

cmr , most of which was built in 1952 , does most ac for pit production , but is scheduled to halt operations around 2019 ; its work would have to be moved elsewhere .

higher capacity also requires more ac , as the two increase in tandem .

pf - 4 is not suitable for most ac work .

thus increased pit production would also require finding one or more sites for ac .

this report shows that many options could address dod's requirement for 80 ppy , but it cannot determine which , if any , could meet this requirement because data do not exist on how much mar and space are needed for ac and pit fabrication for 80 ppy .

likewise , there are little to no data on cost .

however , this report raises questions that congress may wish to have answered in order to decide how to proceed .

questions include: is an 80-ppy capacity needed ? .

if so , how much space and mar in pf - 4 would fabrication of 80 ppy require ? .

could that amount of space be made available by repurposing pf - 4 space ? .

if not , what changes would be needed ? .

how could enough mar allowance be made available ? .

what would be the cost ? .

what are the pros , cons , and costs of pu - 238 options ? .

are modules needed , or are other options preferable ? .

the fy2014 national defense authorization act permits nnsa , once certain conditions have been met , to build two modules .

one module of 5,000 sf could take on most of the pu - 238 mar from pf - 4 and would free up about 5,000 sf in that building .

would the additional freed - up mar and space permit pf - 4 to fabricate 80 ppy ? .

if so , would there be a need for a second module ? .

what would be the cost of the first module ? .

would a second module cost less ? .

how much space and mar would ac for 80 ppy require ? .

what are the pros , cons , and costs of having srs or llnl perform some ac ? .

what would it cost to convert rluob to hc - 3 ? .

what would be the adverse consequences if rluob were operated as is with 1,000 g of wgpu ? .

