t he existence of a sizable population of "dreamers" in the united states has prompted questions about unauthorized aliens' eligibility for admission to public institutions of higher education , in - state tuition , and financial aid .

the term dreamer is widely used to describe aliens who were brought to the united states as children and raised here but lack legal immigration status .

as children , dreamers are entitled to public elementary and secondary education as a result of the supreme court's 1982 decision in plyler v. doe .

there , the court struck down a texas statute that prohibited the use of state funds to provide elementary and secondary education to children who were not "legally admitted" to the united states because the state distinguished between these children and other children without a "substantial" goal , in violation of the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment to the u.s. constitution .

the plyler court did not , however , purport to address unauthorized aliens' access to higher education , and several states subsequently adopted laws or practices barring their enrollment at public institutions of higher education .

congress has also restricted unauthorized aliens' eligibility for "public benefits," a term which has generally been construed to include in - state tuition and financial aid .

emphasizing dreamers' ties to the united states , including their attendance at public elementary and secondary schools , some would permit them to remain in the united states legally , or expand their access to higher education .

for example , in every congress from the 109 th to 113 th , members have introduced , either as separate bills or parts of other measures , versions of the development , relief , and education for alien minors ( dream ) act — from which dreamers take their name — that would create a pathway to citizenship for them , as well as remove certain restrictions on states' ability to grant in - state tuition to unauthorized aliens .

no such legislation has been enacted by congress to date .

however , several states have passed their own dream acts , which permit some dreamers to receive in - state tuition or , less commonly , state financial aid ( but cannot provide a pathway to citizenship because congress has exclusive power over naturalization ) .

the obama administration also began granting deferred action — a type of relief from removal — to qualifying dreamers in 2012 .

because aliens granted deferred action are generally viewed as "lawfully present" for purposes of federal immigration law , they could potentially be deemed eligible for certain educational benefits that are denied to aliens who are "unlawfully present. .

however , not all aliens commonly known as dreamers have been granted deferred action , and even those who have been granted deferred action are considered to be lawfully present only while they are in deferred action or other similar status .

others , however , emphasize dreamers' presence in the united states in violation of federal immigration law , and seek to ensure that public benefits are made available only to u.s. citizens , lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) , and nonimmigrants with legal status .

several states have , for example , adopted measures barring unauthorized aliens from attending public institutions of higher education .

certain states have also reiterated , or sought to expand upon , existing federal restrictions upon unauthorized aliens' receipt of public benefits in order to ensure that they do not receive in - state tuition or state financial aid .

this report surveys key legal issues pertaining to unauthorized alien students' access to higher education , in - state tuition , and financial aid .

state measures that would deny or provide access to public institutions of higher education , in - state tuition , and financial aid to unauthorized aliens have been challenged on various grounds .

while these grounds can vary depending upon the specific statute or practice in question , the grounds most commonly asserted appear to be violations of the equal protection and supremacy clauses of the u.s. constitution .

thus , these provisions are the focus of discussion in this report , and the following paragraphs provide an overview of the basic principles implicated in discussions of equal protection and preemption .

state measures that would deny unauthorized aliens access to public institutions of higher education and in - state tuition have been challenged by plaintiffs and commentators on the grounds that they violate the equal protection or supremacy clauses .

however , the limited case law to date suggests that restrictions on access to higher education do not , as a general matter , deprive unauthorized aliens of equal protection .

such restrictions have also not been seen as preempted by prwora as a general matter , although specific measures could potentially be found to be preempted , or otherwise impermissible , on other grounds .

restrictions on access to in - state tuition have also been seen as permissible .

in - state tuition has generally been considered a public benefit , and prwora and iirira restrict the circumstances in which states may provide public benefits to unauthorized aliens .

prwora has also been construed to restrict unauthorized aliens' access to federal and state financial aid .

state measures that would grant unauthorized aliens access to public institutions of higher education , in - state tuition , and financial aid would also appear to be generally permissible .

because access to public institutions of higher education has not been viewed as a public benefit for purposes of prwora , states may generally provide for unauthorized aliens' access without enacting legislation to this effect .

in - state tuition and financial aid , in contrast , have generally been viewed as public benefits .

this means that states must enact legislation that affirmatively provides for unauthorized aliens' eligibility for such benefits .

also , depending upon how iirira is interpreted , states may need to base unauthorized aliens' eligibility on factors other than their residence in the state ( eg , high school attendance and graduation in the state ) .

further developments in this area seem likely , particularly in terms of federal and state legislative proposals and enactments .

the enactment of laws permitting unauthorized aliens to receive in - state tuition was cited in 2014 as a "trend" in state immigration legislation .

the courts , in contrast , may be unlikely to reconsider existing precedents as to the right to higher education , or whether in - state tuition and financial aid constitute public benefits for purposes of prwora and iirira .

there could , however , potentially be developments in the state courts based on litigation asserting state taxpayer standing to challenge alleged violations of iirira , or challenging state measures' conformity with provisions of state law .

