the effects of the proposed keystone xl pipeline project on climate change may be analyzed , in part , by an assessment of the ghg emissions attributable to the project .

such an analysis could encompass a variety of activities and implications relative to the project , including the ghg emissions associated with the proposed pipeline's construction and operation .

a broader scope could include an analysis of the ghg emissions attributable to the production and use of the crude oils that would be transported through the pipeline .

any assessment would depend on many factors , most notably the availability and quality of ghg emissions data for the industry , the scope of industry activities included within the assessment , and the assumptions made about how to model these activities .

many secondary considerations — for which projections have even greater uncertainty — may also impact an assessment .

these include projections regarding global crude oil markets , refinery inputs and outputs , transport options , policy considerations , and the end - use consumption of petroleum products .

different values attached to these varying factors return different estimates for the ghg emissions attributable to the operation of the project , as well as the production and use of the crude oils transported through it .

perhaps not since the trans - alaska pipeline system debate during the nixon administration has international attention focused so heavily on the construction of a petroleum pipeline in the united states .

in the case of the keystone xl pipeline , however , the debate has extended well beyond the direct environmental impacts of the project ( eg , spills , habitat , and , in this instance , the ghg emissions attributable to the construction and operation of a pipeline ) .

for many , the impact of the proposed pipeline is tied explicitly to its effect on the rate of development of the canadian oil sands , as well as the precedent its approval or denial may set for u.s. energy policy .

assessing these various perspectives involves complex technical analysis , which is complicated by an inherent uncertainty in future market projections .

the feis analyzes the incremental life - cycle ghg emissions attributable to the production and use of the oil sands crudes to be transported through the proposed keystone xl pipeline , and estimates them to be up to 27.4 mmtco 2 e per year more than the crudes they are expected to replace in u.s. refineries ( i.e. , equivalent to the annual emissions from up to 5.7 million passenger vehicles or 7.8 coal - fired power plants ) .

the feis also analyzes a variety of future market projections for oil sands crudes , and finds the most likely scenario to be one of stable to rising global oil prices , diminishing transportation constraints , decreasing production costs , and continued demand for heavy crudes in u.s. gulf coast refineries .

under this scenario , the feis concludes that approval or denial of the proposed pipeline is unlikely to have a substantial impact on the rate of development in the canadian oil sands , as other transport options would fully accommodate all projected growth .

this market scenario makes the technical ghg assessment in the feis less relevant , as the life - cycle ghg emissions from the production and consumption of oil sands crudes would occur regardless of the transportation method used to bring the crudes to market .

while this view of market inevitability recognizes significant uncertainty , it concludes that no combination of reasonable market outcomes would be sufficient to cause delays or decreases in oil sands production .

the only question regarding climate change impacts , in this view , is whether the alternative transportation methods ( eg , rail , truck , tanker ) would contribute greater or lesser amounts of ghg emissions during operation .

some analysts disagree with the feis assessment and argue that there is nothing presumed or inevitable about the rate of expansion for the canadian oil sands .

this skepticism arises from the observation that oil sands projects face a challenging financial environment , with upfront production costs and price differentials comparatively higher than for other crudes , making new investment sensitive to changes in market fundamentals .

they stress that oil market projections and transportation options are rife with uncertainty , and that the proposed keystone xl pipeline could have a much more significant impact on expansion if a number of key variables differ from the state department's projections .

these variables include ( a ) lower global oil prices than projected ; ( b ) higher rail costs than projected ; ( c ) higher new project costs than expected ; ( d ) greater competition from shale oil and tight oil plays ; and ( e ) future carbon pricing or procurement policies in the united states or canada .

they note that several of these variables have already moved against the predictions in the feis , most notably a continued period of lower oil prices .

they contend that any decrease or delay in development could significantly impact the rate of growth in global ghg emissions by allowing more time for the development of energy - efficiency strategies , the promulgation of climate policies , and the deployment of lower - carbon energy technologies .

beyond the debate about the proposed keystone xl pipeline's impacts on oil sands production , some stakeholders have expressed a broader concern about whether the approval or denial of the project could set a precedent for u.s. energy policy .

they argue that while many of the decisions that may affect the development of the oil sands will ultimately be made by the market and the national and provincial governments of canada , the choice of whether or not to approve the permit for the project is an opportunity for the u.s. government to signal its future direction .

some stakeholders have pushed for a national energy policy that moves the united states away from a reliance on fossil fuels .

they see the decision to build the proposed pipeline as a 50-year - long commitment to a carbon - based economy and its resulting ghg emissions .

some observers contend that with meaningful action on climate policy slowed or stalled in congress , the courts , and , to some extent , the regulatory agencies ( i.e. , local , state , and federal environmental and land - use agencies ) , the sole remaining outlet to leverage a low - carbon energy policy is single - action initiatives on such items as infrastructure permits .

many have actively opposed the permit for the project , believing that it may set a precedent ; for if the pipeline is allowed to go forward , they contend , it may be the case that no future infrastructure project would be held accountable for its incremental contribution to cumulative ghg emissions .

others recognize that the project could affect u.s. energy policy by setting a precedent and sending a signal , but they reach a different conclusion .

many regard the project as one element of a revitalized energy production sector in north america , and urge that u.s. policy should support investment in such infrastructure for economic and national security reasons .

they endorse decisions and policies that help encourage u.s. "energy security," or at least shift u.s. supply to reliable allies and partners like canada rather than unreliable sources in the middle east and venezuela .

in this view , since canadian oil sands will be developed regardless of the transportation mode used , the public policy interest lies in supporting north american energy suppliers rather than those overseas .

members of congress remain divided on the merits of the project , as many have expressed support for the potential energy security and economic benefits , while others have reservations about its potential health and environmental impacts .

though congress , to date , has had no direct role in permitting the pipeline's construction , it has oversight stemming from federal environmental statutes that govern the review .

