an increase in the federal minimum wage has been one of several alternative policy proposals that have been offered to address poverty .

pending before the 113 th congress is legislation , s. 1737 ( senator harkin ) and h.r .

1010 ( representative miller ) , that would raise the federal minimum wage from its current law $7.25 to , in three steps , $10.10 per hour .

if these bills were enacted in 2014 , the minimum wage would rise to $10.10 per hour sometime in 2016 .

the minimum wage would be adjusted for inflation thereafter .

an expansion of the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) is an often - mentioned alternative to raising the minimum wage .

the eitc currently supplements the wages of low - wage workers , mostly low - wage parents with children .

low - wage workers with children may receive additional income supplements through the child tax credit , and might qualify for certain need - tested government benefits such as the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly known as food stamps ) .

if congress sought to pursue an increase in incomes for low - wage earners , there is a debate over whether increases in the minimum wage or expansions of government aid through the tax system or benefit programs are more effective in helping low - income families and addressing poverty .

the minimum wage affects workers regardless of their family status ; the federal tax system and government benefit programs take into account family circumstances in determining tax liabilities and benefits .

therefore , minimum wage and earnings supplement policies have differing impacts , depending on a worker's family type .

the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) , enacted in 1938 , is the federal legislation that establishes the general minimum wage that must be paid to all covered workers .

in general , the flsa mandates broad minimum wage coverage .

it also specifies certain categories of workers who are not covered by flsa wage standards , such as workers with disabilities or certain youth workers .

in 1938 , the flsa established a minimum wage of $0.25 per hour .

the minimum wage provisions of the flsa have been amended numerous times since then , typically for the purpose of expanding coverage or raising the wage rate .

since its establishment , the minimum wage rate has been raised 22 separate times .

the most recent change was enacted in 2007 with p.l .

110-28 , which increased the minimum wage from $5.15 per hour to its current rate of $7.25 per hour in three steps .

since the late 1960s , increases in the minimum wage have not kept up with increases in consumer prices .

that is , the purchasing power of income earned by a minimum wage worker has declined .

for example , the february 1968 minimum wage of $1.60 would be "worth" in 2013 dollars $10.69 .

the most recent data available indicate that there are approximately 3.6 million workers , or 4.7% of all hourly paid workers , whose wages are at or below the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour .

of these 3.6 million workers , approximately 1.6 million earn the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour and the other 2 million earn below the federal minimum wage .

as the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) notes , the large number of individuals earning less than the statutory minimum wage does not necessarily indicate violations of the flsa but may reflect exemptions or misreporting .

in addition to the flsa minimum wage , states may also choose to set labor standards that are different from federal statutes .

the flsa establishes that if states enact minimum wage , overtime , or child labor laws more protective of employees than those provided in the flsa , the state law applies .

in the case of minimum wages , this means that if an individual is covered by the flsa in a state with a higher state minimum wage , the individual is entitled to receive the higher state minimum wage .

on the other hand , some states have set minimum wages lower than the flsa minimum .

in those cases , an flsa - covered worker would receive the flsa minimum wage and not the lower state minimum wage .

as of january 1 , 2014 , 21 states and the district of columbia had minimum wage rates above the federal rate of $7.25 per hour .

these rates range from $7.40 per hour in michigan to $9.32 in washington state .

on that date , 20 states had a minimum wage equal to the federal rate of $7.25 per hour .

four states have minimum wage rates below the federal rate and five have no minimum wage requirement .

in the states with no minimum wage requirements or wages lower than the federal minimum wage , only individuals who are not covered by the flsa are subject to those lower rates .

a person working full - time ( 40 hours per week ) all year ( 52 weeks per year ) at the current federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour earns a gross $15,080 for the year .

this is before taxes and any government benefits the individual might be entitled to receive .

gross earnings depend on hours worked and the wage rate paid to that individual .

however , full - year , full - time work at the minimum wage produces a different standard of living depending on the family circumstances of the worker .

larger families typically "need" more income to cover just the necessities of life ( food , clothing , and housing ) , with a family's poverty status depending on both ( 1 ) its income ; and ( 2 ) number of people in the family .

the greater financial need of larger families is reflected in the official federal poverty guidelines .

table 1 shows the 2014 poverty guidelines ( the federal poverty level , or fpl ) for family sizes of one through six .

as shown in the table , a single ( 1 person ) full - year , full - time worker earning the current federal minimum wage has gross earnings ( $15,080 ) above the estimated 2014 poverty guidelines .

however , such a worker in a family of two or more people has gross earnings less than the 2014 poverty guidelines .

figure 1 shows how gross earnings from full - time , year - round work relate to poverty - level income .

these poverty ratios are shown for four different family types: a single , childless person ; a childless couple ; a single mother of two children ; and a married couple with one child .

it shows that gross earnings from full - time , year - round minimum wage work exceed poverty - level income only for the single , childless person .

for the three other family types , gross earnings from full - year , full - time minimum wage work fall short of poverty level income .

the economic well - being of a family — the amount of goods and services it is able to consume — depends not on gross earnings , but on net income .

net income amounts to those dollars available to a family after taxes have been paid and government benefits have been received .

for example , almost all earners pay social security taxes which reduce their take - home pay .

federal income taxes also might reduce take - home pay .

under a progressive tax system , like the federal income tax , required tax payments are based on the ability to pay: families at higher level of earnings are taxed at a higher rate .

however , more significant for low - income workers under the current federal tax system is whether allowed deductions , exemptions , and credits result in the family owing any federal income tax liability at all .

moreover , two key credits — the eitc and the child tax credit — are refundable .

refundable tax credits provide benefits to families even if they have no regular income tax liability .

these benefits are paid through refund checks in the next calendar year .

additionally , need - tested programs are , by definition , paid on the basis of financial need .

families with lower incomes are presumed to have more need than those with higher incomes .

thus , as incomes rise , need - tested benefits — like those from snap — decline .

the eitc and child tax credit are also need - tested .

above a certain income threshold , their benefits begin to phase - out ; that is , decline in value as incomes rise .

the net income of persons working at the minimum wage reflects the effect not only of minimum wage policy , but also of tax and benefit policies .

this section illustrates the effect of the federal minimum wage , federal taxes , and supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) benefits on the net income of families , and relates that net income to the official federal poverty guidelines by family type .

it does so by illustrating the net income produced by full - time , full - year work at the federal minimum wage for the four types of families discussed in this report's introduction: a single person , married couple , single parent with two children , and a married couple with a child .

depicted families' net incomes are calculated based on their earnings , any federal income tax liabilities , and snap benefits .

because both federal taxes and snap benefits received by actual families depend on their individual circumstances , assumptions are made to compute taxes and benefits .

minimum wage and federal tax - transfer policies affect different family types in different ways .

under current law , a single person without a child who earns the minimum wage and works full - time all year , has both gross earnings and net ( after - tax ) income above the poverty line in 2014 .

for families with children , the earnings of one worker at the minimum wage working full - time , year round is insufficient to lift his or her family above poverty .

however , the federal tax system and the snap program supplement earnings for these family types , raising net income above poverty .

of the family types illustrated in this report , only the minimum wage worker supporting a spouse and no children has net income below poverty if working full - year , full - time under current law in 2014 .

however , over time , the purchasing power of a set minimum wage ( currently $7.25 per hour ) declines .

with that decline in value , the net income of families earning the minimum wage also declines , even considering government benefits that partially offset the loss in purchasing power of minimum wage earnings .

an increase in the federal minimum wage is one option if congress wishes to attempt to increase the incomes of these workers .

it is also an option that might reduce reliance on federal taxes and benefit programs .

the above illustrations show that a rise in the minimum wage from current law to $10.10 per hour would boost the incomes of those working full - time , year round at the minimum wage , even after considering increased tax liabilities and reduced refundable tax credits and snap benefits .

the reduced refundable tax credits and snap benefits also mean that an increase in the minimum wage could reduce government support to these families — meaning that these families would have higher incomes , at lower government cost .

congress faces certain considerations in the debate over raising the minimum wage .

in particular are concerns about the effect of raising the minimum wage on employment , and whether a minimum wage policy would be targeted to those most in need .

a common alternative to raising the minimum wage to address poverty among the working poor is to increase earnings supplements , most commonly through the tax code with the eitc , but also through transfer programs such as snap .

federal policy has increasingly relied on increases in refundable tax credits and snap to assist the working poor , particularly those in families with children .

expansions of the earned income tax credit and reducing the income tax burden have garnered bi - partisan support during the period since the 1980s .

president reagan , upon signing the 1986 tax reform act , said the following: millions of the working poor will be dropped from the tax rolls altogether , and families will get a long - overdue break with lower rates and almost doubled personal exemption .

we're going to make it economical to raise children again .

president clinton made the following remarks as the 1993 tax bill , with its further expansion of the eitc , was being considered in congress: but the most important thing of all to reward work is that this will be the first time in the history of our country when we'll be able to say that if you work 40 hours a week and you have children in your home , you will be lifted out of poverty .

it is an elemental , powerful , and profound principle .

it is not liberal or conservative .

it should belong to no party .

it ought to become part of the american creed .

expansions of the eitc have been seen as both substitutes for raising the minimum wage , as well as a means to reduce welfare dependency by making work pay .

the increase in income from the eitc — and the addition of the refundable portion of the child tax credit — significantly reduces poverty among children and their families .

this is shown not only in the illustrations of this report , but also based on a congressional research service ( crs ) analysis of household and family income data .

in 2010 , three tax credits — the eitc , the child credit , and a temporary "make work pay" tax credit in effect in that year — reduced the child poverty rate by about 30% .

however , there are a number of considerations that could be raised: ( 1 ) the federal budget cost of earnings supplements , and their potential increases ; ( 2 ) potential work incentives and disincentives ; ( 3 ) the annual nature of eitc benefits compared to ongoing income support through wages ; and ( 4 ) potential effects on the wages and returns to work for those who do not receive earnings supplements .

since 1981 , the minimum wage has been raised through legislation enacted in 1990 , 1996 , and 2007 .

these increases have been insufficient to compensate for price increases , with the real value of the minimum wage declining over that period .

however , government earnings subsidies , particularly credits through the tax code that benefit mostly families with children , have been expanded over this period .

the expansion of earnings subsidies was an important component of the "welfare reforms" of the 1990s and is credited with part of the increase in single mothers' work that was a goal of those reforms .

however , this has come at a budget cost , and has not benefitted all groups , particularly those without children .

the pending minimum wage legislation raises issues of whether government should intervene to address poverty among low wage workers , and if so , the best means to address it .

in the past , minimum wages and earnings supplements have been viewed as alternative policies to address these issues .

both types of policies would raise incomes , but both types of policies also have potential drawbacks .

both types of policies also affect workers in different types of families differently .

the recent literature not only discusses a weighing of the pros - and cons - of each approach , but suggest that policymakers consider how minimum wage and earnings - supplement policies interact with one another .

this could also lead to a consideration of whether minimum wage and earnings supplements are alternative policies , or can be crafted as complementary policies , to address poverty .

lower - income workers may not only face explicit taxes , such as fica payroll taxes , but implicit taxes as well , if they are receiving need - tested assistance .

cumulative explicit and implicit taxes associated with work are commonly seen as potentially creating work disincentives .

moreover , receipt of assistance from multiple need - tested programs may exacerbate potential work disincentives , as a result of program interactions .

implicit marginal and average tax rates workers incur payroll taxes beginning with the first dollar earned .

the federal insurance contribution act ( fica ) imposes a mandatory contribution of 6.2% of earnings towards social security old age survivor and disability insurance ( oasdi ) trust fund , and an additional 1.45% health insurance ( hi ) contribution towards medicare trust fund .

together , these taxes amount to a 7.65% explicit tax on earnings .

in addition to explicit taxes , need - tested assistance programs may effectively impose an implicit tax on working individuals .

the structure of traditional need - tested assistance reflects a varying balance between social provision of a minimum level of income adequacy and reinforcing personal responsibility among society's members .

need - tested programs provide conditional assistance to households , families , and individuals , based on need and circumstance .

under traditionally structured need - tested assistance , households , families , or individuals with minimal income and resources may qualify for a maximum benefit , which in turn is reduced as earnings or other "countable income" increases .

the reduction of benefits associated with increased earnings or other "countable income," often referred to as the benefit reduction rate ( brr ) , is commonly seen as an "implicit" tax , as earnings ( or other countable income ) increases .

as such , a family's total income does not rise by $1 for each $1 in increased earnings , as a portion of other assistance they might have received is reduced at the program's brr .

for example , after income and certain expense disregards , snap benefits are reduced by 24 cents on every dollar earned , which can be viewed as an implicit 24% tax on earned income .

combined with fica payroll taxes , an individual worker receiving snap might face a combined 31.65% marginal tax on earnings .

the eitc is structured differently than traditional need - tested assistance , in that it provides an "earnings bonus" to specified workers over lower - earnings ranges , up to a specified earnings level and maximum credit amount , before it begins to phase - out at higher earnings levels .

 ( see figure a - 1 . ) .

over the lowest earnings ranges , in which the eitc is phasing in , it provides an earnings subsidy , amounting from 7.65% for certain adult childless workers , to 34% for families with one child , 40% for families with two children , and 45.0% for families with three or more children , until reaching a maximum credit amount ( "eitc plateau" ) .

over the credit's phase - in range , the credit represents what some refer to as a " negative income tax ," in the sense that those eligible for the credit receive money back from the government , either as a refund in excess of any regular federal income tax liability , or as a reduction in federal income taxes that would otherwise be owed .

figure a - 2 shows the structure of benefits , tax credits , and explicit taxes relative to earnings .

earnings are expressed in terms of multiples of full - time full - year work at the current $7.25 minimum wage , and range up to three - times ( 3.00 times ) that level ( the equivalent of $21.75 per hour ) .

the benefits shown include snap , and two refundable tax credits — the eitc and additional child tax credit ( actc ) .

the actc is the refundable portion of the portion of child tax credit ( ctc ) , which is also shown in the figure .

explicit taxes include fica payroll taxes , and any regular federal tax liability the depicted family might incur ( before credits ) .

several reference points along the horizontal ( hourly earnings equivalent ) axis are highlighted , with corresponding vertical markers on each income source / definition: full - time full - year work at the current federal minimum wage ( $7.25 / hour ) , shown at 1.00 ; full - time full - year work at $8.16 per hour ( about 1.13 times the current federal minimum wage ) , which marks the point at which the depicted worker would begin to incur a regular federal income tax liability ( before credits ) ; full - time full - year work at $8.57 per hour ( about 1.18 times the current federal minimum wage ) , which marks the point at which the depicted worker would begin to incur his or her eitc begin to phase - out ; full - time full - year work at $8.37 per hour ( about 1.29 times the current federal minimum wage ) , which marks the point at which the depicted worker would lose food assistance under snap , due his or her gross earnings reaching the program's gross income limit , set at 130% of the federal poverty level ; full - time full - year work at $12.66 per hour ( about 1.75 times the current federal minimum wage ) , which marks the point at which the depicted worker would begin to incur a positive net tax liability ( i.e. , combined fica taxes and regular federal tax liability begin to exceed combined eitc and ctc benefits ) ; and full - time full - year work at $18.51 per hour ( about 2.55 times the current federal minimum wage ) , which marks the point at which the depicted worker would no longer be eligible for the eitc .

figure a - 3 depicts annual net and gross income for a single parent with one child , as well as the federal poverty level ( right vertical axis ) , relative to full - time full - year work at the current $7.25 per hour minimum wage level .

besides the $7.25 per hour wage rate , marked at 1.00 on the figure , the $12.66 per hour wage rate , marked at about 175% of current minimum wage level , several wage rates between the aforementioned wage rates are highlighted figure a - 2 and figure a - 3 , above , provide a "behind the scenes view" that sets the stage for examining the effects of benefits and taxes on implicit tax rates , shown in figure a - 4 and figure a - 5 , below , which depict net "marginal" implicit tax rates , and net "average" implicit tax rates , respectively .

implicit marginal tax rates , shown in figure a - 4 , highlight the effects on net income resulting from a gain or loss in gross earnings over a specified range , or margin .

they provide some indication of the possible incentives or disincentives to work and earn more , or to work or earn less , at specific earnings levels .

for example , over broad ranges , sustained high implicit marginal tax rates may discourage individuals from working more hours , or working harder in hopes of securing a wage increase .

in contrast , over broad ranges , low or even negative marginal tax rates , may help to encourage work .

for example , at lower earnings ranges , the nominal eitc benefit increases with increased earnings , resulting in a net implicit marginal gain in net income that exceeds the marginal gain in gross earnings , which contribute to negative marginal implicit tax rates over a specified range .

at higher income ranges , the nominal eitc is reduced as gross earnings increase , resulting in net income increasing to a lesser extent than an increase in gross earnings over a specified range , and thereby contributing to positive implicit marginal tax rates on earnings .

it should be noted that marginal tax rates would differ from those shown if a different margin were used .

34 average implicit tax rates , shown in figure a - 5 , represent the gain in net income resulting from moving from a state of non - work ( i.e. , zero earnings ) to work , at a specified level of gross earnings ( expressed as multiples of full - time full - year work at the current law $7.25 per hour wage rate ) .

in this sense , average implicit tax rates have theoretical bearing on individuals' choices to work , or to not work , affecting labor market entry and exit .

in contrast , marginal implicit tax rates theoretically have bearing on individuals' choices relating to hours or weeks of work .

however , in that many ( if not most ) workers face work schedules with fixed hours , workers may have little flexibility vis - a - vis employers to adjust their hours , on margin , according to their preferences .

