on november 19 , 2015 , the food and drug administration ( fda ) approved aquabounty technologies' application to produce aquadvantage salmon , a genetically engineered ( ge ) atlantic salmon , for human consumption .

this is the first ge animal that has been approved for human consumption in the united states .

fda also has proposed voluntary guidelines for using labels that indicate whether food products are derived from ge salmon .

by a broad definition , "genetic modification" refers to changes in an organism's genetic makeup that do not occur in nature .

for millennia , farmers and scientists have modified the genetics of animals by selecting those individuals with desirable traits for further breeding .

with the advent of modern biotechnology ( eg , genetic engineering or bioengineering ) , it is now possible to take a gene ( or genes ) for a specific trait from an organism and transfer it to another organism of a different species .

for the purpose of fda's guidance to industry , fda defines genetically engineered ( ge ) animals as those animals modified by recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid ( dna ) , known as rdna , techniques , including the entire lineage of animals that contain the modification .

recombinant dna techniques expand the range of traits that may be transferred to another organism and increase the speed and efficiency by which desirable traits may be incorporated into organisms .

desirable traits may reduce production costs and sometimes make the organism or products made from it more desirable to consumers .

genetically engineered plant varieties , such as herbicide - resistant corn and soybeans , have already been widely adopted by u.s. farmers .

these techniques are now being used to develop genetically engineered organisms for the aquaculture industry .

approximately 50 species of fish have been subject to genetic modification and more than 400 fish / trait combinations have been developed .

fish and other marine organisms are being modified to reduce production costs of human food , to produce pharmaceuticals , to test water contamination , and for other uses .

fish are particularly attractive candidates for genetic engineering because they produce eggs in large quantities and their eggs are more easily manipulated because they are fertilized and develop externally .

aquaculture also supplies a rapidly expanding market of different seafood products .

countries with active research programs for genetically engineered fish include china , cuba , india , korea , the philippines , and thailand .

some have claimed that fda's approval of ge salmon has been long overdue and the delays have been caused by political interference .

they conclude that delays have hindered investment and development of the u.s. biotechnology sector .

they also question whether biotechnology industries in the united states will be able to compete with companies in other parts of the world .

moreover , they hypothesize that the availability of ge salmon at relatively low prices could benefit consumers who are seeking low - fat and affordable options .

development of ge fish has prompted some advocacy groups to raise a number of environmental concerns .

for example , if fish are accidently released into the environment , they may spread and be difficult to contain .

ge fish that escape to the wild could compete with wild fish and harm wild populations .

another concern is that ge fish may interbreed with wild fish and allow the modified genetic material to become assimilated into the wild fish population .

sterilization and bioconfinement have been proposed to isolate ge fish from wild fish populations .

food safety concerns also have been expressed by consumer groups who question whether genetically modified organisms could pose unique hazards to public health .

these groups also support mandatory labeling of ge products because they believe consumers have a right to make informed choices .

in addition , some in the fishing industry are concerned that greater efficiency in the aquaculture industry could harm salmon fisheries .

salmon farm production in the 1990s depressed salmon prices and affected fishing businesses and coastal communities that depend on wild fisheries .

in response to these concerns , legislation has been introduced during the last several congresses to restrict the use and require the labeling of ge organisms .

in the 114 th congress , two bills have been introduced ( h.r .

393 and s. 738 ) , which would require labeling of ge salmon .

in addition , two more general bills ( h.r .

913 and s. 511 ) would require labeling of ge food products , including ge salmon .

h.r .

1599 would preempt any state authority over ge labeling in favor of a voluntary national genetically engineered food certification program under the federal agricultural marketing act of 1946 .

the certification program would establish national standards for labeling both ge and non - ge foods .

two fy2016 appropriations bills for agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies ( s. 1800 and s. 2129 ) include provisions that would provide funds to implement labeling requirements for ge salmon .

h.r .

394 would prohibit most uses of ge fish , with some exceptions or if certain conditions are met .

applications for uses that would be prohibited under h.r .

394 would require an environmental assessment ( ea ) with a finding of no significant impact in accordance with the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c .

4321 ) or an environmental impact statement ( eis ) .

the eis also would be required to include analysis of the risk associated with the escape of ge fish .

in addition to labeling requirements , s. 738 would require an eis before approval of any application to produce ge salmon intended for human consumption .

a national research council study maintains that there is a low to moderate food safety risk from ge seafood .

since genetic engineering can introduce new protein into a food product , there are concerns that this technique could introduce a previously unknown allergen into the food supply or could introduce a known allergen into a "new" food .

on february 7 , 2012 , three nongovernmental organizations petitioned the fda's office of food additive safety ( ofas ) to review the aquabounty application under the ffdca food additive provisions .

the petitioners argued that the gene expression product ( gep ) of the genetic construct creating the aquadvantage salmon is a food additive under ffdca ( §201 ( s ) , 21 u.s.c .

§321 ) .

aquadvantage salmon exhibit an elevated level of insulin growth factor - 1 ( igf - 1 ) , which they asserted is a novel food additive and constitutes a "material fact" about the ge - salmon compared to its non - ge counterpart .

they requested that fda make a finding that neither the aquadvantage salmon nor the gep used to create it is "generally regarded as safe" ( gras ) .

in particular , the petition requested extensive pre - market testing , arguing that "[t]he agency's general classification of rdna constructs as new animal drugs ( nads ) does not displace or override the agency's regulations and guidelines , and nothing precludes the agency from also regulating ge salmon and its components as food additives. .

opponents of approval also questioned the validity of data supplied by aquabounty for risk assessment .

they contended that fda should have made aquabounty re - conduct its studies or that fda should either conduct the studies itself or ask an independent laboratory to undertake the studies .

if the aquadvantage salmon were shown to have materially different nutritional or health - related characteristics from a non - ge salmon , while still being deemed safe , fda could have required labeling of the ge salmon .

the potential harm that might be caused by ge organisms which escape from aquaculture facilities is of great concern to some scientists and environmental groups .

a national research council report stated that transgenic fish pose the "greatest science - based concerns associated with animal biotechnology , in large part due to the uncertainty inherent in identifying environmental problems early on and the difficulty of remediation once a problem has been identified. .

for aquadvantage salmon , concerns include interbreeding and competing with wild atlantic salmon and competition with fish both within and outside the range of atlantic salmon .

on november 19 , 2015 , in addition to approving aquabounty's application , fda also released draft guidance to industry for voluntary labeling of whether food has been derived from ge salmon .

the question of how to label the food derived from the aquadvantage salmon is separate from the decision about whether to approve an nada .

although fda is not required to address labeling issues prior to marketing of the food , fda has considered these two issues simultaneously .

fda has determined that the aquabounty salmon is as safe for human consumption as non - ge salmon — in other words , that the aquabounty salmon is "substantially equivalent" to non - ge salmon .

opponents of the aquabounty salmon , however , have argued that it should be labeled as a ge product on a presumed basis of consumers' right to know .

proponents of the aquabounty salmon argue that labeling a "substantially equivalent" food would imply that the ge fish is different in ways that could be seen as negative .

although voluntary labeling is permissible — as long as the label is not false or misleading — proponents of the aquabounty salmon believe such labeling could reduce retail demand for the fish .

fda has proposed guidance for voluntary labeling that indicates whether food has been derived from ge atlantic salmon .

the guidance will offer fda's thinking on the topic and will not establish specific labeling requirements .

industry will be able to use alternative approaches as long as these approaches follow applicable statutes and regulations .

for atlantic salmon that has not been genetically engineered , fda provides the following examples of voluntary statements that manufacturers may use: not genetically engineered ; not genetically modified through the use of modern technology ; or we do not use atlantic salmon produced using modern biotechnology .

fda also provided examples of voluntary statements that food manufacturers might use for food products derived from ge atlantic salmon: genetically engineered ; this salmon patty was made from atlantic salmon produced using modern biotechnology ; or this atlantic salmon was genetically engineered so it can reach market weight faster than its non - genetically engineered counterparts .

in addition , alaska requires ge fish to be labeled .

no federal law specifically addresses labeling ge fish and seafood .

the success of farm - raised atlantic salmon has made some who work in the commercial wild salmon fishing industry , particularly those in alaska , especially sensitive to potential impacts of ge salmon .

fishermen have concerns related to further increases in salmon aquaculture production and environmental harm to wild stocks .

the salmon fishing industry in alaska does not produce intensively farmed fish salmon in net pens and would not benefit from the use of ge salmon .

over the last three decades , the rapid growth of farmed salmon and trout production has been one of the primary drivers of world salmon prices .

in 2002 , prices paid to alaska fishermen were less than half of the average prices paid from 1980 to 2005 .

changes to salmon markets were actually much more complex during this period because the industry was transformed by a variety of factors in addition to the growth in the total supply of salmon .

salmon markets were also affected by the availability of different types of salmon products , the timing of production , and development of market standards .

some believe that the wide use of ge salmon would depress salmon prices .

potential interactions between ge salmon aquaculture , ongoing salmon aquaculture , and wild fisheries are difficult to fully assess .

part of the difficulty is related to the complex nature of interrelated drivers of aquaculture and wild salmon production .

for example , public acceptance can affect prices which in turn may affect salmon production .

major categories of drivers include the regulatory framework , production , markets , and the public ( figure 1 ) .

although some assume that approval of ge technology will be followed by a rapid increase in farmed salmon production , this outcome is unlikely .

at least initially , annual production at the aquabounty panama facility is limited to a capacity of approximately 100 metric tons compared to the total u.s. fresh and frozen salmon supply of approximately 700,000 metric tons in 2014 .

significant production increases would depend on approval of additional sites in salmon producing regions of the world .

the regulatory framework will determine which production methods would be used and where they are allowed .

if only land - based facilities are allowed , then greater aquaculture production would depend on whether the advantages of using ge salmon ( higher growth rate and feed conversion efficiency ) can outweigh the greater costs of land - based facilities .

currently , the economic viability of most land - based salmon grow - out facilities is questionable .

significant increases in land - based production also may be constrained by the number of available sites with sufficient water quality and volume .

therefore , the magnitude and timing of greater salmon production , if it were to occur , is very uncertain .

some in the commercial fishing industry have stated that it has successfully educated the public to discriminate among fish from different sources , such as wild and farmed salmon .

on the other hand , some believe that a publicized escape of ge fish could lead to less public acceptance of their wild product .

to differentiate wild and ge salmon , commercial alaskan fishermen also have requested the labeling of ge salmon .

some industry groups are concerned that such labeling might lead consumers to believe that wild fishery products also are genetically engineered and to perceive these products as unsafe for consumption .

it is uncertain whether consumers will accept ge fish , but it appears that a broad segment of the u.s. population is opposed to or at least skeptical of consuming the product .

ge salmon may taste the same and are expected , like other atlantic salmon aquaculture products , to be less expensive than wild - caught fish .

however , food safety perceptions , ethical concerns over the appropriate use of animals , and environmental concerns might affect public acceptance of ge fish as food .

ongoing campaigns by environmental and consumer groups have asked grocers , restaurants , and distributors to sign a pledge to not sell ge fish products .

reportedly , many major grocery retail chains have announced that they do not plan to sell the aquabounty fish when it becomes commercially available .

demand for fish products , especially high - quality products such as atlantic salmon , grew quickly during the past three decades and is expected to continue increasing .

in the past , aquaculture productivity gains and reductions in cost have been passed on to the consumer in the form of lower prices .

one study speculated that consumers would require a significant price discount to purchase the ge salmon product .

the required discount likely would vary by country and depend on consumer characteristics , such as income and age .

production increases could contribute to consumer benefits associated with lower prices and health benefits from consumption of salmon rather than less healthy protein sources .

if ge salmon can be sold for a relatively low price , it could stimulate salmon consumption in low - income households .

some researchers have questioned whether the potential benefits associated with the wide use of ge salmon also should be considered as part of the approval process .

members of the alaska congressional delegation have expressed their disappointment with fda's approval of aquabounty's application .

the delegation is now supporting ge salmon labeling to ensure that consumers are aware of the product's identity .

in the 114 th congress , two bills have been introduced ( h.r .

393 and s. 738 ) that would require labeling of ge salmon .

in addition , two bills ( h.r .

913 and s. 511 ) would require labeling of ge food products , including ge salmon .

h.r .

1599 , which was passed by the house , would preempt any state authority over ge labeling in favor of a voluntary national genetically engineered food certification program under the federal agricultural marketing act of 1946 .

the certification program would establish national standards for labeling both ge and non - ge foods .

two fy2016 appropriations bills for agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies ( s. 1800 and s. 2129 ) include provisions that would provide funds to implement labeling requirements for ge salmon .

another bill introduced in the 114 th congress , h.r .

394 , would make it unlawful ( 1 ) to ship , transport , offer for sale , sell , or purchase a covered fish [ge fish] , or a product containing a covered fish , in interstate or foreign commerce ; ( 2 ) to have custody , control , or possession of , with the intent to ship , transport , offer for sale , sell , or purchase a covered fish , or a product containing covered fish , in interstate commerce ; ( 3 ) to engage in net - pen aquaculture of covered fish ; ( 4 ) to release a covered fish into a natural environment ; or ( 5 ) to have custody , control , or possession of a covered fish with the intent to release it into a natural environment .

the definition of a covered fish under h.r .

394 would include any finfish modified or produced through the application of recombinant dna technologies .

h.r .

394 would include exceptions to these prohibitions for scientific research or for fish collected for the purpose of supporting the act .

applications for uses that would be prohibited under h.r .

394 would require an ea with a finding of no significant impact in accordance with nepa or an eis .

the eis would require an environmental risk analysis that assesses impacts of covered fish on wild and cultured fish stocks , best - or worst - case probabilities of confinement failure , costs to eradicate escaped covered fish , and economic damage of escaped covered fish .

h.r .

394 also would require completion of the report on environmental risks associated with ge seafood products , which was required under section 1007 of the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( 21 u.s.c .

§2106 ) .

in addition to labeling requirements , s. 738 would require an eis for any application related to the use of ge salmon intended for human consumption .

the eis would include requirements similar to those stipulated for the eis under h.r .

394 .

during the 113 th congress , concerns related to the approval process and implications of ge salmon approval were expressed by a number of members of congress .

on april 24 , 2013 , 20 members of the house and 12 members of the senate sent similar letters that requested fda commissioner margaret hamburg halt the approval process .

in particular , the letters stated that the fda process had not been adequate to ensure ge salmon is safe for the environment and consumers .

they also expressed concern with the precedent that this ruling could set for future applications for other genetically engineered fish , such as tilapia and trout .

in addition , members urged fda to develop labeling requirements to distinguish the product as genetically engineered .

in the 113 th congress , several bills related to the production and labeling of ge salmon were introduced .

s. 246 and h.r .

1667 included provisions that were similar to those in h.r .

394 ( 114 th congress ) .

h.r .

584 and s. 248 would have required labeling of products which contain genetically engineered fish .

h.r .

1699 and s. 809 would have required labeling of genetically engineered foods , including fish .

on may 22 , 2013 , s.amdt .

965 to s. 954 was proposed and would have permitted states to require a label indicating that the food contains a genetically engineered ingredient .

on may 23 , 2013 , the amendment was defeated by a vote of 27-71 .

some have asserted that the fda's approach to ge salmon evaluation has failed to consider the full scope of potential impacts or to fully assess the risk of unintended consequences .

they claim that neither the vmac nor the ea have fully considered the broader potential risks of aquadvantage salmon approval .

they argue that fda is not suited to undertake biological and ecological studies of this nature , and they question whether the regulatory system has kept pace with advances in ge technology .

they support development of a comprehensive eis to more fully assess the broader context of social , economic , and environmental implications of ge salmon .

fda evaluated ge salmon as an nad that is safe for human consumption .

regulation of transgenic animals as nads , however , suggests to some observers ( eg , the center for food safety , union of concerned scientists ) the inherent weakness of existing regulatory structures to respond adequately to the complexities that arise with animal biotechnology innovations .

an immediate issue is whether aquadvantage salmon should have been subject to a more rigorous assessment as a food additive by fda's office of food additive safety .

some might argue that the nad assessment covered issues related to food safety and found that ge salmon are essentially the same as non - ge salmon .

however , in addition to ensuring the safety of ge salmon , further assessment could have reassured consumers and retailers who are skeptical of genetic engineering technology .

more rigorous assessment also would set a precedent for future products that may warrant greater scrutiny .

some have expressed concerns that such a lengthy process signals that the united states might cede its leadership position in agricultural biotechnology .

the delays and uncertainties faced by the aquabounty application send the message that science - based regulatory oversight is subject to political intervention .

other countries that are likely to commercialize this technology may be less concerned with potential environmental effects .

aquabounty has reported that it has spent $50 million developing the technology and applying for approval .

some would question whether technology industries in the united states will continue to attract investors and compete with companies in other parts of the world if the u.s. approval process remains so long and uncertain .

aquadvantage salmon is likely to be the first of many transgenic candidates for commercial aquaculture production , and some question whether this case has established a proper or useful precedent for future assessment of this technology .

some scientists assert that the fda decision involves broader social costs and benefits of using genetic engineering , and they support wide - ranging interdisciplinary evaluation of ge salmon approval .

according to one group of researchers , assessment of long - term effects of ge salmon requires the interrelated study of production systems , markets , consumer acceptance , and regulatory framework .

generally , it appears that many would prefer a comprehensive analysis rather than a piecemeal approach as new culture methods and areas are proposed by successive applications .

questions remain as to whether the current process can afford adequate safeguards for the public and the environment while allowing for the timely approval and use of new genetic technologies .

