congress has been interested in the use of year - round schools for several decades .

in april 1972 , the house of representatives , general subcommittee on education of the committee on education and labor held a hearing on the "year - round school concept. .

since that time , various bills have been introduced to support the use of year - round schools .

this report provides background information about year - round schools , specifically what they are , how prevalent they are today , state policies on year - round schooling , what recent research says about year - round schooling , and the arguments for and against this approach .

in general , year - round schools are schools that reorganize a traditional school year without allowing for any extended breaks in instruction ( eg , 10 week summer vacation ) .

rather , the days usually included in summer break are redistributed to create regular breaks throughout the year .

this is sometimes referred to as operating on a "balanced calendar. .

according to the national association for year - round education ( nayre ) , schools primarily offer year - round education on a single track or multi - track .

schools using a single track approach to year - round education provide a balanced calendar for instruction in which summer vacation is shortened with additional vacation days added throughout the school year to create breaks from instruction , which are sometimes referred to as "intersessions. .

intersessions may be used by the school to provide remediation or enrichment activities for students .

schools using a single track approach to year - round education often structure their school calendar in one of three ways: 1 .

45-15 calendar: 45 days ( 9 weeks ) of instruction , followed by 15 days ( 3 weeks ) of vacation / intersession ; 2 .

60-20 calendar: 60 days ( 12 weeks ) of instruction , followed by 20 days ( 4 weeks ) of vacation / intercession ; or 3 .

45-10 calendar: 45 days ( 9 weeks ) of instruction , followed by 10 days ( 2 weeks ) of vacation / intersession .

multi - track year - round education is often used to assist schools that are dealing with capacity issues .

by establishing a multi - track system , a school district may be able to avoid having to build a new school or temporary structures ( eg , portable classrooms ) .

a multi - track system is implemented by dividing teachers and students into tracks or groups of similar sizes that each has its own schedule .

students and teachers in a given track follow the same schedule , are in school at the same time , and are on vacation at the same time .

common multi - track calendars include 4 tracks operating on a 45-15 calendar ( 45 days of instruction , 15 days of vacation / intersession ) , 60-20 calendar , or 90-30 calendar .

a 60-15 calendar is generally used in schools with 5 tracks .

for example , if a school that could accommodate 750 students had 1,000 students enrolled , it could divide the students into tracks or groups of 250 students ( i.e. , 4 tracks ) .

the school could then have three tracks at school at any given time and one track on vacation or intersession .

this could enable the school to meet student demand without necessitating expansion of the school facility .

while year - round schools have existed in some form since the early 1900s , there was substantial growth in the number of year - round schools from the mid - 1980s to 2000 .

in 1985 , there were 410 year - round public schools , serving about 350,000 students .

by 2000 , the number of year - round public schools had grown to 3,059 schools , serving almost 2.2 million students in 45 states .

the number of year - round public schools dropped to 2,936 public schools , serving 2.1 million students , by the 2006-2007 school year .

based on data available from the national center for education statistics ( nces ) for the 2011-2012 school year ( most recent data available ) , over the last several years there has again been growth in the number of public schools operating as year - round schools .

during the 2011-2012 school year , there were 3,700 public schools across the nation operating on a year - round calendar cycle .

this accounted for 4.1% of all public schools in the country .

the highest concentration of schools operating on a year - round calendar cycle was in the south ( 40.5% ) , followed by the west ( 24.3% ) with equal proportions of these schools in the northeast and midwest ( 16.2% in each region ) .

the majority of schools operating on a year - round calendar cycle are traditional public schools ( 3,300 schools ) compared with 400 charter schools operating on a year - round calendar cycle .

in terms of school level , over half ( 57% , 2,100 schools ) of all schools operating on a year - round calendar cycle are elementary schools , 900 are secondary schools , and 600 are combined elementary and secondary schools .

most schools operating on a year - round calendar schedule enroll 200 or more students .

in addition , 47% of all schools operating on a year - round calendar schedule had 75% or more of their students eligible for free or reduced - price lunch .

nearly 60% of schools operating on a year - round calendar schedule had at least 50% of their students eligible for free or reduced - price lunch .

in 2011 , most states required public schools to provide 180 days of instruction each school year .

the average number of instructional days per school year for schools with year - round calendar cycles was 189 days during the 2011-2012 school year .

this number varied by region of the country , type of school ( traditional or charter ) , school level , and enrollment .

the most recent data on state policies on year - round schools were compiled by the council of chief state school officers ( ccsso ) for the 2008 school year .

of the states for which information was available , 17 states had a policy on year - round schools .

in addition , 30 states reported that they had school districts in their states with year - round schools .

some states specified the number of districts within the state that had year - round schools operating .

of the states reporting a specific number of districts , most reported that five or fewer school districts had year - round schools .

however , in some states , the number of school districts with year - round schools constituted a majority of the school districts in the state ( eg , delaware ) .

as part of their survey responses , some states provided their definitions of year - round schools .

these definitions are varied as illustrated below .

arkansas: a year - round school must meet the state requirement for the minimum number of school days between july 1 and june 30 of each school year and have no vacation , including summer vacation , last more than six weeks .

oklahoma: a year - round school must offer at least 10 months of 4 weeks during which the school is in session and instruction is offered for not less than 180 days .

texas: a year - round school must operate during the "greater part" of 10 months and up to 12 calendar months of the year .

the research on the extent to which year - round schools affect student achievement has generally been found to be inconclusive and lacking in methodological rigor .

for example , in reviewing the literature on the effects of year - round schooling on student achievement , cooper et al .

concluded that "a truly credible study of modified calendar effects has yet to be conducted. .

wu and stone reached similar conclusions and noted that while "there is a general consensus that [year - round school] has no effect or a small positive effect on student performance , the methodology of many studies had left copious room for more rigorous verification. .

their own study of whether year - round schools in california had an effect upon the outcome and growth of schools' academic performance index ( api ) scores used more sophisticated statistical analyses than prior studies and found that year - round schools failed to affect either measure .

cooper et al .

in their meta - analysis of studies on year - round school found that the "cumulative results of past studies is so close to a chance outcome that the argument that poor designs have led to random findings remain plausible. .

they also note , however , that there is some evidence that suggests that year - round schools may improve academic achievement for economically disadvantaged students .

a second aspect of year - round education that researchers have sought to examine is whether year - round schools affect the cost of education .

based on a review of the literature conducted by the education commission of the states ( ecs ) , schools operating on multi - tracks experience reduced capital expenditures ( i.e. , facility costs ) , but do not tend to achieve savings with respect to operating expenditures ( eg , personnel costs , electricity ) .

however , the savings from capital expenditures outweigh any increases in operating expenditures .

it is less clear , however , whether schools operating on a single - track experience cost savings .

a more recent study of year - round schools in one setting , clark county , nv , generally supports the conclusions noted by ecs , finding significant cost savings as a result of the implementation of multitrack year - round schools .

the researchers concluded that savings were largest with respect to real estate and operations .

based on reviews of the literature conducted by cooper et al. , wu and stone , and ecs , as well as arguments put forth by proponents of year - round education , including nayre , and opponents of year - round education , including the coalition for the traditional school year and summer matters , this section provides an overview of some of the arguments made in favor of or against year - round education .

the use of year - round schools can prevent the loss of learning over the summer , which may be a particular problem for children with special educational needs ( eg , english learners ) and addresses the uneven effects of the summer break on students based on socioeconomic status .

using a modified school calendar creates opportunities to provide remediation and enrichment activities to students during the school year rather than waiting to provide these activities during summer school .

proponents of year - round education often argue that the use of a balanced calendar increases student achievement , but as previously discussed , the research in this area is inconclusive .

there may be cost savings realized when operating multitrack year - round schools , particularly with respect to capital expenditures .

the use of a balanced calendar could help to prevent staff burnout by providing more frequent breaks for staff .

in addition , teachers could choose to substitute teach during breaks to earn additional money while providing students with a teacher with greater knowledge of the curriculum than a substitute teacher that did not regularly work at the school .

the initial implementation of a year - round school program may be costly due to a variety of factors including preparing a facility to serve students for more months during a calendar year .

opponents of year - round education note that while year - round schools may not have a negative effect on education , the data on its positive effects are inconclusive .

instead of changing school calendars , they argue that the focus should be on issues such as effective teaching and parent involvement .

operating on a year - round schedule may require paying more staff ( eg , administrative staff and maintenance workers ) on 12-month contracts instead of 9-month contracts , thereby increasing operational costs .

in addition , staff may experience burnout , particularly principals who are managing buildings that are now occupied by students for the entire calendar year .

families may find it difficult to have their children on different schedules if year - round schooling is not offered districtwide or if their children end up on different tracks in a multitrack school .

there may be a lack of opportunities for older students to have summer jobs , and there may be complications related to student participation in extracurricular activities over breaks .

concerns are also raised about year - round schooling by organizations ( eg , amusement parks , campgrounds ) that could potentially be adversely affected economically by a change in the school calendar .

it may be difficult to conduct large maintenance projects and may require doing routine maintenance at night or on the weekends , which may incur overtime costs .

several disadvantages related specifically to multitrack year - round schools are cited , including possible difficulties in offering remediation if space is an issue , lack of convenience for teachers who may not have a regular classroom in which to keep their teaching materials , and disrupted communication and training among staff as a portion of the staff is always out of the school .

