this report explains the major provisions of the federal estate and gift transfer taxes for transfers by nonresident aliens in 2014 .

this discussion highlights the different tax rules for estates of nonresident aliens as compared to the estates of u.s. citizens and resident aliens .

in determining estate tax liability , the internal revenue code ( irc ) differentiates between the estates of u.s. citizens , resident aliens , and nonresident aliens .

the estates of resident aliens follow the same rules and regulations to determine estate tax liability as do estates of u.s. citizens .

however , the estates of nonresident aliens are taxed differently .

this report will focus on the estate tax rules for this particular group of taxpayers .

department of the treasury ( treasury ) regulations define a "nonresident alien" for the purposes of the estate and gift taxes .

however , other areas of the law , including income tax law , do not rely on the same definition or terminology for a "nonresident alien. .

this report will use the definition for u.s. citizens , resident aliens , and nonresident aliens found in the treasury regulations' estate tax provisions .

determining the final estate tax liability of a resident or nonresident alien ultimately relies upon the citizenship of the decedent and whether the united states has signed an estate tax treaty with that country .

these estate tax treaties alter some aspects of the u.s. federal estate tax rules discussed in this report .

even if a noncitizen - decedent is considered a u.s. resident under the irc , an estate tax treaty may classify the decedent as a nonresident alien for u.s. estate tax purposes .

this report will briefly discuss the implications of tax treaties on the treatment of estate and gift taxes for nonresident aliens , but will not address individual estate and gift tax requirements under each treaty .

in order to understand the key differences between estate and gift tax liability for u.s. citizens , resident aliens , and nonresident aliens , this report will first discuss the definition of "nonresident alien" under the treasury's estate and gift tax regulations .

next , the report will explain the estate tax requirements under the irc for nonresident aliens and the necessary steps to calculate estate tax liability .

because the federal estate and gift taxes for u.s. citizens , resident aliens , and nonresident aliens are unified and use the same rate structure , the report will address the gift tax for nonresident aliens and the procedures used to calculate this tax .

the report will conclude with a chart summarizing the differences regarding the tax treatment among estates of u.s. citizens , resident aliens , and nonresident aliens .

under the estate tax regulations , a "resident" decedent is a decedent who , at the time of his death , had his domicile in the united states .

a person acquires a domicile in a place by living there , for even a brief period of time , with no definite present intention of later leaving that place .

a person's residence will not qualify as a domicile unless the person has the requisite intent to remain in such residence indefinitely .

an intention to change domicile will not generate such a change unless accompanied by actual removal ; intent to leave is not sufficient .

a nonresident alien , for purposes of the estate tax , is an individual who , at the time of his death , had his domicile , as defined above , outside of the united states .

an individual who is present in the united states on a nonimmigrant visa can be considered a resident for estate and gift tax purposes if the individual wants to permanently remain in the united states even though the visa does not allow permanent residence .

because the determination of a person's "domicile" relies upon the intent of an individual , a bright - line test to determine if an individual is a resident for federal estate and gift tax purposes is not available .

therefore , the courts consider the following factors in making such a determination: visas , work permits , location of business and property interests , family immigration history , residential property , individual testimony , motivation , duration of stays in the united states , and community group affiliations .

the federal estate tax is a tax on the estate of a decedent , levied against and paid by the estate .

the determination of federal estate tax liability involves a series of adjustments and modifications of a tax base known as the "gross estate. .

certain allowable deductions reduce the gross estate to the "taxable estate. .

then , the total of all lifetime taxable gifts made by the decedent is added to the taxable estate before tax rates are applied .

the result is the decedent's estate tax which , after the reduction for certain allowable credits , is the amount of tax paid by the estate .

the federal gift tax is a tax imposed on an annual basis on all gratuitous transfers of property made during life .

the tax seeks to account for transfers of property that would otherwise reduce the estate and accordingly estate tax liability at death .

the donor's tax liability on the gift depends upon the value of the "taxable gift. .

the taxable gift is determined by reducing the gross value of the gift by the available deductions and exclusions .

the gift tax liability created on the basis of the donor's taxable gifts may be reduced by the available unified transfer tax credit .

nonresident aliens are subject to the federal gift tax only on gifts of their interest in u.s. real estate and tangible personal property situated in the united states .

generally , gifts of intangible property , regardless of the location of the property , made by a nonresident alien are not subject to the federal gift tax .

citizen , resident alien , and nonresident alien donors calculate gift tax liability by first determining the amount of the taxable gift .

the amount of the taxable gift is the fair market value of the gift at the time it was made , less certain exclusions and deductions .

the major deductions and exclusions available for nonresident alien donors are the annual exclusion , the gift tax marital deduction , and the gift tax charitable deduction .

like citizens and residents , a nonresident alien donor may claim an annual exclusion for transfers of a present interest in property .

for transfers in 2014 , the annual exclusion amount is $14,000 .

therefore , in 2014 , transfers by a nonresident donee within the united states that do not exceed $14,000 per donee would be excluded from the federal gift tax .

to the same extent as u.s. citizen and resident alien donors , a nonresident alien donor may claim an unlimited marital deduction of transfers of property to his or her spouse , if such spouse is a u.s. citizen .

if the spouse is not a u.s. citizen , gifts to the spouse are not deductible but are eligible for a spousal "annual exclusion" indexed for inflation ( $145,000 in 2014 ) .

the tax benefit that allows married couples to double the annual exclusion amount through "gift - splitting," an arrangement in which one spouse consents to be treated as having made one - half of the gifts made by his or her spouse in that taxable year , is not available to nonresident alien donors or citizen donors with noncitizen spouses .

like citizen donors , nonresident aliens may deduct gifts of charitable contributions .

the deduction is available for gifts to a u.s. government entity for exclusively public purposes ; a u.s. corporation organized exclusively for religious , charitable , scientific , literary , or educational purposes ; or a charitable trust that uses the gift for its charitable purposes within the united states , certain u.s. fraternal societies , and u.s. war veterans' organizations .

a nonresident alien donor follows the same guidelines for determining gift tax liability as citizen / resident alien donors .

the tax liability of a taxable gift is measured initially by the value of the transferred property .

the tax is then applied cumulatively to taxable gifts made over the donor's lifetime .

the actual computation of the gift tax for each calendar year is completed in three steps .

first , the donor's taxable gifts for the calendar year and any preceding calendar years are totaled and the tentative tax determined .

second , the tentative tax is again calculated using the total taxable gifts for the preceding calendar years .

third , the result from step two is subtracted from the result of step one , and the donor's unused unified tax credit is applied to the remaining amount .

