this report tracks and provides an overview of actions taken by the administration and congress to provide fy2015 appropriations for commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) accounts .

it also provides an overview of enacted fy2014 appropriations for agencies and bureaus funded as a part of the annual appropriation for cjs .

the amounts in this report reflect only new appropriations .

therefore , the amounts do not include any rescissions of unobligated or de - obligated balances that may be counted as offsets to newly enacted appropriations , nor do they include any scorekeeping adjustments , such as the balance on the crime victims fund .

the fy2014-enacted amounts were taken from the joint explanatory statement to accompany p.l .

113-76 , printed in the january 15 , 2014 , congressional record ( pp .

h507-h532 ) .

the fy2015 requested amounts were taken from the report to accompany h.r .

4660 ( h.rept .

113-448 ) .

the fy2015 house - passed amounts were taken from the text of h.r .

4660 and h.rept .

113-448 .

the amounts reported by the senate committee on appropriations were taken from the report to accompany s. 2473 ( s.rept .

113-181 ) .

the fy2015-enacted amounts were taken from the joint explanatory statement to accompany p.l .

113-235 , printed in the december 11 , 2014 , congressional record .

the annual cjs appropriations act provides funding for the departments of commerce and justice , the science agencies , and several related agencies .

appropriations for the department of commerce include funding for agencies such as census bureau ; the u.s. patent and trademark office ; the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ; and the national institute of standards and technology .

appropriations for the department of justice provide funding for agencies such as the federal bureau of investigation ; the bureau of prisons ; the u.s .

marshals ; the drug enforcement administration ; the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives ; along with funding for a variety of grant programs for state , local , and tribal governments .

the vast majority of funding for the science agencies goes to the national aeronautics and space administration and the national science foundation .

the annual appropriation for the related agencies includes funding for agencies such as the legal services corporation and the equal employment opportunity commission .

the mission of the department of commerce is to promote "job creation , economic growth , sustainable development and improved standards of living ... by working in partnership with businesses , universities , communities and .. .

workers. .

the department has wide - ranging responsibilities including trade , economic development , technology , entrepreneurship and business development , monitoring the environment , and statistical research and analysis .

the department of commerce affects trade and economic development by working to open new markets for u.s. goods and services and promoting pro - growth business policies .

the department also invests in research in development to foster innovation .

the department of commerce , through the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , manages and monitors the nation's natural resources and assets to support both environmental and economic health .

the department , through the census bureau , conducts the constitutionally mandated decennial census .

finally , the department of commerce operates the national patent system .

the mission of the department of justice ( doj ) is to "enforce the law and defend the interests of the united states according to the law ; to ensure public safety against threats foreign and domestic ; to provide federal leadership in preventing and controlling crime ; to seek just punishment for those guilty of unlawful behavior ; and to ensure fair and impartial administration of justice for all americans. .

the doj provides legal advice and opinions , upon request , to the president and executive branch department heads .

the doj prosecutes individuals accused of violating federal laws and it represents the u.s. government in court .

the department enforces federal criminal and civil laws , including antitrust , civil rights , environmental , and tax laws .

the department , through agencies such as the federal bureau of investigation , the drug enforcement administration , and the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives , investigates organized and violent crime , illegal drugs , and gun and explosives violations .

the doj , through the u.s .

marshals service , protects the federal judiciary , apprehends fugitives , and detains individuals who are not granted pretrial release .

it incarcerates individuals convicted of violating federal laws .

the doj also provides grants and training to state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies .

the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) was created by the national aeronautics and space act of 1958 ( p.l .

85-568 ) to conduct civilian space and aeronautics activities .

it has four mission directorates .

the human exploration and operations mission directorate is responsible for human spaceflight activities , including the international space station and development efforts for future crewed spacecraft .

the science mission directorate manages robotic science missions , such as the hubble space telescope , the mars rover curiosity , and satellites for earth science research .

the space technology mission directorate develops new technologies for use in future space missions , such as advanced propulsion and laser communications .

the aeronautics research mission directorate conducts research and development on aircraft and aviation systems .

in addition to the mission directorates , the office of education manages formal and informal education programs for school children , college and university students , and the general public .

the national science foundation ( nsf ) supports basic research and education in the non - medical sciences and engineering .

congress established the foundation as an independent federal agency in 1950 and directed it to "promote the progress of science ; to advance the national health , prosperity , and welfare ; to secure the national defense ; and for other purposes. .

the nsf is a primary source of federal support for u.s. university research .

it is also responsible for significant shares of the federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education program portfolio and federal stem student aid and support .

figure 1 shows the total appropriation , in both nominal and inflation - adjusted dollars , for the cjs act for fy2005-fy2014 .

the data show that nominal appropriations for cjs increased starting with fy2005 , peaked in fy2010 , and have generally declined since .

after adjusting for inflation , fy2013 and fy2014 appropriations for cjs were generally at the same level they were at in fy2005 .

the data also show that the nominal increases in appropriations for cjs between fy2005 and fy2008 were generally in - line with inflation .

figure 2 shows total appropriations for cjs for fy2005-fy2014 by major component ( i.e. , the departments of commerce and justice , the national aeronautics and space administration , and the national science foundation ) .

the data show that the increase in cjs appropriations in fy2009 , fy2010 , and fy2011 was the result of congress appropriating more funding for the department of commerce in support of the 2010 decennial census .

since fy2010 , total appropriations for cjs have been around $60 billion , with the exception of fy2013 when sequestration cut nearly $4 billion out of the total amount congress appropriated for cjs for fy2013 .

while decreased appropriations for the department of commerce mostly explain the overall decrease in cjs appropriations since fy2010 , there have also been cuts in funding for doj and nasa .

the doj's fy2014 appropriation is 1.9% below its fy2010 appropriation , and nasa's fy2014 appropriation is 5.8% below its fy2010 appropriation .

recent reductions to nasa's appropriation has brought it more in - line with what the agency received in fy2005 .

however , even with recent cuts to doj's appropriation , congress still appropriated $6.883 billion more for doj in fy2014 than it did in fy2005 .

appropriations for doj increased because congress appropriated a growing amount for federal law enforcement and counter - terrorism efforts ( eg , the federal bureau of investigation ) , and congress appropriated increasing amounts for the office of the federal detention trustee and the bureau of prisons to cover expenses associated with a rising number of federal detainees and prisoners .

for fy2015 , the administration requested a total of $62.397 billion for the agencies and bureaus funded as a part of the annual cjs bill .

the administration's request was 1.3% , or $774.4 million , more than the fy2014-enacted appropriation of $61.623 billion .

the administration's request included $8.746 billion for the department of commerce , $27.974 billion for the department of justice , $24.721 billion for the science agencies , and $956.1 million for the related agencies .

on january 17 , 2014 , president obama signed into law the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) .

the act provided a total of $61.623 billion for cjs , of which $8.181 billion was for the department of commerce , $27.737 billion was for the department of justice , $24.824 billion was for the science agencies , and $881.8 million was for the related agencies .

on may 15 , 2014 , the house committee on appropriations reported the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2015 ( h.r .

4660 ) .

the bill was passed by the house on may 30 , 2014 .

the bill would have provided $62.559 billion for cjs , an amount that would have been 1.5% greater than the fy2014 appropriation and 0.3% more than the administration's request .

the house - passed bill included $8.231 billion for the department of commerce , $28.162 billion for the department of justice , $25.296 billion for the science agencies , and $870.9 million for the related agencies .

on june 5 , 2014 , the senate committee on appropriations reported its version of the fy2015 cjs appropriations bill ( s. 2437 ) .

the bill reported by the senate committee on appropriations would have provided a total of $62.636 billion for cjs , an amount that would have been 1.6% more than the fy2014 appropriation , 0.4% more than the administration's request , and 0.1% more than the house - passed cjs appropriations bill .

the bill included $8.556 billion for the department of commerce , $27.997 billion for the department of justice , $25.161 billion for the science agencies , and $923.0 million for the related agencies .

on december 16 , 2014 , president obama signed into law the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) .

the act provides a total of $61.753 billion for the agencies and bureaus funded by the annual cjs appropriations act .

the fy2015 appropriation for cjs is 0.2% greater than the fy2014 appropriation , but it is 1.0% less than the administration's request , 1.3% less than the house - passed amount , and 1.4% less than the amount recommended by the senate committee on appropriations .

the act provides $8.467 billion for the department of commerce , $27.030 billion for the department of justice , $25.360 billion for the science agencies , and $895.9 million for the related agencies .

table 1 shows the fy2014-enacted appropriations , the administration's fy2015 request , the amounts recommended by the house and the senate committee on appropriations , and the fy2015-enacted appropriation for the departments of commerce and justice , the science agencies , and the related agencies .

table 14 shows enacted appropriations for these agencies , in detail , for fy2005 through fy2014 ( the fy2013 amounts shown in table 14 reflect sequestration ) .

some of the issues congress considered while debating the fy2015 funding levels for the departments and agencies funded as a part of the cjs appropriations bill are as follows .

the department of commerce ( commerce department ) originated in 1903 with the establishment of the department of commerce and labor .

the separate commerce department was established on march 4 , 1913 .

the department's responsibilities are numerous and quite varied ; its activities center on five basic missions: ( 1 ) promoting the development of u.s. business and increasing foreign trade ; ( 2 ) improving the nation's technological competitiveness ; ( 3 ) encouraging economic development ; ( 4 ) fostering environmental stewardship and assessment ; and ( 5 ) compiling , analyzing , and disseminating statistical information on the u.s. economy and population .

the following agencies within the commerce department carry out these missions: international trade administration ( ita ) seeks to develop the export potential of u.s. firms and improve the trade performance of u.s. industry ; bureau of industry and security ( bis ) enforces u.s. export laws consistent with national security , foreign policy , and short - supply objectives ; economic development administration ( eda ) provides grants for economic development projects in economically distressed communities and regions ; minority business development agency ( mbda ) seeks to promote private - and public - sector investment in minority businesses ; economics and statistics administration ( esa ) , excluding the census bureau , provides ( 1 ) information on the state of the economy through preparation , development , and interpretation of economic data and ( 2 ) analytical support to department officials in meeting their policy responsibilities ; census bureau , a component of esa , collects , compiles , and publishes a broad range of economic , demographic , and social data ; national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) advises the president on domestic and international communications policy , manages the federal government's use of the radio frequency spectrum , and performs research in telecommunications sciences ; united states patent and trademark office ( uspto ) examines and approves applications for patents for claimed inventions and registration of trademarks ; national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) assists industry in developing technology to improve product quality , modernize manufacturing processes , ensure product reliability , and facilitate rapid commercialization of products on the basis of new scientific discoveries ; and national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) provides scientific , technical , and management expertise to ( 1 ) promote safe and efficient marine and air navigation ; ( 2 ) assess the health of coastal and marine resources ; ( 3 ) monitor and predict the coastal , ocean , and global environments ( including weather forecasting ) ; and ( 4 ) protect and manage the nation's coastal resources .

established by an act of 1870 with the attorney general at its head , doj provides counsel for the government in federal cases and protects citizens through law enforcement .

it represents the federal government in all proceedings , civil and criminal , before the supreme court .

in legal matters , generally , the department provides legal advice and opinions , upon request , to the president and executive branch department heads .

the major functions of doj agencies and offices are described below .

united states attorneys prosecute criminal offenses against the united states ; represent the federal government in civil actions ; and initiate proceedings for the collection of fines , penalties , and forfeitures owed to the united states .

united states marshals service ( usms ) provides security for the federal judiciary , protects witnesses , executes warrants and court orders , manages seized assets , detains and transports unsentenced prisoners , and apprehends fugitives .

federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) investigates violations of federal criminal law ; helps protect the united states against terrorism and hostile intelligence efforts ; provides assistance to other federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies ; and shares jurisdiction with drug enforcement administration over federal drug violations .

drug enforcement administration ( dea ) investigates federal drug law violations ; coordinates its efforts with state , local , and other federal law enforcement agencies ; develops and maintains drug intelligence systems ; regulates legitimate controlled substances activities ; and conducts joint intelligence - gathering activities with foreign governments .

bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) enforces federal law related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives .

it was transferred from the department of the treasury to doj by the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) .

federal prison system ( bureau of prisons , bop ) provides for the custody and care of the federal prison population , the maintenance of prison - related facilities , and the boarding of sentenced federal prisoners incarcerated in state and local institutions .

office on violence against women ( ovw ) coordinates legislative and other initiatives relating to violence against women and administers grant programs to help prevent , detect , and stop violence against women , including domestic violence , sexual assault , and stalking .

office of justice programs ( ojp ) manages and coordinates the activities of the bureau of justice assistance , bureau of justice statistics , national institute of justice , office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , and the office of victims of crime .

community oriented policing services ( cops ) advances the practice of community policing by awarding grants to law enforcement agencies to hire and train community policing professionals , acquire and deploy crime - fighting technologies , and develop and test innovative policing strategies .

most crime control has traditionally been a state and local responsibility .

with the passage of the crime control act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-351 ) , however , the federal role in the administration of criminal justice has increased incrementally .

since 1984 , congress has approved five major omnibus crime control bills , designating new federal crimes , penalties , and additional law enforcement assistance programs for state and local governments .

the science agencies fund and otherwise support research and development ( r&d ) and related activities across a wide variety of federal missions , including national competitiveness , energy and the environment , and fundamental discovery .

the annual cjs appropriations act includes funding for seven related agencies with missions or responsibilities similar to those of the departments of commerce and justice or the science agencies .

the related agencies funded as a part of the annual cjs appropriations act are: the u.s. commission on civil rights ; the equal employment opportunity commission ; the international trade commission ; the legal services corporation ; the marine mammal commission ; the office of the u.s. trade representative ; and the state justice institute .

the related agencies received a total of $881.8 million under the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 .

for fy2015 , the administration requested a total of $956.1 million for the related agencies , which represented a proposed 8.4% increase in appropriations .

the house - passed bill would have provided a total of $870.9 million for the related agencies , a proposed decrease of 1.2% compared to the fy2014 appropriation and an amount that would be 8.9% less than the administration's request .

the senate committee - reported bill would have provided $923.0 million for the related agencies , which would have been 4.7% greater than the fy2014 appropriation and 6.0% greater than the house - passed amount , but 3.5% below the administration's request .

the fy2015 appropriations act provides $895.9 million for the related agencies , an amount that is 1.6% greater than the fy2014 appropriation , 6.3% below the administration's request , 2.9% greater than the house - passed amount , and 2.9% less than the amount recommended by the senate committee on appropriations .

established by the civil rights act of 1957 , the u.s. commission on civil rights ( the commission ) investigates allegations of citizens who may have been denied the right to vote based on color , race , religion , or national origin ; studies and gathers information on legal developments constituting a denial of the equal protection of the laws ; assesses the federal laws and policies in the area of civil rights ; and submits reports on its findings to the president and congress when the commission or the president deems it appropriate .

under the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , the commission received $9.0 million .

the administration requested $9.4 million for the commission , a proposed 4.4% increase compared to the fy2014-enacted appropriation .

h.r .

4660 included $9.0 million for the commission , an amount equal to the fy2014 appropriation and 4.3% less than the administration's request .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended $9.4 million for the commission , an amount that is equal to the administration's request .

for fy2015 , congress provides $9.2 million for the commission , an amount that is 2.2% greater than the fy2014 appropriation and the house - passed amount , but 2.1% less than the administration's request and the senate committee - reported amount .

the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) enforces several laws that ban employment discrimination based on race , color , national origin , sex , age , or disability .

in recent years , appropriators were particularly concerned about the agency's ability to reduce the pending inventory of charges due to rising caseloads and limited staff .

due to new hires of enforcement staff and developments in technology , the eeoc continues to reduce the pending inventory of cases .

the fy2015 cjs appropriations act provided $364.5 million for the equal employment opportunity commission , $0.5 million more than the fy2014 amount of $364.0 million .

of the funds provided in fy2015 , up to $30.0 million would be for payments to state and local entities with which the agency has work - sharing agreements to address workplace discrimination within their jurisdictions ( i.e. , fair employment practices agencies ( fepas ) and tribal employment rights organizations ( teros ) ) .

the amount recommended by the senate committee on appropriations for fy2015 was $365.0 million or $0.5 million more than the fy2015 amount .

the house - passed bill would have provided $364.0 million for the eeoc in fy2015 , $0.5 million less than the fy2015 amount .

the administration had recommended $365.5 for the eeoc in fy2015 .

although the pending inventory of private sector cases filed with the eeoc was reduced from 78,136 at the end of fy2011 to 70,312 at the end of fy2012 , the inventory increased slightly in fy2013 to 70,781 .

the increase in fy2013 reflects hiring freezes imposed by the fy2013 budget cycle .

the fy2015 request includes 60 additional investigators and 6 mediator hires , positions which help the agency improve staffing levels and subsequent workloads .

the eeoc federal sector hearings workload was 15,301 hearings in fy2013 and estimated to increase slightly to 15,500 in fy2014 .

the commission continues to implement technology initiatives to support the federal sector program , such as the ongoing development of the eeoc file exchange ( efx ) web - based portal system .

the commission also continues to expand the use of the hotdocs commercial document assembly software , which streamlines the writing phase of the hearings process .

the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) is an independent , quasi - judicial federal agency with broad investigative responsibilities on matters related to international trade .

the itc's activities include investigating the effects of dumped and subsidized imports on domestic industries ; conducting global safeguard investigations ; and adjudicating disputes involving imported goods that allegedly infringe u.s. intellectual property rights .

the itc also serves as a federal resource for trade data and other trade policy information .

it makes most of its information and analyses available to the public to promote understanding of competitiveness , international trade issues , and the role that international trade plays in the u.s. economy .

the itc has two strategic goals that guide its programmatic activities: ( 1 ) to produce sound , objective , and timely determinations in investigations ; and ( 2 ) to produce objective , high - quality , and responsive analysis and information on tariffs , trade , and competitiveness .

as a matter of policy , its budget request is submitted to congress by the president without revision .

the itc received $83.0 million for fy2014 .

the administration's request for the itc for fy2015 was $86.5 million , a proposed increase of 4.2% .

the house - passed bill would have provided $86.0 million for itc , 0.5% less than the administration's request and 3.6% more than the enacted amount for fy2014 .

the amount recommended by the senate committee on appropriations was $85.0 million , 1.7% less than the administration's request and 2.4% more than the fy2014 enacted amount .

the fy2015 cjs appropriations act provided $84.5 million for the itc , an amount 2.3% less than the administration's request and 1.8% above the fy2014 enacted amount .

the legal services corporation ( lsc ) is a private , nonprofit , federally funded corporation that provides grants to local offices that , in turn , provide legal assistance to low - income people in civil ( noncriminal ) cases .

the lsc has been controversial since its incorporation in the early 1970s and has been operating without authorizing legislation since 1980 .

there have been ongoing debates over the adequacy of funding for the agency and the extent to which certain types of activities are appropriate for federally funded legal aid attorneys to undertake .

in annual appropriations bills , congress traditionally has included legislative provisions restricting the activities of lsc - funded grantees , such as prohibiting any lobbying activities or prohibiting representation in certain types of cases .

the authorization of appropriations for the lsc expired at the end of fy1980 .

since then the lsc has operated under annual appropriations laws .

the lsc received $365.0 million for fy2014 .

the obama administration's budget request for the lsc for fy2015 was $430.0 million , a proposed increase of 17.8% .

the administration's fy2015 budget request included $395.0 million for basic field programs and required independent audits , $20.0 million for management and grants oversight , $4.8 million for client self - help and information technology , $4.4 million for the office of the inspector general , $1.0 million for loan repayment assistance , and $4.9 million for a pro bono innovation fund .

the obama administration also proposed that lsc restrictions on class action suits and attorneys' fees be eliminated .

the house - passed bill would have provided $350.0 million for the lsc for fy2015 .

this amount is 4.1% less than the fy2014-enacted amount and 18.6% less than the administration's fy2015 budget request .

the amount recommended by the senate committee on appropriations was $400.0 million .

this amount is 9.6% more than the fy2014-enacted amount and 7.0% less than the administration's fy2015 budget request .

pursuant to p.l .

113-235 , the lsc received $375 million for fy2015 .

this amount is 2.7% more than the fy2014-enacted amount , 7.1 % more than the house - passed amount , and 12.8% less than the administration's fy2015 budget request .

the fy2015 lsc appropriation included $343.2 million for basic field programs and required independent audits , $18.5 million for management and grants oversight , $4.0 million for client self - help and information technology , $4.4 million for the office of the inspector general , $1.0 million for loan repayment assistance , and $4.0 million for a pro bono innovation fund .

the marine mammal commission ( mmc ) is an independent agency of the executive branch , established under title ii of the marine mammal protection act ( mmpa ; p.l .

92-522 ) .

the mmc and its committee of scientific advisors on marine mammals provide oversight and recommend actions on domestic and international topics to advance policies and provisions of the marine mammal protection act .

as funding permits , the marine mammal commission supports research to further the purposes of the mmpa .

the fy2014-enacted appropriation for the mmc was $3.3 million .

the administration proposed a 5.6% increase for mmc for fy2015 .

the house recommended $3.3 million for the mmc for fy2015 .

the house's recommendation would have been the same as the fy2014 appropriation and 5.3% less than the administration's request .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended $3.4 million for the mmc , equal to the administration's request .

the fy2015 appropriation for the mmc is $3.3 million , which is 2.8% greater than the fy2014 appropriation and the house - passed amount , but 2.7% less than the administration's request and the senate committee - reported amount .

the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) , located in the executive office of the president , is responsible for developing and coordinating u.s. international trade and direct investment policies .

the ustr is the president's chief negotiator for international trade agreements , including commodity and direct investment negotiations .

ustr also conducts u.s. affairs related to the world trade organization .

the ustr is leading the negotiations for the united states for the ongoing talks for the proposed trans - pacific partnership agreement ( tpp ) and for the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) .

the ustr received $52.6 million for fy2014 .

the administration's request for ustr was $56.2 million , a proposed increase of 6.8% .

the house - passed bill would have provided $53.5 million for ustr , 4.8% less than the administration's request and 1.7% more than the fy2014 enacted amount .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended $55.0 million for the ustr for fy2015 , the same amount as the administration's request and 4.6% above the fy2014 enacted amount .

the fy2015 cjs appropriations act provided $54.3 million for the ustr , an amount 3.4% less than the administration's request and 3.1% more than the fy2014 enacted amount .

the state justice institute ( sji ) is a nonprofit corporation that makes grants to state courts and funds research , technical assistance , and informational projects aimed at improving the quality of judicial administration in state courts across the united states .

it is governed by an 11-member board of directors appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate .

under the terms of its enabling legislation , sji is authorized to present its budget request directly to congress , apart from the president's budget .

for fy2014 the sji received $4.9 million .

the administration requested $5.1 million for fy2015 , a proposed 4.5% increase in funding .

the house - passed and senate committee - reported bills would have provided a total of $5.1 million for sji , equal to the administration's request .

the fy2015 appropriation for sji is equal to the administration's request .

