the export - import bank of the united states ( ex - im bank or the bank ) , a wholly owned u.s. government corporation , is the official export credit agency ( eca ) of the united states .

its mission is to assist in the financing of u.s. exports of goods and services to support u.s. employment .

ex - im bank is among the federal government agencies involved in promoting u.s. exports of goods and services .

it operates under a general statutory charter , the export - import bank act of 1945 , as amended ( p.l .

79-173 ; 12 u.s.c .

ยง635 et seq. ) .

a fy2015 continuing resolution ( ยง147 of p.l .

113-164 ) includes a provision extending ex - im bank's authority through june 30 , 2015 .

ex - im bank previously was authorized through september 30 , 2014 ( p.l .

112-122 ) .

the 114 th congress may debate whether to renew ex - im bank's authority and , if so , for how long and under what terms ; and if not , the possibility of other policy options .

this report provides ( 1 ) a general background of ex - im bank ; ( 2 ) a discussion of the international context of the bank ; ( 3 ) analysis of key issues that congress may consider in a reauthorization debate ; and ( 4 ) the congressional outlook on ex - im bank .

other crs resources on ex - im bank include crs report r43671 , export - import bank reauthorization: frequently asked questions , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report if10017 , export - import bank ( ex - im bank ) reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report if00039 , export - import ( ex - im ) bank and the federal budget ( in focus ) ( pdf ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

on a demand - driven basis , ex - im bank seeks to provide financing ( 1 ) when the private sector is unwilling , or unable , to undertake alone such financing at commercially viable terms ; and / or ( 2 ) to meet foreign competition by countering government - backed financing offered by other countries to their companies .

the rationales behind ex - im bank's activities are subject to congressional debate .

as international trade has grown , trade finance has expanded .

some 80% - 90% of world trade relies on trade finance , and the global market for trade finance is estimated to be at around $10 trillion a year .

in addition to financing through government - backed ecas , the private sector also provides export financing , including through commercial backs , capital markets , lessors , and manufacturing self - financing .

while the private sector is the leading source of export finance , ecas are considered in the trade finance community to play an important role in certain niches .

most developed countries and many developing countries have ecas .

an estimated 60 ecas exist worldwide .

the relative attractiveness of seeking export financing through the private sector , ecas , or a combination of both can change depending on credit market conditions in the private sector , as well as how eca financing terms may change or respond to these market conditions .

the role of ecas may be more prominent , in part , due to tight credit market conditions associated with the 2008-2009 international financial crisis and the regulatory impact of basel iii on commercial banks .

private lenders and insurers conduct the majority of short - term export financing , though ecas may play an active role in supporting certain sectors , such as taking on risks of financing small business exports .

ecas also appear to be more heavily involved in longer - term export financing , including financing for complex , multi - billion dollar sales such as aircraft and infrastructure projects .

in such sectors , the private sector plays an active role , but in certain cases , eca support can help make transactions more commercially attractive by mitigating risks of financing or by providing another source of funding to diversify risks .

in recent years , discussion of whether to reauthorize ex - im bank , revise its exposure cap , and make policy and operational adjustments to it , among other issues , has dovetailed with debates about the agency's role in supporting u.s. exports and the appropriate size and scope of the u.s. government .

the changing export finance landscape , including the 2008-2009 international financial crisis and the growth of government - backed export financing being conducted by emerging markets , as well as increased questions about ex - im bank's financial soundness and risk management , have intensified congressional interest in ex - im bank .

many of these issues may be focal points in any ex - im bank reauthorization debate in the 114 th congress .

