task forces , and more broadly inter - agency cooperation , have become familiar law enforcement tools to combat innovative , aggressive , and far reaching criminal and homeland security adversaries in the last three decades .

one would be hard - pressed to identify a part of the united states with a greater proliferation of law enforcement task force activity targeting a vast array of threats and actors than the southwest border region .

federal enforcement and security priorities geared toward stemming drug trafficking and terrorism surface in unique ways along the border .

many federally led domestic efforts to coordinate counterdrug and counterterrorism policing exist in the 150-mile - wide belt north of the u.s. - mexican border that stretches from the gulf coast to the west coast .

assessing the effectiveness of task force operations can be crucial in congressional oversight of federal law enforcement , especially because the task force concept has become somewhat of a policing panacea to address most any difficult cross - jurisdictional foe .

it may be time to examine fundamental questions related to the use of such partnership structures .

these include the following: when and under what specific conditions should task forces be created ? .

when and under what specific conditions should task forces be disbanded ? .

how should the successes or failures of task forces be measured , and who should evaluate them ? .

notably , no one formally and publicly catalogs the creation or existence of task forces .

as such , there is no official roster , or task force census , of federally led task forces operating around the country or even in a particular region , nor is there an inventory of those task forces targeting specific threats .

this report provides a framework for examining domestic law enforcement coordination through analysis of counterdrug and counterterrorism policing efforts along the u.s. southwest border , and it discusses issues inherent in the above questions .

moreover , it outlines how this coordination is pivotal to 21 st century federal policing .

as stressed in the 2013 national southwest border counternarcotics strategy , federal agencies will continue to place particular emphasis on enhancing and expanding partnerships with each other and with state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies .

these partnerships will facilitate timely information and criminal intelligence sharing and decrease duplication of effort .

improved coordination through co - location and co - mingling of personnel and resources , formal planning meetings , data set sharing , and intelligence analyst conferences among the various agencies allows for a more synchronized effort .

indeed , federal , state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies all play critical roles in border security efforts .

establishing full and genuine partnerships , designed to maximize the resources and capabilities of each group , will enable the nation to more comprehensively address the threat posed by illicit activities along the southwest border .

while this report acknowledges that law enforcement coordination may be influenced by many mechanisms including task forces , fusion centers , memoranda of understanding , and interagency agreements , among other things , the bulk of the report focuses on the use of task forces and intelligence sharing entities such as fusion centers .

of note , the term "fusion center" lacks an exacting definition ( see task forces and fusion centers textbox , below ) .

the fusion centers described in this report ( see fusion centers and information sharing , below ) are part of a national network "owned and operated by state and local entities with support from federal partners. .

they are not federally led like the other task forces and intelligence sharing initiatives discussed in this report .

nonetheless , they are federally backed and important to national strategies and policing efforts .

while law enforcement coordination may be a central facet to operations throughout the country , this report highlights the issue through analysis of activities along the southwest border .

as such , examples of law enforcement coordination along the southwest border are sprinkled — in text boxes — throughout the body of the report in an effort to highlight some of the concepts discussed .

the task force activities highlighted by no means represent an exhaustive list of task force operations along the southwest border .

in recent decades , a number of realities have helped foster a need for increased coordination between federal law enforcement agencies and their state and local counterparts , particularly along the southwest border .

for one , borders or boundaries often enhance criminal operations .

criminals exploit borders to their advantage , profiting from the movement of black market goods across state and national boundaries .

criminals also harness advanced technologies and the cyber domain to globalize their operations — crossing a variety of borders .

thus , they expand their pool of potential victims and increase the speed with which they can carry out their operations over great distances .

in the same realm , jurisdictional lines tend to limit the efforts of law enforcement agencies to fight these same criminals .

moreover , for one set of actors , boundaries provide opportunities ; for the other , boundaries are impediments .

in addition , criminal networks have become less hierarchical and more networked in their structures and operations .

on top of all this , numerous federal agencies have come to play roles in addressing border security threats .

under such conditions , to keep pace with criminals , law enforcement has had to adopt more networked practices , combining resources and circumventing established hierarchical structures that may constrain individual policing entities in terms of jurisdiction , authority , and turf .

federal law enforcement has used task forces and intelligence sharing entities such as fusion centers as tools to surmount these modern realities .

task forces and fusion centers may be developed for a number of reasons , including overcoming jurisdictional limitations and leveraging expertise and resources — both money and manpower .

task forces , which mostly involve investigative operations , and intelligence - focused fusion centers have been viewed as serving complementary roles , particularly as 21 st century policing has evolved to become more intelligence - driven .

while law enforcement coordination may be essential to today's policing , the department of justice ( doj ) inspector general has noted that "coordinating among law enforcement agencies" has been among doj's top management challenges .

in conceptualizing the nature of law enforcement coordination , an essential portion of the puzzle is an understanding of the lifecycle of specific coordination efforts .

specifically , how does a task force or fusion center form and how does it dissolve ? .

while these issues are relevant throughout the country , they are particularly poignant along the southwest border where coordination is a key element of modern day policing .

one of the primary questions that administration officials and policy makers may ask about existing task forces and intelligence sharing centers — both along the southwest border as well as throughout the country — is whether they are effective .

evaluating effectiveness depends heavily on the specified goals and objectives of the effort as well as the metrics established to determine what constitutes a successful coordination effort .

once these are outlined ( if they are outlined ) , effectiveness may be evaluated through a variety of channels , including through internal , agency level reviews as well as via congressional oversight .

of course , effectively grading law enforcement coordination is a pervasive issue throughout the country .

this report , however , highlights the issue through an examination of metrics used to evaluate coordination efforts along the southwest border .

as outlined , there are a number of federal agencies and collaborative bodies involved in countering threats at the southwest border .

this complexity is compounded by the range of the crime and terror related objectives they address .

each of these agencies has different missions , authorities , and resources dedicated to the threats within and tangential to the southwest border region .

as such , establishing valid and reliable metrics for evaluating the cooperative efforts of these entities may prove challenging .

much as suggested elsewhere in this report ( see tallying task forces , countering illegal drugs and terrorism along the southwest border ; and dissolving coordinating units ) , at the federal level , no uniform metrics exist for either the evaluation of task forces or of the federal strategies that may employ them .

while we may lack universal metrics to estimate the success of federal law enforcement task forces , an array of policy - related questions provide perspectives from which measurements could emerge .

this report suggests an inverted pyramid - style framework that stacks policy questions in terms of their strategic perspective .

in other words , at the top of the framework lie the broadest of questions ( figure 2 ) involving the interplay between task force operations and national - level law enforcement strategies .

the questions in this framework include the following: how integral are federally led task forces in meeting the goals of federal strategies ? .

can the immediate results of task force work be directly linked to key elements in national strategies ? .

what kind of work and how much of it do task forces have to accomplish in order to meet strategic goals ? .

how do one agency's task forces stack up against another agency's in addressing a particular threat ? .

for example , how effective are task forces led by ice , the fbi , and atf in curbing drug - related crime in the southwest border region ? .

to what degree do one agency's task forces duplicate the efforts of others ? .

within a given federal agency , how successful are certain types of task forces when compared to others ? .

this can involve a number of permutations such as evaluating the success of a particular class of task forces .

an example of this could be comparing the effectiveness of fbi gang task forces in different cities .

another approach may involve comparing separate classes of task forces that touch upon a particular threat ( weighing the differing impact of the fbi's corruption task forces versus its gang task forces in countering drug trafficking in the southwest border region ) .

within specific task forces , how effective is the cooperation between officers from different agencies ? .

how is credit for particular investigative successes ( such as successful prosecutions ) apportioned among task force participants ? .

for law enforcement task forces and interagency intelligence sharing bodies , as with many other organizations , measuring success can be characterized as involving the assessment of inputs , outputs , and outcomes .

the concepts of input , output , and outcome can also form the basis — a common language — for evaluating task force effectiveness as well as a means to determine the broader success or failure of law enforcement strategies that involve task forces .

this language could be applied to metrics addressing cooperative law enforcement work at the task force , intraagency , interagency , and strategic levels .

inputs .

these are the resources that police agencies , task forces , or law enforcement strategies array against a particular issue or threat .

outputs .

policing outputs have been defined as the "concrete activities and services" produced by a law enforcement agency .

quantifiable items such as investigations , arrests , convictions , the number of intelligence products disseminated , and the number of kilograms of cocaine seized can be seen as measurable law enforcement outputs .

for decades , law enforcement agencies have collected output - driven data .

but such data , at best , represent only a partial measurement of success ; "[w]hen police departments cite the number of arrests they make or citations they issue , it is the equivalent of a carpenter boasting about how many board feet of lumber he cut , or how many nails he sank. .

outcomes .

in the policing realm , outcomes are conceptually fuzzier and more difficult — if not impossible — to quantify than outputs ; however , they may be arguably more meaningful , namely from a strategic perspective .

it can be said that key outcomes represent the broad impacts that police agencies , task forces , or policing strategies have on the communities in which they operate .

notions such as maintaining public safety , protecting national security , reducing criminal activity ( such as drug trafficking ) , and engendering public trust can be seen as outcomes .

as one might assume , both outputs and outcomes are influenced by inputs .

detailing the inputs , outputs , and outcomes of a particular task force can suggest levels of efficiency in the investigative process .

examples of such estimations of task force productivity include determining the amount of resources required to yield an arrest , or estimating whether the number of arrests has fluctuated as resource input has remained steady , for example .

from a broader strategic perspective , task forces , themselves , can be seen as inputs targeting a particular threat .

in other words , a federal agency and its state and local partners identify a local , regional , or national problem and agree to establish one or more task forces to counter it .

historically , police have more often measured ( and have been more successful at measuring ) output than outcome .

for example , federal agencies regularly document the volumes of drugs seized at the southwest border but are harder pressed to develop an outcome measure that relates these seizures to some larger sense of border security .

this is not to say that drug seizures are unrelated to border security .

likewise it is disingenuous to suggest that law enforcement output is not tied to outcome .

in fact , outputs certainly factor into measures of outcome , but drawing correlations between the two may be difficult .

to extend the image used above , a carpenter might describe the quality of the nailed - together wooden substructure of the walls in a house as a work - related outcome ; though , the number of board feet cut would certainly be an output factoring into the overall outcome .

 figure 3 selects the top and bottom levels of figure 2 for further elaboration in terms of inputs , outputs , and outcomes .

numerous strategies apply to federal policing efforts in the southwest border region .

the law enforcement dimensions of these strategies heavily rely on task forces and other forms of collaboration .

understanding how output and outcome factor into these strategies and task force operations may enhance one's evaluation of them .

such evaluation could start with two core questions: how should a broad strategy involving billions of dollars in federal funding be judged ? .

does this evaluation largely consider the work of participating agencies ( output ) or changes in criminal activity and threat ( outcome ) ? .

more narrowly , should the success of law enforcement coordination be judged in terms of task force work ( output ) , impact ( outcome ) , or some combination of these ? .

strategies .

in some instances , the measurement of success or failure at the strategic level suggests metrics that on the surface appear to evaluate outcome but may be mostly measures of output .

take , for example , the overarching strategic goal for the 2013 national southwest border counternarcotics strategy .

the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) outlined it as "[s]ubstantially reduc[ing] the flow of illicit drugs , drug proceeds , and associated instruments of violence across the southwest border. .

on its face , this may appear to be a measurement of outcome .

however , the strategy does not define what "substantially" means and does not baseline the flow of "drugs , drug proceeds , and associated instruments of violence. .

rather , it relies on indicators described throughout the document to measure success .

these appear to represent traditional law enforcement output measurements — counting drug , currency , and firearm seizures ; counting investigations or prosecutions .

it remains unclear how such outputs directly correlate to staunching the flow of illegal drugs across the border .

presumably , rising figures in all of these outputs indicates success .

the first "strategic objective" of the southwest border counternarcotics strategy , for instance , is to "[e]nhance criminal intelligence and information sharing capabilities and processes associated with the southwest border. .

again , this may appear to be a measurement of outcome , especially if the notion of enhancement built into it includes more than a simple computation of output .

it does not .

ondcp has outlined one broad "indicator" of enhanced information sharing in task forces as well as fusion centers: [i]ncreased number of criminal intelligence databases relevant to the southwest border or counternarcotics to which the following entities have access: el paso intelligence center ( epic ) , organized crime drug enforcement task force ( ocdetf ) fusion center , international organized crime and intelligence operations center ( ioc - 2 ) , southwest border hidtas , ice hsi's national bulk cash smuggling center ( bcsc ) , and state and major urban area fusion centers in the southwest border region .

increasing access does not necessarily result in enhanced information sharing and may leave a number of questions unanswered .

what is the quality of the information ? .

are investigators taking advantage of the enhanced information sharing ? .

how many new cases will be opened or how many existing cases will be improved because of the increased access ? .

how many seizures or arrests have resulted from the increased access to information ? .

how has such access improved law enforcement's overall understanding of the threat posed by drug traffickers ? .

task forces impacting strategies .

ideally , task forces somehow reflect the goals established in broad federal priorities or strategies .

at one level , it is readily apparent how task forces relate to specific strategies .

for example , a task force focusing on counternarcotics may appear inherently designed to support the southwest border counternarcotics strategy or the national drug control strategy .

at another level , what is less clear is exactly how effectively a task force supports a given strategy .

policy makers may consider , for instance , whether or not federal agencies involved in southwest border task forces and intelligence sharing centers should establish metrics for success that can evaluate not only output but outcome as well .

while some metrics can be clearly delineated as output or outcome , others may be more difficult to categorize .

why , might one ask , is it necessary to determine whether a given metric is truly a measure of output or an outcome , particularly at the task force level ? .

from a policy perspective , this may be an important distinction when aiming to evaluate the effectiveness of task forces in meeting the goals of specific strategies , particularly if the strategies themselves clearly establish outcomes and outputs .

for example , how do one agency's task force activities affect the overarching goals of the national drug control strategy — the nation's plan to reduce ( 1 ) illicit drug consumption in the united states and ( 2 ) the consequences of such use ? .

ondcp has detailed initiatives in five broad policy areas , including disrupting domestic drug trafficking and production , aimed at achieving these two goals .

moreover , ondcp has developed a performance reporting system ( prs ) , "a performance and assessment mechanism for gauging the effectiveness of this strategy . .

the prs is "designed to appraise the performance of the large and complex interagency federal effort set forth in the strategy , as required by ondcp's 2006 reauthorization act [p.l .

109-469]. .

of note , while the national drug control strategy and the prs apply to the entire united states , certain aspects are particularly relevant to the southwest border — namely those aspects that involve countering drug trafficking .

specifically , to assess progress towards the objective of disrupting domestic drug trafficking and production , the prs outlines three measures: ( 1 ) the number of disrupted or dismantled domestic criminal groups tied to consolidated priority organization targets ( cpots ) , ( 2 ) the number of disrupted or dismantled domestic criminal groups tied to regional priority organization targets ( rpots ) , and ( 3 ) the number of meth lab incidents .

these three measures may factor into a reduction in domestic drug trafficking and production ; however , it is not clearly articulated how changes in a specific measure , such as the number of cpot - linked organizations disrupted or dismantled , are indicative of changes in the drug trafficking and production threats .

there appears to be an assumption that improved / enhanced output at the law enforcement level ( i.e. , an increase in cpot - linked disruptions ) is indicative of a reduction in the threat .

this may or may not be true .

of note , ondcp has indicated that there may be "errors in the logic model linking program actions to desired results" and that these may contribute to what can be seen as performance shortcomings .

as ondcp continues to improve measures used in the prs , policy makers may question how these measures track to changes in the drug threat .

policy makers may also consider that , if an agency or task force gauges success by increases in its output , it may continue to request additional resources to enhance its input ( and subsequent output ) .

as such , congress may question not only whether certain inputs truly map on to the desired outcome , but also how to most efficiently allocate resources to those inputs that impact outcome .

there exist a number of routes that policy makers and administration officials may use in examining the strength and success of certain collaborative efforts , including those along the southwest border .

federal agencies continuously review their activities , both on an annual basis as well as through periodic internal investigations into specific programs and functions .

annual reviews , often coinciding with the budget cycle , may provide an outlet for repeated assessment .

doj , for instance , in formulating its annual budget request for the organized crime drug enforcement task forces ( ocdetf ) program , reviews the program goals , challenges , and performance indicators .

the ocdetf program aims to reduce the supply of drugs available in the united states and any drug trafficking - related violence .

however , these goals face challenges both internal and external to the ocdetf program .

internal challenges range from harmonizing agency - funded and ocdetf - funded resources as well as balancing resources between personnel and operational costs — and evaluating potential consequences of allocating a high proportion of resources to personnel needs — to uniting agencies with differing , and sometimes competing , priorities .

internal challenges also involve issues in uniting data collection procedures that may be inconsistent between participating agencies and measuring program successes which may be difficult to define and quantify .

in addition to its internal challenges , those struggles external to the ocdetf program , but which it nonetheless faces , involve consequences of agency - level diversion of resources , state and local law enforcement budgetary constraints , international law enforcement relationships and their impacts on the investigation of transnational crime , and criminals' reliance on technology to circumvent detection .

keeping these challenges in mind , doj has a series of performance indicators — generally output measurements — that are used to evaluate the progress of the ocdetf program .

it appears that doj also evaluates the utility of these indicators and will modify , add , or discontinue indicators that may be more or less informative .

these indicators cross the ocdetf activity areas of both investigations and prosecutions .

they include quantitative measures related to significant new investigations ; investigations of consolidated priority organization targets ( cpots ) and regional priority organization targets ( rpots ) — some of the "most prolific international drug trafficking and money laundering organizations affecting the united states ; " achievements in financial investigations , including the seizing and forfeiting of drug - related assets ; targeting defendants in leadership positions within their organizations ; developing multi - jurisdictional and international investigations ; enhancing nationally coordinated investigations ; and bolstering co - located strike forces .

formulating these performance measures helps not only in internal evaluations of the program , but in articulating successes and areas for potential improvement to members of congress .

however , these measures of output may fail to provide estimates of the broader outcomes of the ocdetf program .

namely , has it proven effective in stymying the flow of drugs into the united states ? .

in addition to internal , annual reviews , department - level offices of inspectors general ( oigs ) are responsible for inspecting and reporting on potential waste , fraud , abuse , and misconduct in department and agency programs and activities .

these activities may be initiated internally or through the direction of congress .

for instance , the doj oig , in 2007 , released a congressionally requested report on the coordination of investigations conducted by doj's various violent crime task forces .

the task forces examined were the violent crime impact teams ( vcit ) , mobile enforcement teams ( met ) , safe streets task forces ( sstf ) , and regional fugitive task forces ( rftf ) .

each of these task force types is led by a different investigative agency — atf , dea , fbi , and united states marshals service ( usms ) , respectively — though they all focus on elements of violent crime .

the oig indicated that despite sometimes overlapping missions of these task forces , doj did "not require the components to coordinate operations or investigations , cooperate in joint investigations , or deconflict law enforcement events conducted by their violent crime task forces. .

the one area in which doj had established national - level procedures to coordinate counter - violent crime activities was in the establishment of new anti - gang task forces .

in addition , there were uneven levels of coordination in different parts of the country as well as varying levels of coordination between doj component agencies .

because the doj oig has not conducted a follow - up assessment and doj has not published additional information on violent crime task force coordination , it is unclear whether overall coordination has since improved .

in 2011 , dhs implemented an annual assessment of fusion centers , the cornerstone of its fusion center performance program .

this involves a two - part annual process .

first , fusion centers complete a self - assessment .

second , this assessment is validated by a team of "interagency partners led by dhs. .

the 2011 and 2012 assessments evaluated the capabilities of individual fusion centers and the national network of fusion centers ( nnfc ) as a whole .

also , to understand the progress of the entire nnfc , dhs has established a maturity model or ladder that includes four rungs — "fundamental," "emerging," "enhanced," and "mature. .

for the nnfc to climb a rung 75% of fusion centers must meet criteria particular to the rung .

in 2011 , the nnfc was assessed as fundamental — meaning that more than 75% of fusion centers had the required plans , policies , or standard procedures in place to conduct their fundamental mission — engaging in the fusion process .

in 2012 , the nnfc moved up another rung , meaning that three quarters of fusion centers were implementing the plans , policies , or standard procedures that they had put in place to achieve the first rung on the ladder .

congress can rely upon a number of channels to evaluate law enforcement and intelligence center coordination .

from oversight hearings and committee reports to gao and other investigative directives , policy makers have a variety of review mechanisms at their fingertips .

aspects of the high intensity drug trafficking areas ( hidta ) program , for example , have been examined through the lens of each of these congressional tools .

the senate committee on appropriations requested that gao examine the hidtas' efforts to link investigations to international drug traffickers .

this stemmed , in part , from concern that if hidtas were encouraged by either the administration or congress to focus on investigating transnational consolidated priority organization target ( cpot ) organizations , this could detract from the hidtas' mission and emphasis on tackling regional drug threats .

gao concluded that "cpot investigations were not inconsistent with the hidta mission because hidtas' targeting of local drug traffickers linked with international organizations on the cpot list was one possible strategy for achieving the program's goal of eliminating or reducing significant sources of drug trafficking in their regions. .

gao has also examined other aspects of the hidta program via investigations of other law enforcement coordination issues .

for instance , in a broader examination of doj's mechanisms to clarify agents' roles in investigations , gao highlighted a number of cooperative efforts including hidtas , noting that these centers can provide "one - stop access to numerous federal , state , and local law enforcement databases , and also provides an event deconfliction service. .

elements of the hidta program , other task force models , and information sharing activities have also been scrutinized through congressional oversight and budget hearings .

for example , a may 2012 oversight hearing on "stopping the flow of illicit drugs in arizona by leveraging state , local , and federal information sharing" featured testimony and questions regarding the utility of various task force programs , whether their missions might overlap , and how to streamline information sharing .

while congressional oversight may be a useful tool for legislators to gather information about the workings of task forces , intelligence centers , and other forms of law enforcement coordination , policy makers may debate how to best use this information for purposes such as enhancing program performance and efficiency , reducing unnecessary duplication , and reviewing federal priorities .

oversight in the form of congressional committee reports may also factor in the evaluation of collaborative law enforcement and security efforts .

for example , two congressional reports have examined fusion centers .

in 2013 , the u.s. house committee on homeland security's majority staff released a report that , among other things , directly critiqued dhs's annual assessment process for the nnfc .

the house report stated thus far , fusion center metrics have primarily focused on measuring capacity and capability rather than "bang for the buck. .

due to the inherent difficulty in determining the success of prevention activities , stakeholders struggle with how to accurately , adequately , and tangibly measure the value of fusion centers to the national homeland security mission , and particularly the counterterrorism mission .

in 2012 , the majority and minority staff of the u.s. senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , permanent subcommittee on investigations , critiqued fusion center counterterrorism intelligence sharing efforts: despite reviewing 13 months' worth of reporting originating from fusion centers from april 1 , 2009 to april 30 , 2010 , the subcommittee investigation could identify no reporting which uncovered a terrorist threat , nor could it identify a contribution such fusion center reporting made to disrupt an active terrorist plot .

on occasion , congressional investigations focus on specific law enforcement or intelligence failures like 9 / 11 or u.s. army major nidal hasan's november 2009 assault at fort hood in texas that claimed 13 lives and wounded more than 30 others .

these investigations can also call into question concepts inherent in task force operations such as the sharing of information .

one challenge in evaluating a task force or collaborative program on the whole may be that a number of committees may have jurisdiction over certain issues or the activities of a given agency / program .

for instance , the house and senate homeland security committees as well as the judiciary committees might all have interests in ensuring that federal law enforcement is effectively working to combat criminal networks operating along the border .

however , the focus of oversight from the judiciary committees might well differ from that of the homeland security committees .

as such , no one angle will necessarily capture a full evaluation of law enforcement effectiveness in countering criminal networks .

budget hearings , similar to one aspect of oversight hearings , can examine collaboration in light of overall federal priorities .

in formulating recommendations for the fy2013 financial services and general government appropriations , the house committee on appropriations heard , among other things , testimony from the director of ondcp .

during questioning , the director described the activities of the regional hidtas .

some members questioned whether the activities of the hidtas were in line with the authorized and congressionally intended activities — namely focusing on drug trafficking .

