c ongress has generally broad authority to impose requirements upon the federal procurement process ( i.e. , the process whereby agencies acquire supplies and services from other entities for the agency's direct benefit or use ) .

one of the many ways in which congress has exercised this authority is by enacting measures that encourage agencies to contract and subcontract with "small businesses. .

for purposes of federal procurement law , the term small business generally denotes a business that ( 1 ) is independently owned and operated , ( 2 ) is not dominant in its field of operations , and ( 3 ) has fewer employees or annual receipts than the standard that the small business administration ( sba ) has established for the industry in which the business operates .

in exercising its authority over procurement , congress has declared a policy of ensuring that a "fair proportion" of federal contract and subcontract dollars is awarded to small businesses .

it has also required the executive branch to establish government - wide and agency - specific goals for the amount of contract and / or subcontract dollars awarded to small businesses that equal or exceed specified percentages of federal procurement spending ( eg , 3% to historically underutilized business zone ( hubzone ) small businesses ) .

congress has similarly required or authorized agencies to conduct set - asides , or competitions in which only small businesses may compete , as well as to make noncompetitive or "sole - source" awards to small businesses in circumstances when such awards could not be made to other businesses .

in addition , the sba and officers of the procuring agencies are tasked with reviewing and restructuring proposed procurements to maximize opportunities for small business participation .

crs report r42391 , legal authorities governing federal contracting and subcontracting with small businesses , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , discusses these and related measures in more detail .

congress periodically amends the statutes governing contracting and subcontracting with small businesses to better achieve its declared policy of ensuring that small businesses receive a "fair proportion" of federal procurement spending .

the 111 th and 112 th congresses , in particular , made numerous changes .

these congresses enacted legislation ( p.l .

111-240 , p.l .

112-239 ) that addresses , among other things , ( 1 ) the standards under which business size is determined ; ( 2 ) goals for contracting and subcontracting with small businesses ; ( 3 ) prime contractors' obligations in subcontracting with small businesses ; ( 4 ) sba guarantees of small businesses' performance and payment bonds ; ( 5 ) "bundling" and "consolidation" of agency requirements into contracts unsuitable for performance by small businesses ; ( 6 ) set - asides for women - owned small businesses ; and ( 7 ) mentor - protégé programs for small business contractors .

compared to the 111 th and 112 th congresses , the 113 th congress enacted relatively few measures addressing small business contracting , perhaps because the amendments made to the various laws governing small business contracting by its predecessors were still being implemented and assessed .

this report describes , by issue area , the various small business contracting bills in the 113 th congress and , particularly , the modifications to existing law that were made .

in doing so , the report also briefly surveys current law on particular issues pertaining to small business contracting and subcontracting , including significant amendments to current law made by the 111 th and 112 th congresses .

the latter information is included because , in many cases , the legislation enacted or proposed in the 113 th congress built upon changes made by its predecessors .

although the report cites numerous bills , it does not attempt to include all legislation related to small business contracting in the 113 th congress .

nor does it discuss all provisions of bills that are included .

rather , its focus is upon legislation that reflects distinctive approaches to issues in small business contracting ( eg , increasing goals , authorizing set - asides or sole - source awards ) .

the report will be updated as additional legislation is enacted or introduced .

government - wide and agency - specific goals for the percentage of contract and / or subcontract dollars awarded to small businesses have long been part of the federal procurement process .

congress amended section 15 ( g ) of the small business act in 1978 to require that agency heads , in consultation with the sba , set agency - specific goals for the percentage of federal contract and subcontract dollars awarded to small businesses each year .

ten years later , in 1988 , congress further amended section 15 ( g ) to require the president to set government - wide goals for the percentage of federal contract and / or subcontract dollars awarded annually to various categories of small businesses .

these government - wide goals must equal or exceed certain percentages specified in statute ( currently , 23% of federal contract dollars awarded to small businesses ( of any type ) ; 5% of federal contract and subcontract dollars awarded to women - owned small businesses ; 5% to small businesses owned and controlled by "socially and economically disadvantaged" individuals and groups ; 3% to hubzone small businesses ; and 3% to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ) .

individual contracts may be counted toward multiple goals .

for example , an award to a hubzone small business counts toward both that goal and the overall small business goal .

the 1978 and 1988 amendments granted the executive branch considerable discretion in determining how the "total value of all prime contract and subcontract awards" for a fiscal year was to be calculated , and in deciding what steps should be taken to meet the government - wide and agency - specific goals .

this discretion , coupled with persistent failures to meet the goals , prompted the 111 th and 112 th congresses to make multiple changes to what is commonly known as the "small business goaling program. .

initially , the 111 th congress required that senior procurement executives , senior program managers , and agency directors of small and disadvantaged business utilization ( osdbus ) communicate to their subordinates the "importance of achieving small business goals. .

subsequently , the 112 th congress reiterated this requirement , and made other amendments to sections 15 ( g ) and ( h ) of the small business act with the intent of improving performance as to these goals .

among other things , the 112 th congress directed the sba to review its "goaling guidelines" to ensure that certain types of spending are not excluded when goals are set .

it also imposed several requirements as to the establishment of agency - specific contracting goals , directed agencies to take specified steps to meet their goals , and increased reporting regarding goaling program performance .

in addition , the 112 th congress mandated an independent assessment of the goaling program and required that certain members of the senior executive service ( ses ) be trained on contracting requirements under the small business act .

the basic requirement that agencies incorporate clauses stating u.s. policy as to subcontracting with small businesses into their prime contracts , and "subcontracting plans" into larger prime contracts , originated with the 1978 amendments to section 8 ( d ) of the small business act .

as amended , section 8 ( d ) generally requires agencies to incorporate terms addressing subcontracting with small businesses in contracts performed within the united states whose value exceeds a minimum threshold ( currently , generally $150,000 ) .

these terms ( 1 ) articulate that it is the "policy of the united states" that small businesses have the "maximum practicable opportunity to participate" in the performance of federal contracts , and ( 2 ) obligate the prime contractor to carry out this policy "to the fullest extent consistent with the efficient performance of th[e] contract. .

in addition , "larger" contracts ( currently those whose value exceeds $700,000 ( $1.5 million for construction contracts ) ) that offer subcontracting possibilities must generally also incorporate so - called subcontracting plans with percentage goals for the amount of work to be subcontracted with various types of small businesses ( eg , hubzone small businesses ) ; descriptions of the efforts the contractor will take to ensure that small businesses have "an equitable opportunity to compete" for subcontracts ; assurances that the contractor will "flow down" these requirements to all subcontractors ( other than small businesses ) with "larger" subcontracts ( currently , those valued in excess of $700,000 ( $1.5 million for construction contracts ) ) ; and recitations of the types of records the contractor will maintain to demonstrate the procedures it has adopted to comply with its subcontracting plan .

recent congresses have , however , made a number of amendments to section 8 ( d ) , in part , because of concerns about agencies' performance in meeting the government - wide and agency - specific goals for contracting and subcontracting with small businesses .

initially , the 111 th congress amended section 8 ( d ) in an attempt to address "bait - and - switch" ( i.e. , prime contractors using subcontractors other than those whom they said in their bid or offer that they would use ) , and subcontractors' difficulties in obtaining payment from prime contractors .

among other things , the 111 th congress required that subcontracting plans include terms obligating prime contractors to make "good faith efforts" to obtain supplies and services from the small businesses they "used" in preparing their bids and proposals , and provide the contracting officer a written explanation if they do not .

it also required prime contractors to notify the contracting officer in writing if they pay a "reduced price" to a subcontractor for completed work , or if payment to a subcontractor for work for which the agency has paid the prime contractor is more than 90 days past due .

subsequently , the 112 th congress imposed additional requirements on the collection and reporting of data regarding prime contractors' performance of their subcontracting plans .

it also provided statutory authority for contracting officers to consider prime contractors' performance in subcontracting with small businesses when evaluating their "past performance" for source - selection purposes .

in addition , it established further protections for subcontractors by requiring that ( 1 ) offerors who intend to identify a particular small business as a potential subcontractor in their bid or proposal notify the small business prior to doing so , and ( 2 ) the sba establish a mechanism whereby subcontractors can report "fraudulent activity or bad faith" by contractors with respect to subcontracting plans .

the way in which agencies structure their contracting requirements can have significant implications for small businesses .

when multiple requirements are grouped into a single contract , that contract may be difficult , or impossible , for small businesses to perform .

for this reason , congress has enacted progressively more stringent limitations upon the "bundling" and "consolidation" of requirements by federal agencies .

first , in 1997 , congress amended the small business act to define bundling as , consolidat[ing] 2 or more procurement requirements for goods or services previously provided or performed under separate smaller contracts into a solicitation of offers for a single contract that is likely to be unsuitable for award to a small business concern due to — ( a ) the diversity , size , or specialized nature of the elements of performance specified ; ( b ) the aggregate dollar value of the anticipated award ; ( c ) the geographical dispersion of the contract performance sites ; or ( d ) any combination of the factors described in subparagraphs ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) .

it also required agencies to take certain steps to ensure that any bundling that they engage in is "necessary and justified. .

then , in 2003 , congress amended the armed services procurement act ( aspa ) to prohibit defense agencies from executing any acquisition strategy that includes a "consolidation" of contract requirements valued in excess of $5 million ( later adjusted for inflation to $6 million ) without first ( 1 ) conducting market research , ( 2 ) identifying any alternative contracting approaches that would involve a lesser degree of consolidation of contract requirements , and ( 3 ) determining that the consolidation is "necessary and justified. .

the 111 th congress subsequently imposed similar requirements upon other agencies' contracts valued in excess of $2 million .

it also required ( 1 ) the development of a government - wide policy regarding bundling , ( 2 ) listings of and justifications for bundled contracts , and ( 3 ) periodic reports on the performance of agency officials who are tasked with minimizing bundling and promoting contracting with small businesses .

most recently , the 112 th congress repealed the consolidation - related provisions of the aspa and generally subjected defense agencies to the same requirements as civilian agencies .

competition is generally valued in federal contracting because it can result in the government paying lower prices , ensure some degree of transparency and accountability , and help prevent fraud .

because of this , congress has generally required that agencies obtain "full and open competition through the use of competitive procedures" when awarding contracts , and defined full and open competition to mean that all responsible sources are permitted to submit bids or offers .

however , in keeping with its declared policy of ensuring that small businesses obtain a "fair proportion" of federal procurement dollars , congress has also enacted a number of statutes that require or authorize agencies to use other than full - and - open competition when contracting with small businesses .

in particular , various provisions of the small business act permit agencies to award contracts to small businesses on a set - aside or sole - source basis if certain requirements are met , as table 1 illustrates .

key among these requirements is that the contracting officer reasonably expects bids or offers will be received from at least two small businesses , and the award can be made at a fair market price .

this requirement is commonly known as the "rule of two" because of its focus upon receipt of bids or offers from at least two small businesses .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) has separate statutory authority , beyond that provided in the small business act , to make set - aside and sole - source awards to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses and other veteran - owned small businesses , as discussed below .

because legislation pertaining to the so - called "set - aside programs" for different types of small businesses ( eg , hubzone , women - owned ) has historically been enacted separately , each program is discussed below under its own heading .

however , there have been occasional measures that affect set - asides or sole - source awards for all types of small businesses .

these latter measures are grouped together under the heading "general. .

as previously noted , there are currently set - aside programs for hubzone small businesses , women - owned small businesses , service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses , certain small disadvantaged businesses , and small businesses not belonging to any of the foregoing types under the authority of the small business act .

the most recent of these programs were not created until 2003 , in the case of the program for service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses , and not implemented until 2011 , in the case of the program for women - owned small businesses .

however , some have called for the establishment of additional set - aside programs that would benefit certain small businesses and , potentially , others .

at least one measure introduced in the 113 th congress would , for example , have authorized a set - aside program for businesses "owned or controlled by historically disadvantaged individuals," a category which would be defined by reference to the department of commerce's minority business development agency's ( mbda's ) definition of socially or economically disadvantaged groups .

small businesses meeting specified criteria ( eg , owners' net worth no greater than $2 million ; principal place of business in the united states ) would have been eligible for set - asides through this program .

however , eligibility would not have been limited to small businesses , as it would have been under similar measures introduced in the 112 th congress .

other measures proposed , but not enacted , in the 113 th congress similarly called for particular types of small businesses to be given "preference" in the award of federal contracts .

one such measure would have created a new category of "emerging business enterprises," which agencies would have been authorized to give "preference" in the award of agency contracts .

another measure would generally have barred the use of funds appropriated under the act to award a contract "using procedures that do not give to small business concerns owned and controlled by veterans ... any preference available with respect to such contract. .

various provisions of federal law require government contractors — including small businesses — to post performance and payment bonds .

these and other types of bonds may also be required in conjunction with state , local , and private contracts .

however , small businesses have historically had difficulty posting such bonds because of their limited access to capital .

thus , congress amended section 411 of the small business investment act in 1970 to authorize the sba to guarantee certain bonds posted by small businesses that cannot obtain bonding on "reasonable terms and conditions" through regular commercial channels without the sba's guarantee .

initially , section 411 only permitted the sba to guarantee bonds for contracts valued at $500,000 or less .

however , congress has increased the maximum contract value over the years , including to $2 million in 2000 .

the recession of 2007-2009 prompted a further increase , to $5 million ( $10 million if the contracting officer certified that a larger guarantee is "necessary" ) , although this increase was a temporary one , lasting only from february 17 , 2009 , through september 30 , 2010 .

subsequently , though , the 112 th congress increased the maximum contract value to $6.5 million , and provided for the cap to be adjusted for inflation every five years pursuant to section 807 of the ronald w. reagan national defense authorization act for fy2005 .

legislation introduced in the 113 th congress would have built on these changes by increasing the maximum percentage of the surety's loss that the sba may pay in the event of a default by the contractor .

at that time , section 411 provided for a maximum guarantee of 70% , in the case of sureties authorized to issue bonds subject to the sba's guarantee ( 90% in the case of sureties requiring the sba's specific approval for the issuance of a bond ) .

however , bills introduced in the 113 th congress would have amended section 411 to permit the sba to pay up to 90% of losses paid by sureties authorized to issue bonds subject to the sba's guarantee , regardless of whether the sba had to specifically approve the issuance of the bond .

 ( such legislation was subsequently enacted in the 114 th congress. ) .

the term reverse auction generally connotes a bidding procedure wherein sellers compete to determine who is willing to offer their supplies or services at the lowest price .

federal law does not expressly authorize — or directly regulate — the use of reverse auctions by federal agencies .

however , the gao has found that the use of reverse auctions is permissible pursuant to far provisions that authorize the use of procurement practices and procedures that are not "prohibited by law. .

the use of reverse auctions by federal agencies has reportedly increased recently , prompting some concern that such auctions could be detrimental to small businesses , which are generally less able to compete on price than larger firms .

the 113 th congress responded to these concerns , at least as they pertain to department of defense ( dod ) contracts , by requiring that dod regulations be "clarified" to ensure that ( 1 ) any "single bid" contracts entered into as the result of a reverse auction are compliant with existing regulations and dod guidance regarding "single bid" contracts ; ( 2 ) all reverse auctions provide offerors with the ability to submit revised bids throughout the course of the auction ; ( 3 ) third parties conducting reverse auctions do not perform , or permit the performance , by private contractors of "inherently governmental functions," and make available to prospective vendors any "past performance" or "financial responsibility" information created by the third party ; and ( 4 ) reverse auctions resulting in certain "design - build military construction contracts" are prohibited .

non - defense agencies are not subject to these requirements .

other legislation introduced , but not enacted , in the 113 th congress also responded to these concerns , as well as related concerns that agencies may use reverse auctions in inappropriate circumstances ( eg , with supplies or services that cannot be evaluated strictly on price ) .

among other things , this legislation would have added a new section to the small business act prohibiting the use of "reverse auction methods" for certain contracts "suitable" for award to a small business , or that are to be awarded pursuant to those sections of the small business act that require or permit set - asides and sole - source awards to small businesses ( i.e. , sections 8 ( a ) , 8 ( m ) , 15 ( a ) , 15 ( j ) , 31 , and 36 ) .

one bill would have prohibited the use of reverse auctions only with contracts for design and construction services , which the bill would have defined to include site planning and landscaping design ; architectural and interior design ; engineering system design ; delivery and supply of construction materials ; and construction , alteration , or repair .

another bill would have prohibited the use of reverse auctions with any contract for "services , including design and construction services," as well as with contracts for supplies in which the offeror's technical qualifications constitute "part of the basis" for the award .

the latter bill would have also extended these limitations to the use of reverse auctions to contracts awarded to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses and other veteran - owned small businesses by the va under the authority of the veterans benefits act .

the former would not .

section 4105 of the federal acquisition reform act ( fara ) of 1996 generally requires agencies to use "two - phase selection procedures" when contracting for the design and construction of public buildings or works , provided certain conditions are met .

in the first phase , the agency solicits information about offerors' technical approaches and qualifications , without considering cost or price .

based on these submissions , the agency then selects the "most highly qualified" offerors from the first phase and invites them to submit proposals for a second phase of the competition that considers cost or price , among other things .

section 4105 further provides that the first - phase solicitation must state the maximum number of offerors who will be selected for consideration in the second phase , and that this number cannot exceed five unless the contracting agency determines , on a case - by - case basis , that a "specified number greater than 5 is in the federal government's interest and is consistent with the purposes and objectives of the two - phase selection process. .

however , concerns have been raised that agencies select more than five offerors in too many cases , thereby imposing the costs of competing on firms — particularly small businesses — that are progressively less likely to be selected as the number of competitors increases .

at least one measure introduced in the 113 th congress would have responded to these concerns by amending the codification of section 4105 ( i.e. , 41 u.s.c .

§3309 ) to require that ( 1 ) contracting officers document how selecting more than five firms is consistent with the purposes of the two - phase selection process , and ( 2 ) agency heads approve these justifications before a procurement contemplating more than five finalists proceeds .

currently , contracting officers must determine that selection of more than five firms is consistent with the purposes of the two - phase selection process , but they are not required by statute to document this determination in writing .

nor is the approval of the agency head presently required .

the proposed legislation would also have generally required the use of two - phase selection procedures in contracts whose value exceeds $750,000 , with the apparent intent of foreclosing the use of design - bid - build or certain other procedures with such contracts .

agencies would have also been required to provide public notice of all cases in which they select more than five finalists , or do not use two - phase selection procedures with contracts valued in excess of $750,000 .

while the amendments that would have been made by this legislation did not involve the small business act or expressly refer to small businesses , its drafters indicated , through the bill's title , that it was intended to benefit small businesses .

federal law currently distinguishes between ( 1 ) purchases whose value is below the micro - purchase threshold ( generally $3,500 ) ; ( 2 ) those whose value is above the micro - purchase threshold , but below the simplified acquisition threshold ( generally $150,000 ) ; and ( 3 ) other purchases .

in particular , section 15 ( j ) of the small business act and its implementing regulations have long provided that those acquisitions whose value falls between the micro - purchase threshold and the simplified acquisition threshold are "exclusively reserved" for small businesses .

however , there have been periodic reports of contracts whose value suggests that they should have been awarded to small businesses going to contractors that do not qualify as "small" under the criteria of the small business act .

the 111 th congress responded , in part , to these reports by requiring the omb , in consultation with the gsa , to issue guidelines regarding one of the most commonly used simplified acquisition methods: government - wide commercial purchase cards .

the omb issued this guidance on december 19 , 2011 , reminding agencies that those holding government - wide commercial purchase cards should consider small businesses "to the maximum extent practicable" when making micro - purchases .

notwithstanding the issuance of this guidance , legislation was introduced during the 113 th congress that would have increased the value of the "small purchases" that are reserved for small businesses .

among other things , this legislation would have generally required agencies "to the extent practicable" to award contracts whose value exceeds $3,000 , but is below $500,000 , to small businesses .

the legislation would have also granted contracting officers additional authority to award contracts whose value is within this range to small businesses on a sole - source basis .

specifically , it would have authorized agencies to make sole - source awards of contracts valued at between $150,000 and $500,000 to women - owned small businesses , or other small businesses that are not 8 ( a ) , hubzone , or service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses .

at the time of introduction , the small business act did not authorize sole - source awards to firms other than hubzone small businesses ; service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ; and small disadvantaged businesses participating in the 8 ( a ) program .

rather , it only authorized agencies to set aside contracts for such small businesses .

section 3 of the small business act currently prescribes criteria that entities must meet to qualify as "small businesses" for purposes of the act .

specifically , it requires that businesses be ( 1 ) independently owned and operated ; ( 2 ) not dominant in their fields of operation ; and ( 3 ) meet any "size standards" that the sba may establish based on the number of employees , dollar volume of business , net worth , net income , or "other appropriate factors. .

these basic criteria have not changed significantly since the act's enactment in 1958 , although the 112 th congress imposed certain requirements upon the sba's promulgation of regulations revising , modifying , or establishing size standards .

legislation introduced during the 113 th congress would have amended the definition of small business to exclude "publicly traded" firms , "foreign - owned" firms , and their subsidiaries .

these entities are not expressly disqualified from recognition as small businesses under the small business act at present , although existing restrictions on firm size and the citizenship of firm owners may effectively exclude at least some of them .

the proposed legislation would have also imposed related requirements to ensure that agencies and contractors were aware of these changes and of the penalties for misrepresentation of business size and status .

it also would have permitted interested parties to file complaints with the sba and the procuring agencies regarding firms' size or status , and require these complaints to be resolved in a "timely manner. .

entities found to have fraudulently misrepresented their size or status would have been debarred from government contracts for five years .

the existing laws and proposed legislation discussed thus far generally have government - wide applicability .

however , there are other measures that pertain only to an individual agency and , as a general matter , impose more stringent requirements upon that agency than apply to other agencies .

perhaps the most notable example is the veterans benefits , health care , and information technology act ( vbhcita ) of 2006 .

sections 502 and 503 of vbhcita have been construed as requiring ( with certain exceptions ) the va to set aside contracts for service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses and other veteran - owned small businesses whenever the "rule of two" is satisfied .

other agencies are also subject to similar agency - specific requirements as to small business contracting .

implemented under the authority of sections 502 and 503 of vbhcita , the va's "veterans first" contracting program gives small businesses owned by veterans ( and certain surviving spouses of veterans ) that meet eligibility requirements "preference" in the award of va contracts .

under section 502 , in particular , the veterans first program is subject to its own requirements as to ( 1 ) goals for contracting with veteran - owned small businesses ; ( 2 ) set - asides and sole - source awards to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses and other veteran - owned small businesses ; ( 3 ) priority in awards among different types of small businesses ; ( 4 ) eligibility criteria for firms and owners ; and ( 5 ) sanctions for misrepresentation of size or status .

many of these requirements were part of vbhcita , as originally enacted .

however , the 111 th congress substantially amended vbhcita's eligibility requirements by barring the inclusion of persons whose status had not been verified by the va in the va's database of eligible firms and owners .

the 112 th congress further amended vbhcita's penalty provisions by changing the type of actionable conduct from "misrepresentations" of status , to "willful and intentional misrepresentations" of status .

the 112 th congress also prescribed a five - year term of debarment from va contracts for such misrepresentations , instead of leaving the term of any debarment to the va's discretion .

debarment proceedings must also be commenced and completed within specified timeframes .

members of the 113 th congress proposed additional changes to the veterans first program , including moving responsibility for verifying the status of firms and owners from the va to the sba .

this legislation would have required the sba to ( 1 ) enter into an agreement with the va transferring "control and administration" of va's "veterans first" contracting program to the sba , subject to certain conditions ; ( 2 ) assume responsibility for the database that the va uses in verifying the eligibility of firms and owners ; and ( 3 ) hear appeals of denials of verifications .

the va , in turn , would also have been required to reimburse the sba for the functions that the sba performs .

several other measures introduced in the 113 th congress would have expanded the circumstances in which family members of veterans may participate in the veterans first program .

currently , only surviving spouses of veterans with service - connected disabilities rated as 100% disabling , or of veterans who die as the result of a service - connected disability , may participate in the program for a limited period of time .

however , under legislation proposed in the 113 th congress , surviving spouses of veterans who have service - connected disabilities rated at less than 100% disabling who do not die from a service - connected disability could have participated for a period of time .

surviving spouses or dependents of members of the armed services killed in the line of duty would also have been eligible to participate for a period of time .

other legislation would have modified the procedures for making awards under the veterans first program .

one measure would , for example , generally have required consideration of whether veteran - owned firms are local contractors — a term which would have been defined to mean contractors who have principal offices or "locations" within a 60-mile radius of a va facility — in the award of contracts for the construction or maintenance of va facilities .

the measure would have also restated the order of priority for the award of contracts under the veterans first program .

currently , this order is ( 1 ) service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses ; ( 2 ) veteran - owned small businesses ; ( 3 ) small disadvantaged businesses and hubzone small businesses awarded contracts under the authority of sections 8 ( a ) or 31 of the small business act ; and ( 4 ) small businesses awarded contracts under other authority ( eg , women - owned small businesses awarded contracts under the authority of section 8 ( m ) of the small business act ) .

however , the measure proposed in the 113 th congress would have changed this order of priority to give local small businesses a preference over other small businesses within the same category ( i.e. , local service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses would have priority other service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses , which would , in turn , have priority over local veteran - owned small businesses , etc. ) .

another measure would have required the application of "limitations on subcontracting" — or restrictions on the amount of work that prime contractors may subcontract to other entities , rather than perform themselves — to contracts awarded under the authority of vbhcita .

currently , these limitations are required by statute to apply only to contracts awarded under the authority of the small business act .

the small business act grants the sba's administrator the discretion to impose similar limitations on contracts awarded to small businesses under other authority , but the administrator does not appear to have done so to date .

other measures enacted or introduced in the 113 th congress similarly addressed contracting and subcontracting with small businesses by individual agencies .

among the notable measures enacted are ones permitting the doe to count first - tier subcontracts awarded by contractors managing and operating national laboratories toward the doe and government - wide goals for prime contracts ; extending the dod comprehensive subcontracting plan test program through the end of 2017 , and requiring participating contractors to report "on a semi - annual basis" the amount of first - tier subcontract dollars awarded to covered small businesses , among other things ; authorizing certain incumbent contractors who are other - than - small businesses to compete for contracts for the operation of job corps centers that are awarded via a set - aside for small businesses ; requiring dod to incorporate into larger value contracts terms which require the contractor to acknowledge that acceptance of the contract may cause the business to exceed the small business size standards for the applicable industry , thereby ceasing to qualify as a small business ; exempting certain dod and u.s. agency for international development contracts from otherwise applicable requirements when contracting with small businesses .

additional measures that were not enacted would generally have required additional reporting regarding an agency's performance in contracting with small businesses , or tasked specific agency officials with certain responsibilities as to contracting with small businesses .

however , one measure would have also repealed the provision permitting the doe to count certain subcontracts toward the doe and government - wide prime contract goals , previously noted .

