modern u.s. government - funded international broadcasting began during world war ii with the creation of the voice of america , and continued throughout the cold war period with radio free europe broadcasting behind the iron curtain , and radio liberty targeting populations in the former soviet union .

over the decades , voa expanded its broadcasting and language services into other regions of the world , including the middle east , asia , latin america , and africa .

later , new services for cuba and east asia were initiated .

most recently , in the wake of the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , significant new resources and services were introduced to reach the peoples of the middle east and central and south asia .

for almost as long as these services have been in existence , debates over the effectiveness , strategic direction , and necessity of u.s. international broadcasting have persisted .

since the creation of the broadcasting board of governors in the 1990s , and its establishment as an independent government agency in 1999 , arguments over its structure , as a government agency headed by a nine - member bi - partisan board , have only added to these debates .

many observers perceive flaws in the bbg's structure that create ( 1 ) weak leadership from the board and overreaching interference by governors in day - to - day operations ; ( 2 ) overlapping management structures amongst the bbg , elements of the federal international broadcasting bureaucracy , and five separate international broadcasters ; ( 3 ) duplicative programming and language services and a lack of focus on individual broadcaster missions ; and ( 4 ) inefficient administrative and personnel management of the agency .

current legislation in the 113 th congress is intended , in large part , to address these perceived shortcomings .

in addition , a number of issues concerning the bbg and u.s. international broadcasting continue to spark debate , including problems with board operations and the possible need to create a new position for executive leadership ; recommendations for the strategic direction and allocation of resources in u.s. international broadcasting ; the effect of shifts in information communication technologies , especially the importance of the internet and digital media , on u.s. international broadcasters ; proposals for improving the efficiency of u.s. international broadcasting , including possible consolidation of the several u.s. international broadcast entities ; continuing disagreements over the role of u.s. international broadcasting in advancing u.s. foreign policy goals and promoting democracy ; and assessment and improvement of u.s. international broadcasting effectiveness .

the structure , purposes , and aims of u.s. government - funded broadcasting to foreign countries have evolved over seven decades , spanning world war ii , the cold war , the fall of communist regimes in russia and eastern europe , and the response to the threat of terrorism after the september 11 attacks on the united states .

paralleling these global political shifts , the technology and delivery mechanisms of broadcasting to local , regional , and global audiences have also evolved , requiring u.s. international broadcasting to adapt and innovate to effectively deliver programming and inform audiences .

an independent agency of the u.s. federal government , the bbg operates a global broadcasting organization , including five separate broadcasters with varied missions and programming , agency and personnel administration , and operations and management of international communications technology and transmission , among other authorities .

this section provides background information on the bbg , its broadcasters , its broadcasting missions , and activities .

the bbg recently reported worldwide audiences for u.s. international broadcasters of over 200 million people .

in a number of instances bbg - supervised broadcasters have been accused of broadcasting programming that does not comport with the broad foreign policy interests of the united states .

u.s. international broadcasters and the american and foreign journalists working for them , nonetheless , are often generally considered to be effective sources of news and information in the countries where they broadcast .

their programming increases in audience size and importance especially in times of crises where the american voice and u.s. government policy is most salient to targeted populations .

while the goals and objectives of u.s. international broadcasting have been broadly supported by policymakers for many years , the bbg as an agency has often been the subject of criticism , from its operations and structure to the individuals making up the board's membership .

former secretary of state hillary clinton , for example , gave this testimony in a house foreign affairs committee hearing in january 2013: [w]e need to do a better job conveying a counternarrative to the extremist jihadist narrative.... [w]e have abdicated the broadcasting arena.... [w]e have private stations , cnn , fox , nbc , all of that .

they're out there , they convey information .

but we're not doing what we did during the cold war .

our broadcasting board of governors is practically defunct in terms of its capacity to be able to tell a message around the world .

so we're abdicating the ideological arena , and we need to get back into it .

we have the best values , we have the best narrative .

most people in the world just want to have a good , decent life that is supported by a good , decent job and raise their families .

and we're letting the jihadist narrative fill a void .

we need to get in there and compete — and we can do it successfully .

several issues and recommendations for reform have been put forward to make the bbg more effective .

on may 14 , 2015 , house foreign affairs committee chairman edward royce , with committee ranking member eliot engel and 12 other co - sponsors , introduced the united states international communications reform act of 2015 ( h.r .

2323 ) .

the committee voted to report the bill favorably to the house on may 21 .

the bill in its findings provision states that the bbg operates poorly under a flawed structure , that the bbg's internal operations and personnel decision making have deficiencies , and that u.s. international broadcasters lack clearly defined missions , leading to duplicative services and a lack of focus on maintaining the division between the "public diplomacy" mission of voa and the "surrogate" mission of rfe / rl , rfa , mbn , and ocb .

the bill seeks to restructure the whole of u.s. international broadcasting in order to address these problems .

the following sections highlight some of the central provisions of this bill .

the house version of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( h.r .

4909 ; ndaa ) includes two sections , sections 1259d and 1259e , that would accomplish a number of reforms to the structure of u.s. international broadcasting and the bbg .

the senate version , s. 2943 , did not initially include similar provisions .

after s. 2943 passed the senate , the house adopted an amended version of s. 2943 , which included the provisions from h.r .

4909 .

on december 2 and 8 , 2016 , respectively , the house and senate approved the conference report accompanying s. 2943 , containing a similar version of certain of these bbg reform provisions in section 1288 .

the provisions ultimately included in the enacted 2017 ndaa would significantly broaden the role of the bbg ceo , and provide authority to the ceo to direct broadcasting and reform efforts in the bbg .

among other things , the provisions would replace the bbg board with a permanent ceo position at the head of the agency ; create in the bbg board's place a successor advisory board without any executive powers but with a duty to advise the ceo and report to appropriate congressional committees ; transfer all powers of the board to the ceo and authorize the ceo to "direct" all u.s. international broadcasting activities within the agency's purview ; provide the ceo with blanket personnel appointment authority and expanded , detailed procurement authority ; authorize the ceo to change the name of the agency from "broadcasting board of governors" ( presumably to reflect new agency structure without a board ) ; authorize the ceo to establish a new grantee broadcaster and condition continued federal grants to existing grantees ( rfe / rl , rfa , and mbn ) on their agreement to merge into one surrogate broadcaster ; and authorize the ceo to appoint the board of any grantee broadcaster , including a possible consolidated grantee broadcaster .

table 4 , below , compares section 1288 of s. 2943 , sections 1259d and 1259e of h.r .

4909 , and related provisions in the earlier bbg reform bill considered by the house foreign affairs committee , h.r .

2323 .

