after several years of increases , the number of unaccompanied alien children ( uac ) apprehended at the southwest border by the department of homeland security's ( dhs's ) customs and border protection ( cbp ) peaked at 68,541 in fy2014 .

some members of congress as well as the obama administration have characterized the issue as a humanitarian crisis .

the reasons why they migrate to the united states are often multifaceted and difficult to measure analytically .

the congressional research service ( crs ) has analyzed several out - migration - related factors , such as violent crime rates , economic conditions , rates of poverty , and the presence of transnational gangs .

crs also has analyzed in - migration - related factors , such as the search for economic opportunity , the desire to reunite with family members , and u.s. immigration policies .

some have suggested that the sizable increase in uac flows in recent years results from a perception of relaxed u.s. immigration policies toward children under the obama administration .

these critics also cite a 2008 law that treats uac from contiguous countries differently than those from noncontiguous countries ( see the section " customs and border protection " ) .

unaccompanied alien children are defined in statute as children who: lack lawful immigration status in the united states ; are under the age of 18 ; and are without a parent or legal guardian in the united states or without a parent or legal guardian in the united states who is available to provide care and physical custody .

they most often arrive at u.s. ports of entry or are apprehended along the southwestern border with mexico .

less frequently , they are apprehended in the interior of the country and determined to be juveniles and unaccompanied .

although most are age 14 or older , apprehensions of uac under age 13 have increased .

this report opens with an analysis of uac apprehension data .

it then discusses current policy on the treatment , care , and custody of the population and describes the responsibilities of each federal agency involved with the population .

the report then discusses both administrative and congressional actions to deal with the uac surge in fy2014 and action since then to address possible future surges .

since fy2011 , uac apprehensions increased each year through fy2014: from 16,067 in fy2011 to 24,481 in fy2012 to 38,759 in fy2013 and 68,541 in fy2014 ( figure 1 ) .

at the close of fy2014 , the border patrol had apprehended more uac than in any of the previous six years and close to four times as many uac as in fy2011 .

in fy2015 , apprehensions numbered 39,970 , a 42% drop from fy2014 apprehensions .

at the close of fy2016 they stood at 59,692 , roughly 20,000 more than in fy2015 , and 9,000 less than the peak of fy2014 .

during the first two months of fy2017 ( october and november , 2016 ) , usbp apprehended 14,128 unaccompanied alien children .

as a basis for comparison , apprehensions in the first two months of fy2015 and fy2016 numbered 5,143 and 10,588 , respectively nationals of guatemala , honduras , el salvador , and mexico account for the majority of unaccompanied alien children apprehended at the mexico - u.s. border ( figure 1 ) .

flows of uac from mexico rose substantially in fy2009 and have fluctuated since then between roughly 11,000 and 17,000 .

in contrast , uac from guatemala , honduras , and el salvador increased sizably starting in fy2011 .

in fy2009 , mexican uac accounted for 82% of 19,668 uac apprehensions , while the other three central american countries accounted for 17% .

by september 30 , 2014 , those proportions had almost reversed , with mexican uac comprising 23% of the 68,541 uac apprehensions and uac from the three central american countries comprising 75% .

in fy2015 and fy2016 , the percentages of unaccompanied children originating from mexico were 28% and 20% , respectively .

the majority of uac apprehensions have occurred within the rio grande and tucson border sectors ( 62% and 11% , respectively , in fy2016 ) .

the proportions of uac who were female or who were under the age of 13 also increased in fy2014 , and orr data on uac referred to the agency indicate an increase in the female uac proportion from 23% in fy2012 to 33% in fy2016 .

apprehensions of family units ( unaccompanied children with a related adult ) increased from 14,855 in fy2013 to 68,445 in fy2014 , declined to 39,838 in fy2015 and increased to 77,674 in fy2016 .

in the first two months of fy2017 , family unit apprehensions totaled 28,691 .

of these apprehended family units in fy2016 and fy2017 , 95% originated from guatemala , el salvador , and honduras .

two laws and a settlement most directly affect u.s. policy for the treatment and administrative processing of uac: the flores settlement agreement of 1997 ; the homeland security act of 2002 ; and the trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2008 .

during the 1980s , allegations of uac mistreatment by the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) caused a series of lawsuits against the government that eventually resulted in the flores settlement agreement ( flores agreement ) in 1997 .

the flores agreement established a nationwide policy for the detention , treatment , and release of uac and recognized the particular vulnerability of uac as minors while detained without a parent or legal guardian present .

it required that immigration officials detaining minors provide ( 1 ) food and drinking water , ( 2 ) medical assistance in emergencies , ( 3 ) toilets and sinks , ( 4 ) adequate temperature control and ventilation , ( 5 ) adequate supervision to protect minors from others , and ( 6 ) separation from unrelated adults whenever possible .

for several years following the flores agreement , criticism continued over whether the ins had fully implemented the drafted regulations .

five years later , the homeland security act of 2002 ( hsa ; p.l .

107-296 ) divided responsibilities for the processing and treatment of uac between the newly created department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the department of health and human services' ( hhs's ) office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) .

to dhs , the law assigned responsibility for the apprehension , transfer , and repatriation of uac .

to hhs , the law assigned responsibility for coordinating and implementing the care and placement of uac in appropriate custody , reunifying uac with their parents abroad if appropriate , maintaining and publishing a list of legal services available to uac , and collecting statistical information on uac , among other responsibilities .

the hsa also established a statutory definition of uac as unauthorized minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian .

despite these developments , criticism continued that the flores agreement had not been fully implemented .

in response to ongoing concerns that uac apprehended by the border patrol were not being adequately screened for reasons they should not be returned to their home country , congress passed the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2008 ( tvpra , p.l .

110-457 ) .

the tvpra directed the secretary of dhs , in conjunction with other federal agencies , to develop policies and procedures to ensure that uac in the united states are safely repatriated to their country of nationality or of last habitual residence .

the section set forth special rules for uac from contiguous countries ( i.e. , mexico and canada ) , allowing such children , under certain circumstances , to return to mexico or canada without additional penalties , and directing the secretary of state to negotiate agreements with mexico and canada to manage the repatriation process .

the tvpra mandated that unaccompanied alien children from countries other than mexico or canada — along with uac from those countries who are apprehended away from the border — are to be transferred to the care and custody of hhs and placed in formal removal proceedings .

the tvpra required that children from contiguous countries be screened within 48 hours of being apprehended to determine whether they should be returned to their country or transferred to hhs and placed in removal proceedings .

several dhs agencies handle the apprehension , processing , and repatriation of uac , while hhs handles the care and custody of uac .

the executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) in the u.s. department of justice conducts immigration removal proceedings .

cbp apprehends , processes , and detains the majority of uac arrested along u.s. borders .

dhs's immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) physically transports uac from cbp to orr custody .

orr is responsible for detaining and sheltering uac who are from noncontiguous countries and those from contiguous countries ( i.e. , canada and mexico ) who may be victims of trafficking or have an asylum claim , while they await an immigration hearing .

dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) is responsible for the initial adjudication of asylum applications filed by uac .

doj's eoir conducts immigration proceedings that determine whether uac may be allowed to remain in the united states or must be deported to their home countries .

ice is responsible for returning uac who are ordered removed from the united states to their home countries .

the following sections discuss the role of each of these federal agencies in more detail .

the obama administration and congress have both taken action since 2014 to respond to the uac surge .

the administration developed a working group to coordinate the efforts of the various agencies involved in responding to the issue , temporarily opened additional shelters and holding facilities to accommodate the large number of uac apprehended at the border , initiated programs to address root causes of child migration in central america , and requested funding from congress to deal with the crisis .

in turn , congress considered supplemental appropriations for fy2014 and increased funding for uac - related activities in orr and dhs appropriations for subsequent fiscal years .

in response to the uac surge in the spring and summer of 2014 , the administration announced initiatives to unify efforts among federal agencies with uac responsibilities and to address the situation with programs geared toward unaccompanied children from several central american countries .

additionally , congress increased funding for the hhs program responsible for the care of unaccompanied children , and permitted the secretary of dhs to transfer funds from within a specific cbp and ice account for the care and transportation of unaccompanied children , among other actions taken .

since fy2014 , the administration has continued to request additional funding for programs geared toward unaccompanied children , and congress has appropriated for some but not all such requests .

apprehensions of unaccompanied children rose substantially between fy2011 and fy2014 before declining considerably in fy2015 .

however , the increased number of apprehensions in fy2016 and the most recent apprehension data for the first few months of fy2017 suggest that the flow of unaccompanied children to the united states has not abated .

once in the united states , the number of unaccompanied children who will ultimately qualify for asylum or other forms of immigration relief that may allow them to remain in the united states remains unclear .

many unaccompanied children have family members in the united states , many of whom may not be legally present .

such circumstances raise challenging policy questions that may pit what is in the "best interests of the child" against what is permissible under the immigration and nationality act and other relevant laws .

