the federal housing administration ( fha ) , an agency of the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , insures private mortgage lenders against the possibility that a borrower will default on his or her mortgage .

if the borrower does default , and the home goes to foreclosure , fha will pay the lender the remaining principal amount owed on the mortgage .

fha insurance is intended to encourage lenders to offer affordable mortgages to certain eligible borrowers who might find it difficult to obtain a conventional ( that is , non - government - insured ) mortgage , such as households with small down payments .

fha requires a 3.5% down payment for most mortgages it insures , which is lower than the down payment required for most conventional mortgages .

through its single - family mortgage insurance program , fha insures eligible mortgages used to purchase or refinance a single - family home .

a lender must be approved by fha to be eligible to offer fha - insured mortgages , and borrowers and mortgages must meet certain underwriting and eligibility criteria to qualify for fha insurance .

borrowers also pay fees , called premiums , in exchange for the insurance .

fha's single - family mortgage insurance program is intended to be self - supporting .

the money that it brings in from the fees charged to borrowers and any amounts that it recoups from the sale of foreclosed homes is intended to cover the costs of any claims paid to lenders when mortgages default .

however , in recent years increasing foreclosures on fha - insured mortgages and factors such as house price declines have put pressure on the single - family mortgage insurance fund , known as the mutual mortgage insurance fund ( mmi fund ) .

at the end of fy2013 , fha was required to take a $1.7 billion mandatory appropriation from treasury to ensure that it would have sufficient funds to cover all of its expected future losses on the loans that it was currently insuring .

fha did not need any funds from treasury for this purpose in fy2014 .

furthermore , by statute , the mmi fund is required to maintain a capital ratio of 2% .

this means that it is supposed to have an economic value that is equal to at least 2% of the total dollar volume of mortgages that it is currently insuring , where the economic value is the current net assets of the mmi fund plus the net present value of the estimated future cash flows on the mortgages that it currently insures .

in other words , it is a measure of the amount of funds that would be expected to be available to cover any unexpected future losses on the loans that it currently insures , beyond what is needed to cover expected losses .

the capital ratio fell below 2% in fy2009 , and has remained below 2% since then , turning negative in fy2012 and fy2013 .

in fy2014 , the capital ratio was once again positive , but at 0.41% remained below the 2% statutory requirement .

fha has made a number of policy changes in recent years to attempt to improve its financial condition .

congress has also been considering additional reforms to fha .

this report describes recent policy changes made by fha and recent legislative proposals that would make additional changes to fha's single - family program .

for the most part , this report does not go into detail about the features of fha - insured loans , fha's market role , or its financial status , except as necessary to describe implemented or proposed policy changes .

for more information on the features of fha - insured loans and fha's role in the mortgage market , see crs report rs20530 , fha - insured home loans: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

for details on the financial status of the mmi fund , see crs report r42875 , fha single - family mortgage insurance: financial status of the mutual mortgage insurance fund ( mmi fund ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

fha has made several changes to its single - family insurance programs , particularly since fy2010 , to attempt to improve its financial status .

recognizing that there is a tension between fha's mission of expanding access to mortgage credit and its need to maintain the financial soundness of the mmi fund , these changes generally attempt to improve fha's financial soundness without unduly limiting access to mortgages for creditworthy borrowers .

fha has the authority to make some of these changes administratively , through policy guidance or rulemaking procedures , while others require congressional action .

the policy changes that fha has made in recent years generally attempt to increase fha's cash reserves , to decrease the riskiness of the mortgages it insures , or both .

many of the changes that fha has made or could make — including increasing premiums and strengthening underwriting criteria — impact the risk profile of future loans that fha will insure rather than loans that fha has already insured .

fha has fewer options at its disposal for making changes that will reduce its risk related to loans that it already insures .

however , it has taken some steps that address past loans as well as future loans , such as more aggressively holding lenders accountable for loans they originated that did not meet fha's criteria , making changes to its procedures for addressing delinquent mortgages ( known as loss mitigation ) , and implementing new methods of selling foreclosed properties ( known as property disposition ) .

this section describes several major policy changes that fha has proposed or implemented in recent years .

the changes are divided into three broad categories: changes to eligibility and underwriting criteria ( including changes to the premiums borrowers pay ) , changes intended to enhance fha's oversight of lenders , and changes to the way in which fha handles delinquent mortgages and foreclosed properties .

while fha has taken a number of actions to stabilize its finances in recent years , there are some changes that it cannot make without congressional action .

furthermore , some policy makers believe that additional changes are needed , beyond what fha has done or has stated that it would do if given legislative authority .

therefore , some policy makers have proposed making additional changes to fha's single - family program through legislation .

such proposals have included additional changes in underwriting or eligibility requirements to reduce the risk on fha - insured loans and changes to fha's capital requirements to require it to hold more funds in reserve to pay for unexpected losses .

furthermore , some policy makers have advocated making changes to fha's mortgage insurance standards or business operations to attempt to reduce its role in the mortgage market and bring more purely private capital back into the market .

however , others have expressed concern that some of these policy changes — whether aimed at strengthening fha's finances , decreasing its role in the mortgage market , or both — could make it more difficult for some creditworthy borrowers to obtain fha - insured mortgages .

in both the 111 th and 112 th congresses , bills containing certain fha reforms were passed by the house of representatives but were not considered by the senate .

the bills passed by the house in each of these congresses were not the same , but they contained some similar provisions , including some that have been sought by fha in recent years to provide it with additional authority for monitoring lenders .

for example , while the specifics differed , these bills both would have provided fha with increased authority to terminate lenders' fha approval under certain circumstances and to require indemnification when insured mortgages did not meet fha's requirements .

during the 113 th congress , the fha emergency fiscal solvency act of 2013 ( h.r .

1145 ) was introduced in the house , but was not reported out of committee .

the bill contained some of the changes that were included in the bills passed by the house in the 111 th and 112 th congresses .

two additional bills related to fha were ordered to be reported out of committee in the 113 th congress: the fha solvency act of 2013 ( s. 1376 ) , which was reported in the senate , and the protecting american taxpayers and homeowners ( path ) act ( h.r .

2767 ) , which was ordered to be reported in the house .

while h.r .

1145 and s. 1376 only address fha , the path act includes fha provisions as part of a broader bill to reform the housing finance system .

the path act is also the most far - reaching of these bills , and includes a number of provisions that are aimed at more narrowly targeting fha insurance to certain populations and bringing more purely private capital into the mortgage market .

this section briefly describes some of the major provisions included in these fha reform bills introduced in the 113 th congress .

it does not provide a comprehensive discussion of every provision contained in these bills .

the fha emergency fiscal solvency act was not reported out of committee in the 113 th congress , but it contained similar provisions to bills that passed the house in previous congresses .

among other things , this bill would have done the following .

the bill would have required a minimum annual mortgage insurance premium of 0.55% .

the bill would also have raised the maximum annual premium that fha is allowed to charge to 2.05% ( 2% for mortgages with loan - to - value ratios at or below 95% ) from 1.55% ( 1.50% for mortgages with loan - to - value ratios at or below 95% ) .

under current law , fha is required to maintain a capital ratio of 2% .

 ( the capital ratio is defined as the economic value of the mmi fund — that is , the fund's current capital resources plus the expected net present value of the future cash flows on the mortgages that it currently insures — divided by the total dollar amount of mortgages that fha is currently insuring. ) .

the capital ratio has been below this 2% threshold for several years .

fha is also required to contract with an independent actuary each year to perform an actuarial review of the mmi fund .

h.r .

1145 would have required fha to provide more frequent actuarial reviews of the mmi fund when its capital ratio falls below 2% .

it would also have required fha to submit an emergency capital plan describing actions it would take to restore the capital ratio when the ratio fell below the required threshold .

finally , the bill would have required the government accountability office ( gao ) to submit a report on fha's safety and soundness .

the bill would have expanded fha's ability to seek indemnification for certain mortgages while requiring fha to establish an appeals process for lenders to appeal indemnification decisions .

it would also have increased fha's ability to terminate a lender's approval to originate fha - insured loans under certain circumstances .

additional provisions included , among others , a requirement that hud submit a report examining opportunities for streamlining fha programs .

the path act was a broader bill to reform the housing finance system that was ordered to be reported out of the house financial services committee .

title ii of the bill included extensive provisions related to fha .

some of these included versions of provisions that had also been included in other bills in some form , including a number of changes to lender oversight , premiums , and capital requirements .

other provisions would have made additional , more far - reaching changes to fha , including making it an independent agency , taking steps to more narrowly target fha insurance , and reducing the amount of fha's insurance coverage and increasing the role of private capital .

these provisions were intended to better target fha insurance to those who most need it , and to improve fha's financial soundness .

however , some expressed concern over the potential impacts that these provisions could have on credit availability or affordability for some households .

among several other provisions , the path act , as ordered to be reported out of committee , would have done the following .

the bill would have removed fha from hud and made it a free - standing agency .

the bill would have limited fha insurance to mortgages made to first - time homebuyers or low - and moderate - income homebuyers ( defined as families with incomes less than 115% of area median income , or families with incomes less than 150% of area median income in designated high - cost areas ) .

fha would have been allowed to insure mortgages made to households that did not meet these criteria in times of tight credit availability or in areas affected by disasters .

the minimum down payment would have been increased to 5% for non - first - time homebuyers , and the maximum dollar amount of a mortgage that can be insured by fha would have been reduced in some non - high - cost areas .

the bill would have prohibited fha from insuring any mortgages where seller concessions exceeded 3% .

it would also have prohibited fha from insuring mortgages in any areas that had used eminent domain to acquire mortgages within the past 10 years .

the bill would have required a minimum annual mortgage insurance premium of 0.55% of the mortgage balance , and would have required that fha set its premiums at a level adequate to cover its administrative and personnel costs as well as the costs of insurance and maintaining the capital ratio .

the bill would have increased the capital ratio requirement for mortgages insured after the bill was enacted to 4% from the current 2% .

it would have required the capital ratio to be determined quarterly , and placed restrictions on the loan - to - value ratios of the mortgages that fha could have insured if the capital ratio fell below certain thresholds .

fha's financial reports would have been required to use accounting methods that are used in the private sector .

the path act would have provided fha with increased authority to require compensation from lenders under certain circumstances when mortgages did not meet fha's standards while requiring fha to establish an appeals process for lenders to appeal indemnification decisions .

fha would have been required to publish a consolidated handbook with all of its origination and underwriting requirements for lenders and servicers .

the bill would have gradually reduced the share of the original principal amount of the mortgage that fha can insure to 50% from 100% over a five - year period .

it would also have required fha to establish risk - sharing demonstration programs to transfer some of the credit risk of fha - insured mortgages to other entities .

the fha solvency act , as reported out of the senate banking committee , would also have made several changes related to lender oversight , mortgage insurance premiums , and capital requirements , among other things .

it was not as far - reaching as the path act , and would not have taken steps to limit who is eligible for fha insurance or to bring private capital into the market to the same extent as the path act .

among other provisions , the bill would have done the following .

fha would have been required to evaluate its underwriting standards and revise them as necessary , taking certain specific factors into account .

it would also have been required to finalize its proposed rule on seller concessions ( described earlier in this report ) .

the bill would have required a minimum annual mortgage insurance premium of 0.55% of the mortgage balance and increased the maximum annual premium that fha can charge to 2% or 2.05% ( depending on whether the initial loan - to - value ratio is above 95% ) .

it would also have required fha to review the premiums annually to ensure that they were adequate to maintain the costs of insurance and the capital ratio .

the fha solvency act would have raised the required capital ratio to 3% and required fha to take certain actions if the capital ratio fell below certain thresholds , including imposing premium surcharges on new borrowers and increasing its reporting requirements .

it would have required stress testing of the mmi fund similar to the stress tests required by the federal reserve , with the results included in the annual actuarial review , and it would have required fha and treasury to notify congress within 48 hours if fha drew on its authority with treasury to fund any of its accounts .

the bill would have provided fha with increased authority to seek compensation from lenders under certain circumstances when a mortgage did not meet fha's standards while requiring fha to establish an appeals process for lenders to appeal indemnification decisions .

further , it would have allowed fha to terminate lenders' approval on a nationwide basis as well as in specific areas .

the bill would also have allowed fha to transfer mortgage servicing to specialty servicers in some cases .

fha would also have been required to issue a consolidated handbook with all of its guidelines for lenders and servicers of fha - insured mortgages .

