prescription drug abuse has been described as an epidemic , with an estimated 6.5 million current prescription drug abusers — including 4.3 million abusing prescription pain relievers ( opioids ) .

on average , 44 people die from an overdose of a prescription painkiller each day in the united states .

while prescription painkillers are not the only prescription drugs of abuse ( see text box ) , they are the most commonly abused and receive the most attention from federal policymakers .

federal policy on pcs aims to balance the need to limit abuse of prescription controlled substances ( pcs ) with the need to maintain access to pcs for legitimate medical use .

the federal government's approach to addressing prescription drug abuse has increasingly relied on coordination across agencies , including both law enforcement and health agencies .

this report begins with a summary of recent efforts to address prescription drug abuse — focused on prescription painkiller abuse .

the remainder of the report is organized in two parts: ( 1 ) federal roles in reducing prescription drug abuse and ( 2 ) current approaches aimed at reducing prescription drug abuse .

federal roles include coordination across agencies ; regulation of drugs ; law enforcement activities ; and health services , financing , and research .

approaches to reducing prescription drug abuse include scheduling of pcs ; safe storage and disposal ; focusing law enforcement ; using data to identify risk ; awareness and education ; and treatment .

congress has demonstrated an interest in addressing the problem of prescription drug abuse ( and particularly prescription opioid abuse ) by holding hearings and introducing legislation taking various approaches to the problem .

for example , the comprehensive addiction and recovery act of 2015 ( h.r .

953 , s. 524 ) would primarily authorize the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the department of justice ( doj ) , and the white house office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) to administer grants and require hhs to convene task forces .

in contrast , the ensuring patient access and effective drug enforcement act of 2015 ( h.r .

471 , s. 483 ) would primarily amend current law regarding registration to distribute or dispense pcs and require an inter - departmental report to congress .

the administration has also made efforts to address the problem , including an hhs opioid initiative and a presidential memorandum requiring federal agencies to provide training in opioid prescribing to employees who prescribe controlled substances and to identify and address barriers to accessing medication - assisted treatment for opioid addiction .

both congress and the administration have directed funds toward reducing opioid abuse and overdoses .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) includes some funding for opioid - specific programs , most of which is identified in the explanatory statement accompanying the act .

for example , the agreement provides $25 million for the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) to expand prescription opioid and heroin abuse treatment services in high - risk communities .

the president's budget for fy2017 proposes both mandatory and discretionary funding for hhs to address prescription opioid and heroin abuse , with an emphasis on expanding the use of medication - assisted treatment .

the federal government works to reduce prescription drug abuse in a variety of roles , including coordination across agencies ; regulation of drugs ; law enforcement activities ; and health services , financing , and research .

this section provides an overview of these roles , along with references to other crs reports that address some of these roles in more detail .

the federal government , state and local governments , and various private entities ( eg , pharmacies ) are currently undertaking a range of approaches to reducing prescription drug abuse .

such approaches may focus on health care professionals , law enforcement , or current or potential abusers .

the particular scheduling status of a pcs has several significant consequences: ( 1 ) it directly affects patient access to the medication ( in terms of the number of allowable refills and whether prescriptions must be written or may be conveyed over the telephone by the physician to the pharmacist ) ; ( 2 ) it affects the degree of regulatory requirements that controlled substance handlers ( manufacturers , distributors , pharmacies , and physicians ) must follow ( such as security restrictions and recordkeeping obligations ) ; and ( 3 ) it determines the degree of criminal punishment for illegal traffickers of the controlled substance .

the csa and its implementing regulations offer limitations on the prescribing and dispensing of a pcs that vary depending on the schedule in which the medication is placed .

for example , no controlled substance listed in schedule ii may be dispensed to a patient by a pharmacist without a written prescription from a practitioner , except in certain cases where the practitioner administers the controlled substance directly to the patient .

however , controlled substances in schedules iii - v may be dispensed by a pharmacy pursuant to either a written or oral prescription , including a facsimile of a written prescription ; these substances may also be administered or dispensed directly by the practitioner in the course of his professional practice without a prescription .

pharmacists are prohibited from refilling prescriptions for schedule ii substances .

pharmacists may fill or refill prescriptions for controlled substances in schedules iii and iv up to five times within six months after the date on which the prescription was issued , unless the prescribing practitioner authorizes a renewal of the prescription .

the schedule status of a pcs also determines the nature and extent of federal regulatory requirements for lawful handlers of controlled substances .

for example , manufacturers and distributors are required to store schedule i and ii substances in electronically monitored safes , steel cabinets , or vaults that meet or exceed certain specifications , while schedule iii , iv , or v substances may be stored in less secure enclosures .

they must also receive a special order form from a purchaser prior to shipping schedule i and ii drugs .

the form is preprinted by dea with the name and address of the purchaser , and the drugs must be shipped by the supplier filling the order to the purchaser's registered location .

dea further monitors the distribution of controlled substances by requiring manufacturers and distributors of schedule i and ii drugs to file reports on acquisition and distribution of controlled substances through the automated reports and consolidated orders system ( arcos ) .

dea also limits the quantity of schedule i and ii controlled substances which may be produced in a given calendar year .

finally , the authorized criminal penalties and fines are greater for drug trafficking offenses involving schedule i and ii substances than for those in the other schedules .

the csa provides both legislative and administrative mechanisms for substances to be added to a schedule ; removed from the scheduling framework altogether ; and rescheduled or transferred from one schedule to another .

congress may change the scheduling status of a drug or substance through legislation .

for example , in the 113 th congress , legislation has been introduced that would reschedule marijuana from its current placement in schedule i to schedule ii , while another bill would direct the attorney general to "issue a final order that removes marijuana in any form from all [csa] schedules. .

dea , hhs , or ( by petition ) any interested person may initiate federal rulemaking proceedings to add , delete , or change the schedule of a drug or substance administratively .

for example , dea in 2009 requested from hhs an evaluation and recommendation concerning whether to reschedule hydrocodone combination products ( hcps ) such as vicodin® from schedule iii to schedule ii .

in december 2013 , hhs recommended to dea that hcps should be reclassified to the more restrictive schedule ii .

on august 22 , 2014 , dea published a final rule in the federal register that administratively reschedules hcps from schedule iii to schedule ii , which subjects anyone who manufactures , distributes , or dispenses hcps to the more stringent regulatory requirements and administrative , civil , and criminal sanctions that are applicable to schedule ii controlled substances .

safe storage and proper disposal of medication are viewed as ways to prevent the diversion of prescription drugs .

the federal government supports these prevention measures in several ways .

dea regulations require all applicants and registrants to comply with strict storage requirements for prescription medication .

also , as required under the controlled substances act and dea regulations , registrants have several options for proper disposal of medication .

congress may have an interest in monitoring the effectiveness of existing safe storage and disposal activities to determine whether additional legislative action ( eg , changes in authorizations or funding ) is warranted .

for the purposes of ensuring the secure storage and distribution of controlled substances and listed chemicals , all applicants and registrants must generally "provide effective controls and procedures to guard against theft and diversion of controlled substances. .

dea regulations further require all applicants and registrants to substantially comply with specific security standards for storage of controlled substances ( and other specified chemicals ) .

applicants and registrants must also be prepared to make adjustments to their security systems in the event that a controlled substance is transferred to another schedule or removed from control under the csa .

dea regulations also detail specific security requirements for the different types of applicants and registrants .

non - practitioners ( i.e. , manufacturers , distributors , and narcotic treatment programs ) are required to store schedule i and ii substances in electronically monitored safes , steel cabinets , or vaults that meet or exceed certain specifications .

licensed practitioners must store controlled substances in a "securely locked , substantially constructed cabinet" and must notify dea of the theft or significant loss of any controlled substances within one business day of discovering such loss or theft .

furthermore , all practitioners are prohibited from hiring employees who have been convicted of a drug - related felony or who have had a dea registration denied or revoked .

dea regulations recommend that non - practitioners carefully screen individuals before hiring them as employees , to ensure that job applicants do not have convictions for crimes or have engaged in unauthorized use of controlled substances .

to assist citizens in proper disposal , dea has sponsored several different types of take - back programs , including the following: permanent locations where unused prescription drugs are collected ; special one - day events in which patients can drop off unwanted drugs at pharmacies or hazardous waste collection sites ; and mail - in / ship - back programs .

as previously discussed , the disposal of controlled substances final rule authorizes ultimate users to transfer unwanted drugs to authorized collectors for safe and secure disposal .

some local and state government agencies and grassroots organizations have established drug disposal programs ( often referred to as pharmaceutical "take - back" programs ) to facilitate the collection of unused , unwanted , or expired medications for incineration or other methods of destruction that comply with federal and state laws and regulations , including those relating to public health and the environment .

federal law enforcement efforts to combat prescription drug abuse may focus on specific geographic regions or on specific types of drugs , depending on how priorities are established .

ondcp analyzes geographic patterns of drug trafficking in high intensity drug trafficking areas ( hidta ) .

for example , a 2011 drug market analysis of the rocky mountain hidta shows that abuse of illegally diverted prescription drugs is "very high" in the region , and additionally this area has experienced increased overdose deaths .

using drug trafficking metrics is more consistent with federal law enforcement's emphasis on traffickers and prescribers than , for example , using drug abuse metrics .

while geographic patterns of prescription drug abuse are available for analysis , the extent to which traffickers and prescribers are located in proximity to the individuals abusing prescription drugs is unclear .

within the hidta program , ondcp funds the national methamphetamine & pharmaceuticals initiative ( nmpi ) , which targets specific types of drugs and chemicals .

in addition to reducing the availability of methamphetamine and its precursor chemicals , nmpi aims "to reduce pharmaceutical drug crimes by utilizing best practices for investigations and intelligence collection and analysis. .

nmpi strategic priorities that support prescription drug abuse prevention include [e]ffective pharmaceutical drug monitoring programs ; [t]raining to federal , state , local , and tribal personnel on methamphetamine and pharmaceutical drug crimes , trends , drug - endangered children , and best practice solutions ; and [e]nhance parcel interdiction and investigations .

as part of this initiative , ondcp also monitors pharmacy robberies , which may help identify trends in pcs diversion .

various data sources may support analyses that can identify high - risk behavior indicating potential pcs diversion and abuse among prescribers , dispensers , patients , and others .

prescription drug monitoring programs ( pdmps ) maintain statewide electronic databases of prescriptions dispensed for pcs .

analysis of information collected by pdmps may help identify potential pcs diversion and abuse .

law enforcement uses of pdmp data include ( but are not limited to ) investigations of physicians who prescribe controlled substances for drug dealers or abusers , pharmacists who falsify records in order to sell controlled substances , and people who forge prescriptions .

public health uses of pdmp data include ( but are not limited to ) preventing dangerous combinations of medications when physicians check a patient's pdmp record prior to prescribing a pcs or other medication .

congress appropriates funds to support state pdmps through doj - administered grants — and previously through hhs - administered grants as well .

for more information about pdmps , see crs report r42593 , prescription drug monitoring programs , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

in addition to pdmps , which were designed specifically to track pcs , various public and private entities have data potentially related to prescription drug abuse .

for example , new york city's rxstat program combines multiple sources of health and crime data ( including pdmp data ) with sophisticated analytics to help target efforts to reduce prescription drug abuse .

at the federal level , fda ( along with public and private partners ) is building a national system of health care databases that fda can search for adverse events possibly associated with its regulated products — including pcs .

medicare , medicaid , and private health insurers have data about the medical care for which they pay .

analyses similar to those used to detect potential fraud may be applied to identify behavior potentially contributing to prescription drug abuse .

for example , iowa's medicaid program refers members who receive prescriptions from multiple pharmacies or multiple prescribers ( among other possible criteria ) to a "lock - in" program , which limits them to one primary care physician , one pharmacy , one hospital , and one specialist .

the alliance to prevent the abuse of medicines is reviewing legislative options for a similar program in medicare , which would restrict certain beneficiaries to a single pharmacy and avoid disrupting access to needed medications .

pharmacies have data about prescriptions written by providers and filled by patients .

for example , a large chain pharmacy identified high - risk prescribers and ( after multiple attempts to contact them ) stopped filling prescriptions for controlled substances written by those who were unable or unwilling to provide legitimate reasons for their high - risk prescribing patterns .

similarly , large health care service delivery systems have data about their patients' diagnoses and treatments , as well as providers' practice patterns .

ondcp has described raising awareness through education as a "crucial first step in tackling the problem of prescription drug abuse. .

efforts to increase awareness and education about prescription drug abuse may focus on health care providers , patients , or the general public .

although federal agencies do not generally regulate the practice of medicine , they may convene expert panels or encourage state - level activities to explore clinical decision support tools ( eg , electronic alerts or treatment guidelines ) .

in conjunction with a rems specifically for extended - release and long - acting opioid analgesics , fda has published a "blueprint" for prescriber education and has established a searchable on - line repository for educational activities that comply with the rems .

the rems also includes development of materials to educate patients when the prescription is written and when it is filled .

samhsa offers reports , pamphlets , and continuing medical education about prescription drug abuse at no cost .

in addition to federal efforts , state or local governments and private entities may also engage in awareness and education activities .

several states have produced or sponsored public service announcements to raise public awareness of prescription drug abuse .

the federation of state medical boards has published a model policy to encourage state medical boards to adopt guidelines for use of prescription pain relievers in treating chronic pain .

prescription drug abuse may be prevented in some cases through choices in treatment of underlying conditions ( eg , pain ) , and it may be treated effectively through pharmacologic or non - pharmacologic interventions .

new products may be developed for treating both underlying conditions and prescription drug abuse .

decisions about how to treat underlying conditions ( eg , pain , adhd , or insomnia ) might be made with attention to minimizing the risk of prescription drug abuse .

for example , alternatives to prescription medications — such as surgery or physical therapy instead of pain relievers — may be available for some conditions .

va and dod have jointly issued clinical practice guidelines for treating chronic pain with prescription pain relievers , taking into account not only managing pain effectively but also limiting risk of abuse and monitoring for signs of abuse .

as an example of a state - level effort , ohio's guidelines for prescribing controlled substances in emergency departments and acute care facilities suggest limiting prescriptions to a three - day supply , thus putting less of the medication in circulation .

the national institute on drug abuse ( nida ) recognizes both medications and behavioral treatments as effective approaches to treating drug abuse in general and prescription drug abuse in particular .

which treatment is effective — particularly among pharmacologic treatments — varies by the drug of abuse .

addiction to opioids ( including prescription pain relievers ) may be treated using medication - assisted treatment such as methadone , buprenorphine , and naltrexone .

nida is funding research into medications to treat addiction to stimulants ( eg , ritalin® ) ; no medications are currently fda - approved for this indication .

the federal government may support treatment of prescription drug abuse through direct service delivery , financing or grant funding , and regulation of opioid treatment programs .

for more information about medication - assisted treatment of opioid addiction , see crs in focus if10219 , opioid treatment programs and related federal regulations , by [author name scrubbed] .

new pharmaceutical products may come in the form of new formulations of existing drugs ( eg , tamper - resistant or abuse - deterrent pain relievers ) , new drugs to treat underlying conditions ( eg , pain or insomnia ) without addictive properties , or new drugs to treat addiction .

abuse - deterrent drug formulations include additional substances intended to make the primary drug less subject to abuse .

an example is the combination of buprenorphine and naloxone , where the naloxone is meant to prevent the buprenorphine from taking effect if the drug is injected rather than dissolved under the tongue .

tamper - resistant drug formulations are manufactured to prevent potential abusers from crushing them into a powder that can be snorted or dissolving them into a liquid that can be injected .

an example is the reformulated version of extended release oxycodone , which is manufactured with a highly viscous ( i.e. , gooey ) substance that prevents the pill from being crushed or dissolved .

nida has identified the "development of effective , nonaddicting pain medications [as] a public health priority. .

non - pharmaceutical products or interventions may also be developed to treat underlying conditions such as pain , reducing the demand for pcs .

