in 1967 , the supreme court pronounced in katz v. united states that "[w]hat a person knowingly exposes to the public , even in his own home or office , is not a subject of fourth amendment protection. .

this rule "that a person has no legitimate expectation of privacy in information he voluntarily turns over to third parties" is known as the "third - party doctrine. .

while its reach in the pre - digital age was relatively limited , the third - party doctrine has provided the government a powerful investigative tool in a society where people share ever - increasing amounts of information with others .

many have debated whether these technological and social changes require the courts to reconsider this doctrine , or , alternatively , whether congress should step in and create some form of statutory protection for this information .

over the years , the court has applied the third - party doctrine to two main sets of cases .

in one , the court has held that people do not have a reasonable expectation that a person with whom they are communicating will not later reveal that conversation to the police .

in the second , the court extended this doctrine to hold that people are not entitled to fourth amendment safeguards for records given to a third - party or data generated as part of a person's business transactions with a third - party .

in two of the most prominent third - party cases , smith v. maryland and united states v. miller , the court held that government access to telephone calling records and bank records , respectively , were not fourth amendment searches for which warrants were required .

to be clear , the third - party doctrine does not cover all conceivable information that is transferred through a third party .

for instance , the content of a voice or email communication does not fall within its scope .

the courts have reasoned that the service provider is merely the conduit or intermediary of those communications and not the recipient ; thus , the user does not lose privacy protection in those communications .

on the other hand , both non - content and content information that is shared directly with a service provider is covered by the third - party doctrine ( eg , the deposit slips or checks shared with a bank and data kept by the bank relating to transactions with it ) .

additionally , non - content information derived from private interactions with others is subject to the third - party doctrine .

this covers data such as telephone numbers dialed , email addresses of those emailed , or websites visited .

the third - party doctrine has been heavily criticized for unnecessarily constricting americans' privacy rights .

but whatever one thinks of the rule that citizens are not entitled to fourth amendment protection when they share information with one another , the third - party doctrine is largely entrenched in other areas of fourth amendment case law .

for example , it is not a fourth amendment search for the police to dig through one's trash left on the curb , to track a person's movements on public streets , and even to surveil a person in a fenced - in backyard with an aircraft .

in each of these instances , the court reasoned that because the person exposed his activities to the public gaze he was no longer entitled to an expectation of privacy .

in addition to the legal attacks on the third - party doctrine , some have questioned its practical implications in a society which shares almost every facet of its life with various entities .

both smith and miller , decided in the mid - to late - 1970s , came before the mass digital revolution experienced over the last several decades .

since these decisions , there has been a wave of advancement in data generation , collection , automation , and processing .

whether these new technologies and shifts in social interaction require courts or lawmakers to revise this review is currently under debate .

two major events in the past few years typify this ongoing debate .

the first is the conversation prompted by several concurrences in the 2012 gps tracking case united states v. jones .

in two concurring opinions in that case , five justices opined that warrantless , pervasive government location monitoring can violate the fourth amendment .

commentators have speculated that these five votes could have significant consequences for other similar ubiquitous surveillance techniques .

and at least one member of the court , justice sotomayor , believes that the third - party doctrine should be seriously rethought as a whole .

the second is the litigation surrounding the national security agency's telephone metadata program .

several federal courts , including the foreign intelligence surveillance court , have applied smith and the third - party doctrine to uphold this comprehensive data collection program .

one district court judge , however , found smith outdated and the nsa program too invasive for smith to still control this legal question .

with these shifts in technology and legal thinking in mind , this report explores the history and legal foundations of the third - party doctrine .

it will first provide background to the fourth amendment and describe in what instances government investigations trigger its protections .

it will then analyze the court's third - party doctrine cases and provide doctrinal and practical arguments for and against its application .

next , this report will examine how congress has responded to the third - party doctrine and whether united states v. jones and subsequent cases might alter its future application .

lastly , this report will consider any potential future developments in this fast - moving area of law .

before the advent of modern communications , government officials could not simply subpoena an internet service provider ( isp ) , or amazon , or google for information relating to a target of investigation , but had to enter the suspect's home or office , sometimes by force , to retrieve personal information directly themselves .

during the 18 th century , british and colonial officials conducted searches and seizures of people's homes with little to no suspicion of wrongdoing pursuant to either a general warrant , which was used mainly in england , or a writ of assistance , which was used in the american colonies .

these indiscriminate government intrusions contributed to the people's fear of unrestrained government power and led to the eventual passage of the fourth amendment .

take , for instance , the formative english search and seizure case entick v. carrington , where the government was investigating john entick and others for alleged publication of seditious articles .

in that case , government officials broke into entick's home with "force and arms," pried open the locks on his doors , broke open his chests and drawers , and searched his private papers and books for four hours .

the officers conducted this search under the guise of a general warrant , a legal order which states with a high level of generality the places and things to be searched and seized .

in outlawing these practices , lord camden of the english bench observed: [o]ur law holds the property of every man so sacred , that no man can set his foot upon his neighbour's close without his leave ; if he does he is a trespasser , though he does no damage at all ; if he will tread upon his neighbour's ground , he must justify it by law .

these same intrusive practices also faced disfavor in the american colonies .

british officials often resorted to writs of assistance , a form of general warrant , which permitted house - to - house searches .

these legal orders generally failed to allege any illegal activity and were not signed off on by a judge .

in the famous paxton's case , leading boston attorney james otis attacked these writs as "the worst instrument of arbitrary power , the most destructive of english liberty , and the fundamental principles of the constitution , that was ever found in an english law book. .

john adams later commented that these indiscriminate intrusions were "the spark in which originated the american revolution. .

to prevent the newly established federal government from committing these incursions into their lives , the american people ratified the fourth amendment as part of the bill of rights in 1791 .

it reads: the right of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures , shall not be violated , and no warrants shall issue , but upon probable cause , supported by oath of affirmation , and particularly describing the place to be searched , and the person or things to be seized .

over the years , the federal courts have struggled to reconcile the first clause of the amendment , which requires that all searches and seizures be reasonable , with the second clause , which requires that all warrants meet certain minimum requirements such as particularly describing the place to be searched and the things to be seized .

in any event , the court must first determine whether the fourth amendment's restrictions apply at all .

this is done by asking whether the government has conducted a "search," a legal term of art that cannot be resolved by mere dictionary definition , but instead requires application of the supreme court's intricate , and at times contradictory , fourth amendment case law .

the idea that what a person knowingly exposes to the public is not entitled to constitutional protection was not an invention of the katz court , but was embedded in fourth amendment jurisprudence for quite some time .

in one of the first fourth amendment cases , ex parte jackson , the court held that anything "exposed" on the outside of a parcel of mail is not entitled to fourth amendment protection .

similarly , under what has come to be known as the "plain view" doctrine , justice brandeis noted in the 1927 case united states v. lee that the use of a searchlight to view cases of liquor on the deck of a ship was not a fourth amendment search .

more prominently , the court decided a series of cases throughout the 20 th century holding that people do not have a reasonable expectation that a person with whom they are conversing will not later reveal that conversation to the police .

the third - party doctrine would later be extended to documents and transactional data shared with third parties .

perhaps the strongest argument in support of the third - party doctrine is its ability to be harmonized with the rest of fourth amendment case law .

one only has to quickly scan the supreme court reporter to realize that the third - party doctrine is consistent with numerous other cases which hold that acts or things revealed to the public are not entitled to fourth amendment protection .

take , for instance , the garbage collection case , california v. greenwood .

there , the police requested that a trash collector pick up a suspect's plastic trash bags left in front of his house so the officer could search it for contraband or other evidence of criminal activity .

the court concluded that the defendant was not entitled to a reasonable expectation of privacy in his trash as he discarded it where it could be accessed by the public .

similarly , in united states v. knotts , the court held that a person does not have a legitimate privacy expectation in his public movements as he voluntarily conveys this information to anyone who wants to look .

this theory has also been applied to cases where police flew an airplane 1,000 feet and a helicopter 400 feet over private property in search of illegal activity .

the rationale in those cases was that any member of the public flying in federally regulated airspace could have looked down and seen what the officers saw , vitiating any privacy expectation in that space .

in united states v. jacobsen , the court held that it was not a search when police opened a mailed package after its contents had already been viewed by an employee of a private freight carrier .

there , the court observed that once the defendant's privacy expectation had been frustrated by one person , it became public information subject to government investigation .

as a more practical matter , assistance from third parties is utilized by law enforcement in almost every investigation .

when investigating a murder , robbery , or any other crime committed in the real world , police officers will usually interview witnesses to obtain facts about the crime .

to conduct these interviews , the officers generally need not obtain a warrant , and witnesses who refuse to cooperate can be compelled to testify with a grand jury subpoena .

it could be argued that this process of fact finding is very similar to requesting documentary evidence held by third parties and the same standard should be applied to each .

in this same vein , professor orin kerr has defended the third - party doctrine on the ground that it maintains the appropriate balance of privacy and security in the face of technological change .

without the ability to use third parties such as telephone or internet companies , kerr posits , the criminal would traditionally have to go out into the public to commit his crime where the fourth amendment offers more limited protection .

he argues that a criminal can use the services of these third parties to commit crimes without having to expose these activities to areas open to public surveillance .

this , he posits , upsets the privacy - security balance that undergirds the fourth amendment because it would require police to have probable cause to obtain any evidence of the crime: "the effect would be a catch - 22: the police would need probable cause to observe evidence of the crime , but they would need to observe evidence of the crime first to get probable cause. .

kerr contends that the third - party doctrine responds to this imbalance by providing the same amount of protection regardless of whether the defendant commits the crime on his own or through the use of a third - party service .

from an institutional perspective , one might argue that the courts are not the proper branch of the federal government to resolve privacy disputes related to information handed over to third - parties .

once the supreme court outlaws , or significantly limits , a certain police practice , it "constitutionalizes" it , and only the court or a constitutional amendment could overturn this decision .

instead , some argue that when creating rules that pertain to new technologies , congress , and legislatures generally , might be best fitted to find the appropriate balance between privacy and security , while providing the necessary flexibility to change this rule as technology changes .

another argument in support of the third - party doctrine is that the companies which hold a person's records "own" them , as they are in possession of them and are generally the ones that create them .

once possessed by the company , the argument runs , it can transfer these documents to others free from the permission of the subject of the documents .

the court relied on this theory in miller , where it noted that the bank records were not the defendant's "private papers," and as such he could "assert neither ownership nor possession. .

instead , they were deemed "the business records of the banks. .

this argument is buttressed by the theory that the first amendment protects a person's right to communicate facts to others .

while the third - party doctrine appears to fit reasonably well with the rest of fourth amendment case law , and has other weighty arguments in its favor , it has also had its share of vocal critics both on and off the court .

there have been four major arguments against its application: ( 1 ) privacy is not an all - or - nothing proposition that is lost once information is disclosed to another person or company ; ( 2 ) information sent to third - party companies is not actually "voluntary," as people need these services to participate in modern society ; ( 3 ) the judiciary should not impose privacy regimes on the citizenry without engaging in a more comprehensive privacy analysis ; and ( 4 ) failing to protect information shared with others has the potential to breed distrust among people or businesses communicating with each other .

the first major argument against the third - party doctrine challenges the notion that once privacy is lost to one person , it is lost to the world .

at bottom , this is a challenge to the secrecy model of the fourth amendment .

the secrecy theory of privacy has been criticized for not taking into consideration that people may not want to engage in "total disclosure" of information they share with others , but instead seek to selectively disclose that information .

justice marshall said as much in dissent in smith v. maryland ,where he argued that "privacy is not a discrete commodity , possessed absolutely or not at all. .

he continued: "those who disclose certain facts to a bank or phone company for a limited business purpose need not assume that this information will be released to other persons for other purposes. .

several commentators have similarly argued that there is an important distinction between information that is broadcast to the world and that which is disclosed in a controlled environment .

the first category , they argue , includes instances where the government accesses information that is readily available in the public square , such as information posted on a publicly available website or a loud conversation overheard in an airport .

because the person has decided to release this information to the public , he cannot later claim to have an expectation of privacy .

the latter category , on the other hand , entails a more limited sharing that is "an integral part of a legitimate transaction" between the individual and the recipient of the information , and is entitled to fourth amendment protection .

along these same lines , some have pointed out the apparent inconsistency in fourth amendment protection accorded to various types of information people share with third parties .

in katz v. united states and berger v. new york , the court held that people have an expectation of privacy in the content of their conversations , while similar protection was not extended to the telephone numbers dialed in smith .

dissenting in smith , justice stewart , who authored the katz majority opinion , pointed out this incongruity , noting that like telephone numbers , the voice of a conversation must be transmitted through the telephone company's equipment and may be overheard or recorded by that company .

he argued that "what the telephone company does or might do with those numbers is no more relevant to this inquiry than it would be in a case involving the conversation itself. .

instead , justice stewart would have granted both forms of information protection under katz .

in a line that would foreshadow more recent arguments against the third - party doctrine , justice stewart contended that people are not concerned about revealing a list of their telephone calls because it could be incriminating , but rather because it would "reveal the most intimate details of a person's life. .

the second major argument against the third - party doctrine challenges the idea that people "voluntarily" convey information to others when engaging in business transactions .

in miller , the court asserted that the financial statements and deposit slips were "voluntarily conveyed" to the banks in the "ordinary course of business," and in smith the defendant "voluntarily conveyed numerical information to the telephone company. .

more recently , a federal court of appeals judge made a similar argument regarding cell phone users: their use of their phones , moreover , is entirely voluntary .

the government does not require a member of the public to own or carry a phone .

as the days of monopoly phone companies are past , the government does not require him to obtain his cell phone service from a particular service provider that keeps historical cell site records for its subscribers , either .

and it does not require him to make a call , let alone to make a call at a specific location .

there has been significant disagreement , however , about how voluntary these transactions really are .

justice brennan argued in dissent that "for all practical purposes , the disclosure by individuals or business firms of their financial affairs to a bank is not entirely volitional , since it is impossible to participate in the economic life of contemporary society without maintaining a bank account. .

similarly , justice marshall argued in smith that "unless a person is prepared to forgo use" of the telephone , which for "many has become a personal or professional necessity , he cannot help but accept the risk of surveillance .

it is idle to speak of 'assuming' risks in contexts where , as a practical matter , individuals have no realistic alternative. .

one commentator has argued that unlike the undercover agent cases , where refusing to talk to a particular individual is a "realistic option," refusing to get medical treatment or an education would lead to an "unproductive" and "possibly much foreshortened existence. .

the third central argument against the third - party doctrine challenges the assertion that people "assume the risk" when handing information over to third parties .

people do not assume legal risks as a matter of pure deduction , the argument goes , "but assume only those risks of unregulated government intrusion that the courts tell us we have to assume. .

dissenting in white , justice harlan expressed concern about the process by which courts determine how much privacy protection people should expect and will receive .

he notes that people's expectations of privacy and the risks they assume are "reflections" of the laws handed down by courts or legislatures .

because it is the "task of the law to form and project , as well as mirror or reflect," justice harlan instructs , "we should not , as judges , merely recite the expectations and risks without examining the desirability of saddling them upon society. .

instead of allowing "the substitution of words for analysis," courts should assess "the nature of a particular practice and the likely extent of its impact on the individual's sense of security balanced against the utility of the conduct as a technique of law enforcement. .

in other words , rather than simply applying the phrase "assumption of the risk" in each new legal context , justice harlan suggested that courts should look anew at each surveillance practice and determine its actual impact on the individual's privacy interests .

one commentator has suggested a similar approach in that the government should not have "practically unrestricted access" to people's records , or , on the flipside , that probable cause must be required for every request of documents .

instead , he argues that the level of protection should depend on the nature of the documents requested .

for example , certain types of records , including public records , may not be entitled to the same protection as others , such as medical or financial records .

lastly , many practical arguments have been formulated against application of third - party doctrine .

justice harlan believed one of the main concerns with the third - party doctrine was its ability to breed distrust in people who are communicating with others .

he noted that the practice of third - party bugging "undermine[s] the confidence and sense of security in dealing with one another that is characteristic of individual relationships between citizens in a free society. .

in justice harlan's view , "words would be measured a good deal more carefully and communication inhibited if one suspected his conversations were being transmitted and transcribed. .

one only has to look to the recent nsa controversy as a more modern example .

some argue that knowledge that information shared with tech companies like google , facebook , and apple might end up in the hands of the government has the potential to engender distrust and cost american businesses significant revenues both at home and abroad .

in addition to the doctrinal and practical arguments made against the third - party doctrine , several concurring opinions in the recent gps tracking case united states v. jones prompt additional questions about its continued application .

some argue that these opinions foreshadow a shift in the court's thinking about the effect of technology on the government's ability to collect large data sets about american citizens .

in jones , the police attached a gps tracking device to the underbelly of jones's car and tracked it 24 hours a day for 28 days without a warrant .

under controlling precedent , a person had no reasonable expectation of privacy when traveling on public streets because he has revealed his movements to the public at large .

while it appeared that jones required a strict application of this previous case law , the court ruled 9-0 against the government , and held that the investigative activity there constituted a fourth amendment search .

the reason why , however , was far from unanimous .

the majority opinion , written by justice scalia , and joined by chief justice roberts and justices kennedy , thomas , and sotomayor , held that the physical attachment of the tracking device on jones's car , coupled with the intent to obtain information about his movements , amounted to a fourth amendment search .

when the police attached the device , they physically trespassed onto his vehicle , his "effect," a constitutionally protected area under the fourth amendment's protection of "persons , houses , papers , and effects. .

as justice scalia's opinion relied upon a trespass theory of the fourth amendment , it will likely not have major repercussions for the third - party doctrine , unless one accepts that the government trespasses on an individual's "papers" or "effects" when it accesses records from third - party companies .

however , two concurring opinions in jones by justices sotomayor and alito might signal the willingness of five justices to reevaluate future applications of the third - party doctrine , at least with respect to pervasive government monitoring .

justice sotomayor's solo concurrence provided the more far - reaching of the two opinions .

she directly called into question "the premise that an individual has no reasonable expectation of privacy in information voluntarily disclosed to third parties. .

she observed: this approach is ill suited to the digital age , in which people reveal a great deal of information about themselves to third parties in the course of carrying out mundane tasks .

people disclose the phone numbers that they dial or text to their cellular providers ; the urls that they visit and the e - mail addresses with which they correspond to their internet service providers ; and the books , groceries , and medications they purchase to online retailers... .

i for one doubt that people would accept without complaint the warrantless disclosure to the government of a list of every web site they had visited in the last week , or month , or year .

but whatever the societal expectations , they can attain constitutionally protected status only if our fourth amendment jurisprudence ceases to treat secrecy as a prerequisite for privacy .

i would not assume that all information voluntarily disclosed to some member of the public for a limited purpose is , for that reason alone , disentitled to fourth amendment protection .

it seems that justice sotomayor , if not prepared to discard the third - party doctrine in whole , is willing to significantly limit its reach , especially when the government is accessing a wealth of data about an individual .

again , it should be noted that justice sotomayor was the only member to articulate this more expansive roll - back of the third - party doctrine .

more generally , both justices sotomayor and alito's opinions could be interpreted to call into question the continued application of the third - party doctrine insofar as it permits pervasive government monitoring .

in his concurrence , justice alito , joined by justices ginsburg , breyer , and kagan , found that while short - term monitoring may be permissible under past precedent , "the use of longer term gps monitoring in investigations of most offenses impinges on expectations of privacy. .

justice sotomayor , who joined the majority but also concurred separately , agreed with justice alito's approach and would have gone even further to find that short - term monitoring should be prohibited in some instances .

these five justices expressed two interrelated concerns .

first , they were uneasy about the government's ability to gather , analyze , and use an extensive volume of information about each person's comings and goings .

justice sotomayor observed that "gps monitoring generates a precise , comprehensive records of a person's public movements that reflects a wealth of information about her familial , political , professional , religious , and sexual associations. .

this idea , commonly referred to as the "mosaic theory," posits that the aggregation of information about a person can reveal a whole lot more about him than each part in isolation .

the justices were not the first to espouse this theory .

before the case reached the supreme court , the district of columbia court of appeals below articulated a similar sentiment in finding that the government's month - long location tracking constituted a fourth amendment search: prolonged surveillance reveals types of information not revealed by short - term surveillance , such as what a person does repeatedly , what he does not do , and what he does ensemble .

these types of information can each reveal more about a person than does any individual trip viewed in isolation .

repeated visits to a church , a gym , a bar , or a bookie tell a story not told by any single visit , as does one's not visiting any of these places over the course of a month .

the sequence of a person's movements can reveal still more ; a single trip to a gynecologist's office tells little about a woman , but that trip followed a few weeks later by a visit to a baby supply store tells a different story .

a person who knows all of another's travels can deduce whether he is a weekly church goer , a heavy drinker , a regular at the gym , an unfaithful husband , an outpatient receiving medical treatment , an associate of particular individuals or political groups — and not just one such fact about a person , but all such facts .

in addition to this aggregation issue , the justices expressed concern about the ability of technology to significantly reduce natural barriers such as limited resources and political accountability that in the past would have limited law enforcement overreach in the field of surveillance .

for justice alito , the fact that the government simply could not have tracked a person's every movement for a month - long period under traditional law enforcement methods led him to conclude that the tracking was overly intrusive .

while justice sotomayor directly criticized the third - party doctrine , one could read justice alito's concurrence as limited solely to monitoring conducted directly by government agents , and not extending to instances where third parties collect data on individuals .

that being said , the combination of the j ones concurrences has already had an effect in third - party cases in lower federal courts .

for example , the district court for the district of columbia applied a variation of the mosaic theory to invalidate the nsa's collection of telephone call records .

citing to the jones concurrences , judge richard h. leon acknowledged that the type of information collected under the nsa's metadata program was very similar to that upheld in smith , "but the ubiquity of phones has dramatically altered the quantity of information that is now available and , more importantly , what that information can tell the government about people's lives. .

and , as described above , judges in certain cell phone location monitoring cases have applied jones and the mosaic theory to deem months - long government tracking a fourth amendment search .

in the long run , it may take a more pertinent set of facts for the justices to advance the arguments enunciated in jones .

notwithstanding the concurring opinions in jones , the bulk of supreme court and lower federal court precedent have left most non - content information unprotected by the fourth amendment .

in some instances , congress filled this void by creating varying levels of privacy protection for this type of non - content information .

however , these protections are in the main not as robust as the warrant requirement , and in some instances , searches may be justified by little more than "official curiosity. .

seven years after the court handed down smith and ruled that government access to telephone toll records was not covered by the fourth amendment , congress enacted as part of the electronic communications privacy act of 1986 ( ecpa ) several provisions requiring the government to seek a court order before using a pen register or trap and trace device .

again , these devices allow the government to gather dialed telephone numbers and email addressing information , among other non - content information .

under 18 u.s.c .

§ 3123 , a court "shall issue an ex parte order authorizing the installation and use of a pen register or trap and trace device ... if the court finds that the attorney for the government has certified that the information likely to be obtained by such installation and use is relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation. .

a few things should be noted about this provision .

first , the "shall" language removes discretion from the judge ; if the judge finds the government has made the required certification , he must issue the order .

second , while the court must ensure that the government has made the proper certification , ecpa does not require an "independent judicial inquiry into the veracity of the attested facts. .

this means that the judge will not make an independent assessment whether the relevancy standard has been met , but only that the government has made the proper certification .

one district court has noted that "the extremely limited judicial review required by [the pen register statute] is intended merely to safeguard against purely random use of this device. .

one magistrate judge went so far as to describe his role under the pen register statute as a "rubber stamp" limited to "proofreading errors," and that "without independent judicial review , the authorization of pen registers is subject to misuse and abuse. .

third , the relevancy standard , which again the government , and not the court , determines if it has been met , is a "far from burdensome" legal standard .

the supreme court has held , at least in the subpoena context , that information sought is not relevant only if "there is no reasonable possibility that the category of materials the government seeks will produce information relevant to the general subject" of the investigation .

in light of this relatively lax standard , several prominent commentators on privacy and technology have suggested that congress should increase the evidentiary threshold under section 3123 from mere relevance to at least a reasonable suspicion standard similar to that used for accessing certain stored communications .

also included in ecpa is the stored communications act ( sca ) , in which congress provided varying degrees of protection to information historically subject to the third - party doctrine and , thus , outside the reach of the fourth amendment .

under 18 u.s.c .

§ 2703 ( c ) , service providers must hand over "records or other information pertaining to a subscriber" so long as the government can establish "specific and articulable facts" that the records are "relevant and material" to an ongoing criminal investigation .

this is akin to the terry reasonable suspicion standard — it is lower than probable cause but does require the government to articulate its basis to believe that the information is connected to criminal activity .

this standard has been applied to data such as the to / from address line in an email or the ip addresses of websites a person has visited .

some courts have construed section 2703 ( d ) in conjunction with the pen register statute to allow the government access to cell site location information .

section 2703 ( c ) ( 2 ) requires the providers to hand over other customer information such as their name , address , telephone calling records , length of service , telephone number , and means and source of payments , including credit card or bank account numbers with either an administrative , grand jury , or trial subpoena .

additionally , congress has passed more targeted privacy protection laws .

for instance , the privacy of cable subscribers is safeguarded under the cable communications privacy act of 1984 , and the privacy of video store customers under the video privacy protection act .

more recently , various members of congress have sought to temper the reach of the third - party doctrine with respect to transactional data .

several days after the edward snowden leaks became public , senator paul filed the "fourth amendment restoration act of 2013" ( s. 1121 ) in an effort to "stop the national security agency from spying on citizens of the united states[.] .

this bill would require that "[t]he fourth amendment to the constitution shall not be construed to allow any agency of the united states government to search the phone records of americans without a warrant based upon probable cause. .

while dictating to the judiciary what the fourth amendment should and should not protect may be beyond congress's constitutional power , congress clearly can play a role in setting substantive and procedural limitations on government surveillance authorities .

for instance , senator paul has introduced a similar bill , the "fourth amendment preservation and protection act of 2013" ( s. 1037 ) , which would prohibit federal , state , and local government officials from accessing information relating to an individual held by a third party in a "system of records. .

other congressional measures would alter the third - party doctrine in a more targeted way .

several location monitoring bills would , for instance , prohibit companies from sharing their customers' location information unless the government obtained a warrant or one of several limited exceptions applied .

so what does the future have in store for the third - party doctrine and the government's collection of non - content , transactional data ? .

at this point , there appears to be only one solid vote on the court in justice sotomayor for eliminating or significantly reducing the scope of this doctrine .

although there are hints in justice alito's jones opinion that he and the three members of his concurrence are ready to reconsider this rule when it comes to pervasive government surveillance , his rationale was left somewhat underdeveloped .

it will take future opinions to get a better sense of whether or how far these justices are willing to go to limit government access to non - content information held in the hands of third parties .

in the meantime , the lower federal courts might continue to limit or distinguish the third - party doctrine in specific and narrow instances .

for instance , in the nsa telephone metadata case , judge leon limited smith to its facts and held that it did not apply to this more comprehensive data collection program .

likewise , if and when the supreme court is asked to reconsider the scope of the third - party doctrine , it is more likely to carve out specific exceptions than to overturn it in its entirety .

this approach would permit the courts to engage in a more nuanced , normative approach to analyzing the privacy interests implicated by accessing records derived from transactions between people and other various entities .

another possibility is for congress to act .

justice alito observed in jones that "[i]in circumstances involving dramatic technological change , the best solution to privacy concerns may be legislative" as "a legislative body is well situated to gauge changing public attitudes , to draw detailed lines , and to balance privacy and public safety in a comprehensive way. .

this argument that congress is best suited to address the nuanced policy questions that privacy and security entails has been expressed by commentators as well .

like the courts , it appears unlikely that congress would be willing to completely eliminate the third - party doctrine .

on the other hand , congress may be more inclined to engage in a subject - by - subject approach , in which congress limits the third - party doctrine in certain areas .

congress provided statutory protection for telephone toll records in the pen register / trap and trace statute ; for internet metadata in the stored communications act ; and for video customer records in the video privacy protection act .

it could enact similar protection for other subject areas where non - content information is shared with companies as a necessary part of doing business .

