this report provides background information and issues for congress on the john lewis ( tao - 205 ) class oiler shipbuilding program , a program to build a new class of 20 fleet oilers for the navy .

the navy's proposed fy2020 budget requests the procurement of the fifth and sixth ships in the program .

issues for congress regarding the tao - 205 program include the following: whether to approve , reject , or modify the navy's fy2020 procurement funding request for the program ; the number of oilers the navy will require in coming years to support its operations ; and whether to encourage or direct the navy to build tao - 205s with more ship self - defense equipment than currently planned by the navy .

decisions that congress makes regarding the program could affect navy capabilities and funding requirements and the u.s. shipbuilding industrial base .

for an overview of the strategic and budgetary context in which the tao - 205 program and other navy shipbuilding programs may be considered , see crs report rl32665 , navy force structure and shipbuilding plans: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke .

 table 2 summarizes congressional action on the navy's request for fy2020 procurement funding for the tao - 205 program .

a may 2019 gao report — the 2019 edition of gao's annual report surveying dod major acquisition programs — stated the following regarding the tao - 205 program: technology maturity and design stability the navy has matured all lewis class critical technologies and stabilized the ships' design .

in 2014 , the navy identified three critical technologies for the lewis class , all of which involved a new system for transferring cargo at sea .

prior to initiating detail design activities in june 2016 , the navy completed prototype tests of the critical technologies and found that they were fully mature — an approach consistent with shipbuilding best practices .

in 2017 , the navy removed one critical technology — the heavy e - stream cargo delivery system — from the lewis class design .

the navy had intended to use this system to deliver f - 35 lightning ii power modules .

the navy subsequently decided to deliver these by air , which precluded any need for the heavy system .

lead ship construction began in september 2018 with 95 percent of the ship's total design effort complete .

program officials stated that this figure meant that 100 percent of the ship's basic and functional design were by then complete — an approach consistent with best practices .

throughout detail design and now into construction , the navy has not changed the lewis class program's performance requirements .

the navy also leveraged commercial vessel designs to minimize design and construction risks .

the lewis class features a modern double - hull construction , an environmental - based design standard for commercial tankers , to ensure the ships can dock at ports - of - call .

this design was included in the final three kaiser class oilers .

production readiness the program office has largely kept to its construction schedule to date for the first ship , but a flooding incident at a nassco graving dock in july 2018 has affected the delivery of future ships .

the program office stated that this incident has not affected current ship fabrication activities .

however , the dock's unavailability while repairs are planned and implemented has disrupted the contractor's schedule for future ships .

according to the program office , the incident has resulted in some delays to certain delivery dates for ships two through six .

other program issues as part of the navy's plan to expand the fleet , the navy concluded that it would need an additional three lewis class ships .

the navy's budget request for fiscal year 2019 increased its planned one - ship - per - year buy to two for fiscal years 2019 , 2021 , and 2023 .

the congress provided appropriations for the additional fiscal year 2019 ship in support of the navy's request .

to account for the additional ships in fiscal years 2019 and 2021 , the navy plans to add two more ships to the low - rate initial production phase .

subsequently , program officials stated that they plan to compete a new contract for the remaining 12 ships using the construction knowledge gained from efforts under the existing contract .

program office comments we provided a draft of this assessment to the program office for review and comment .

the program office provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate .

the program office stated that it continues to follow gao shipbuilding best practices and has leveraged commercial vessel design practices to minimize risk .

the program office also stated that it is currently revising its acquisition baseline to reflect the update in total quantities to 20 ships .

in addition , the program office noted that , in fiscal year 2019 , it fully funded the third and fourth ships and funded advance procurement for the fifth ship .

