almost all commercial service airports in the united states are owned by local and state governments , or by public entities such as airport authorities or multipurpose port authorities .

in 1996 , congress established the airport privatization pilot program ( appp ) to explore the prospect of privatizing publicly owned airports and using private capital to improve and develop them .

in addition to reducing demand for government funds , privatization has been promoted as a way to make airports more efficient and financially viable .

participation in the appp has been very limited .

only two airports have completed the privatization process , and one of them later reverted to public ownership .

owners of other airports considered privatization , but eventually chose not to proceed .

the lack of interest in privatization among u.s. airports could be the result of ( 1 ) readily available financing sources for publicly owned airports ; ( 2 ) barriers or lack of incentives to privatize ; ( 3 ) the potential implications for major stakeholders ; and ( 4 ) satisfaction with the status quo .

privatization refers to the shifting of governmental functions , responsibilities , and sometimes ownership , in whole or in part , to the private sector .

with respect to airports , "privatization" can take many forms up to and including the transfer of an entire airport to private operation and / or ownership .

in the united states , most cases of airport privatization fall into the category of "partial privatization" ; full privatization , either under or outside the appp , has been very rare .

the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 ( 49 u.s.c .

ยง47134 ; section 149 of the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 , p.l .

104-264 ) established the appp .

the program was created to test a new concept for increasing private participation , especially private capital investment , in airport operations and development .

the law authorizes the secretary of the u.s. department of transportation and , through delegation , the faa administrator , to exempt participating airports from certain federal requirements .

specifically , the administrator may exempt the airports from all or part of the requirements to use airport revenue for airport - related purposes , to repay federal grants , or to return airport property acquired with federal assistance upon the lease or sale of the airport deeded by the federal government .

the law originally limited participation in the appp to no more than five airports .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-95 ) increased the number of airports that may participate from 5 to 10 .

only one large hub commercial airport may participate in the program and that airport may only be leased , not sold .

only general aviation airports can be sold under the appp .

 ( see the appendix for definitions of airport types. ) .

table 1 provides a comparison of the requirements and regulations governing airport privatization under and outside the appp .

over its 20-year history , the appp has not been successful in stimulating wide interest in airport privatization .

the program's modest results appear to have several causes .

several european countries and canada have undertaken notable steps in airport privatization .

two factors that have facilitated privatization in other countries do not exist in the united states .

first , many of the major airports that have been privatized in europe and canada were previously owned by national governments , not by local or provincial governments , so the decision to privatize did not need to be taken at multiple levels of government .

second , the tax - favored status of debt issued by state and local governments in the united states has no analogue in most other countries , so the shift from public to private ownership did not necessarily entail higher borrowing costs .

congress has been interested in airport privatization as a way to save money by making airports less dependent on federal assistance while also , in the long run , increasing the nation's aviation capacity to meet growing demand for air travel .

however , under current federal law , privatization has struggled to achieve these goals .

federal aip spending is ultimately determined via the budget process and therefore budget savings may or may not result from airport privatization .

privatization outside the framework of the appp is generally unattractive to both airport owners and potential investors , as it is likely to result in higher financing costs and loss of federal aip grants and will not provide the public - sector owner with revenues that can be used for other purposes .

privatization within the framework of the appp may generate minor reductions in federal outlays due to the requirement for a privately run airport to match a larger share of federal aip grants , but it is not clear that privatization serves the interests of public - sector owners or air carriers , except in cases where the airport is losing money or the owner can channel the proceeds of privatization into capital projects at other airports .

private investors' ability to earn money from an airport privatized under the appp is limited by restrictions on passenger facility charges and limitations on increases in other airport fees .

air carriers , in most cases , will see advantages from privatization only if they can negotiate lower rents and landing fees in return for agreeing to it , but this would diminish the potential financial return to investors .

streamlining the appp application and review process might make privatization somewhat more attractive by reducing the risks arising from a long application period , such as changes in economic and capital market conditions .

however , significantly increasing interest in airport privatization is likely to require structural change to the existing airport financing system .

options might include the following: offering the same tax treatment to private and public airport infrastructure bonds .

this could be done by eliminating the current federal income tax exemption of interest on bonds issued by public - sector airport owners or by extending tax - exempt or tax - preferential treatment to airport infrastructure bonds issued by private investors .

either change would eliminate a major disincentive to shift airports from public to private ownership .

on the other hand , removing the tax exemption on public - sector airport bonds would raise airports' financing costs , while extending it to private - sector bonds could have consequences for federal revenues .

changing aip requirements .

reducing the percentage match private operators must provide to obtain aip grants to the level of comparable public operators would make privatization more attractive to private investors , but would increase the share of federal funding .

relaxing aip grant assurances .

if private investors were freed from some of the requirements agreed to by the public owner in order to obtain aip funds , privatization might become more attractive to investors .

however , some of the changes that might be most attractive to investors , such as allowing the sale of airport property , might interfere with the federal interest in maintaining aviation system capacity and safety .

liberalizing rules governing fees .

allowing privatized airports more flexibility to impose passenger facility charges and to raise rents and landing fees would make privatization more attractive to investors .

however , this might increase airline opposition to privatization and could lead to higher costs for passengers and air cargo shippers .

easing limits on use of privatization revenue .

reducing the obstacles for public - sector owners to use privatization revenue for non - airport purposes would stimulate local and state government interest in privatization .

on the other hand , it could potentially lead to a lower level of investment in aviation infrastructure .

the following types of airports are discussed in this report: commercial service airports publicly owned airports that receive scheduled passenger service and board at least 2,500 passengers each year .

there are 509 commercial service airports .

primary airports commercial service airports that board more than 10,000 passengers each year .

large hub airports board 1% or more of system - wide passengers ( 30 airports , 72% of all enplanements ) .

medium hub airports board 0.25% but less than 1% of system - wide passengers ( 31 airports , 15% of all enplanements ) .

small hub airports board 0.05% but less than 0.25% of system - wide passengers ( 72 airports , 8% of all enplanements ) .

non - hub airports board more than 10,000 but less than 0.05% of system - wide passengers ( 249 airports , 4% of all enplanements ) .

non - primary commercial service airports board at least 2,500 but no more than 10,000 passengers each year ( 127 airports , 0.1% of all enplanements ) .

general aviation airports general aviation airports do not receive scheduled commercial or military service but typically support business , personal , and instructional flying ; agricultural spraying ; air ambulances ; on - demand air - taxies ; and / or charter aircraft service ( 2,564 airports ) .

reliever airports airports designated by faa to relieve congestion at commercial airports and provide improved general aviation access ( 259 airports ) .

