the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , sometimes referred to as the president's disaster relief fund , is managed by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

the drf is the main account used to fund a wide variety of disaster assistance programs that provide grants and other forms of support to assist state , local , and tribal governments , as well as certain nonprofit entities during disaster recovery .

the drf is also used to fund mission assignments .

mission assignments are used by fema to task and reimburse other federal entities that provide direct assistance during emergency and major disaster declarations .

the drf functions as a reserve for potential , future incidents , as well as an account to pay for ongoing projects to recover from past disasters .

the majority of assistance provided by the federal government in response to emergency and major disaster declarations is funded through the drf .

the drf , however , is not used to fund the federal response to every type of incident .

in general , funds from the drf are released after the president has issued an emergency or major disaster declaration pursuant to the robert t. stafford relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , as amended , hereinafter the stafford act ) .

incidents that are not declared under the stafford act are either handled by states and localities without federal assistance , or the assistance is provided by another federal entity under its own authority using its own funding mechanism .

for example , the small business act authorizes the small business administration ( sba ) to issue disaster loans to households and businesses in response to certain types of incidents .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) also offers several permanently authorized programs to help farmers recover financially from a natural disaster , including federal crop insurance , the noninsured crop disaster assistance program ( nap ) , and emergency disaster loans .

while not specifically authorized in statute , the drf has been used to fund recovery projects for over four decades .

rather than an authorized account , the drf is the product of legislation and federal policies that can be traced to the post - world war ii era .

prior to that time , disaster response activities were funded primarily through local efforts and voluntary groups .

in cases where the federal government did offer assistance , the needs of disaster victims and affected communities were funded on an as - needed basis through appropriations that were then allocated , pursuant to the legislation , by executive branch administrators and , ultimately , the president .

the following section discusses how the drf is funded including the budgeting and appropriation process .

it also describes the budget control act and the drf monthly report .

the drf has been of congressional interest for a number of reasons .

these include the amount of funding appropriated to the drf , the appropriateness and effectiveness of providing additional funding to the drf through supplemental appropriations , and the use of policy mechanisms to reduce the amount of funding provided to states and localities for emergency and disaster assistance .

one fundamental debate that has been of concern , particularly in the light of the national debt , is the federal role in providing disaster assistance .

since the 1950s , the level of financial assistance given to states for disaster relief by the federal government has steadily increased .

in light of stated concern with the federal deficit , the increased federal involvement has raised policymaking questions concerning how disaster relief should be equitably funded .

some of these questions include the following: the model for emergency and disaster response is built on the premise that emergencies and disasters are local .

requests for assistance from the next level of government are made only if the lower unit of government is overwhelmed .

some would argue that some incidents funded by the federal government do not meet this requirement .

an example might be snow removal or repairs after minor flooding .

is the federal government funding emergency and major disaster declarations that do not meet the criterion of the states being overwhelmed before requesting assistance ? .

are states using federal funding for disaster relief to protect their own budgets ? .

should federal disaster relief be subject to thresholds and maximums ? .

for example , an emergency or major disaster might not receive federal funding unless damage estimates reach a certain level .

while the current system does use a per capita amount , that level could be increased .

as another example , the total amount of federal relief for an event could be capped at a certain amount .

after this level has been reached , the state would then be responsible to pay for the rest of recovery .

should the state's fiscal capability factor into disaster relief ? .

in 1986 , fema proposed measures to reduce the amount the agency contributed toward disaster relief .

one of the proposals argued that funding allocations should be made according to each state's ability to fund its own disaster relief .

the determination would be based on a comparison of the state's per capita income with the national per capita income .

the calculation would then be used to create a sliding scale for assistance .

states capable of funding their own disaster relief would receive limited or no assistance .

in contrast , struggling communities would be eligible to receive more federal assistance .

is federal assistance to states and localities unintentionally creating a disincentive for states and localities to prepare for emergencies and major disasters ? .

some may argue that federal funding for disaster relief through regular annual appropriations has become entrenched to the point that it has contributed to unintended consequences .

for example , it has been argued that some states do not properly fund mitigation measures because there is a presumption that federal funding is virtually guaranteed should an emergency or major disaster occur .

those advocating this position could arguably point out that federal involvement in disaster relief will continue to increase and that in order to be fiscally responsible , changes should be made in the way in which disaster relief is funded .

others may claim the function of the federal government is to help states in their time of crisis .

from this perspective , withholding or limiting the amount of funding a state could receive for an incident would be neglectful of that state's needs .

as mentioned earlier , funding the drf at a higher level through annual appropriations may give some the perception that the funds are not being used and could therefore be subject to rescissions or transfers .

if larger appropriations for the drf witnessed since the enactment of the bca continue , will there be a temptation to transfer unobligated funds to other disaster assistance programs not authorized by the stafford act ? .

for example , could the funds from the drf be used to fund drought relief programs provided by the united states department of agriculture , or to fund fire assistance provided by the department of the interior ? .

would subsidizing other assistance programs negate the benefit of having a larger appropriation ? .

these and other questions may be raised should congress elect to debate the past and future funding of disaster relief .

