according to the office of personnel management ( opm ) , the federal workforce is composed of an estimated 2.1 million civilian workers , and several federal agencies collect , compile , and publish statistics about this workforce .

source s may vary in their totals due to differences in how federal workforce statistics are compiled .

some sources rely on "head counts" of employees ( opm ) , some on total hours worked ( such as the office of management and budget [omb] ) , some on surveys of employing agencies , and others on self - identification by workers surveyed in their homes .

in addition , federal civilian employee databases may exclude particular departments , agencies , or branches of government .

some may also account for temporary or seasonal employees ( such as those employed by the u.s. census ) depending on the time of year the statistics are generated .

this report focuses on differences in methodologies , including exclusions , and the frequency of data collection employed by omb and opm to determine the size and scope of the federal workforce .

these differences will facilitate the selection of appropriate data for specific purposes .

one example of a key methodological distinction is the difference between "full - time equivalents" ( ftes ) and on - board personnel .

the following two examples illustrate how the fte and on - board methods can be used to derive different federal workforce totals .

opm is an independent agency that functions as the central human resources department of the executive branch .

in fulfilling its mission , opm collects , maintains , and publishes data on a large portion of the federal civilian workforce .

in fy2010 , opm established a system called the enterprise human resources integration - statistical data mart ( ehri - sdm ) .

this automated system provides access to personnel data for 96% of nonpostal federal civilian executive branch employees .

the database does have exclusions ; for example , not all executive branch agencies submit their personnel data to opm .

these exclusions include some national security and intelligence agencies , and the postal service .

even with these exclusions , the ehri - sdm is widely regarded as the most comprehensive resource available on the size and scope of the federal workforce .

more than 100 data elements are collected for each federal employee within the ehri - sdm .

these data are aggregated by opm and published in the resources described below .

omb is the largest component of the executive office of the president .

omb reports directly to the president , and it assists executive departments and agencies in implementing priorities and commitments of the president .

omb produces the budget of the united states , which includes federal employee statistics created using the fte counting method .

the resources described in this report contain data often requested by members or congressional staff .

the sources covered differ in the methodology , including exclusions , and the frequency of data collection .

users should be aware of these differences when using federal workforce statistics from these sources .

