the 113 th congress has made fighting trafficking in persons ( tip ) within the united states a legislative priority .

tip is believed to be one of the most prolific areas of contemporary criminal activity and is of significant interest to the united states as a serious human rights concern .

tip is both an international and domestic crime that involves violations of labor , public health , and human rights standards , as well as criminal law .

the united states is a source , transit , and destination country for men , women , and children subject to trafficking in persons .

in the united states , human trafficking occurs in every state , and it victimizes both u.s. citizens and noncitizens .

as many as 17,500 people are believed to be trafficked into the united states each year , and some have estimated that 100,000 u.s. citizen ( usc ) children are victims of trafficking within the united states .

the trafficking of individuals within u.s. borders is commonly referred to as domestic or "internal" human trafficking .

domestic human trafficking occurs primarily for labor and most commonly in domestic service , agriculture , manufacturing , janitorial services , hotel services , construction , health and elder care , hair and nail salons , and strip club dancing .

however , more investigations and prosecutions have taken place for sex trafficking offenses than for labor trafficking offenses .

noncitizens are more susceptible than u.s. citizens to labor trafficking , and more foreign victims are found in labor trafficking than in sex trafficking .

although labor trafficking can happen to u.s. citizens , significantly more u.s. citizens are found in sex trafficking than in labor trafficking .

research indicates that most of the victims of sex trafficking into and within the united states are women and children .

in addition , migrant labor camps tend to be common settings for labor exploitation and domestic trafficking .

domestically , anti - tip efforts include protection for victims , education of the public , and the investigation and prosecution of trafficking offenses .

the departments of justice ( doj ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , and labor ( dol ) have programs or administer grants to other entities to provide assistance specific to the needs of trafficking victims .

this assistance includes temporary housing , independent living skills , cultural orientation , transportation , job training , mental health counseling , and legal assistance .

both hhs and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) administer public awareness campaigns on recognizing human trafficking victims .

in addition , at the federal level , the majority of the cases are investigated by agents in doj's federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and dhs's u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , who coordinate as appropriate ; the cases are prosecuted by doj .

for more than a decade , congress has been actively engaged in anti - human - trafficking efforts within the united states .

through the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( tvpa , division a of p.l .

106-386 ) and its four reauthorizations ( tvpras ) , congress has aimed to eliminate human trafficking within the united states by creating domestic grant programs for both victims and law enforcement , creating new criminal laws , and conducting oversight on the effectiveness and implications of u.s. anti - tip policy .

most recently , in march 2013 , the tvpa's grant programs were reauthorized through fy2017 in the violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 ( title xii , p.l .

113-4 ) .

this report discusses domestic human - trafficking - related issues that have received legislative action or are of significant congressional interest in the 113 th congress .

the most recent reauthorization of the tvpa is not reviewed in detail in this report .

this report accompanies crs report rl34317 , trafficking in persons: u.s. policy and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and liana rosen and crs report r41878 , sex trafficking of children in the united states: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

federal statutes do not formally define human trafficking or trafficking in persons .

instead , the tvpa defines "severe forms of trafficking in persons" to mean , sex trafficking in which a commercial sex act is induced by force , fraud , or coercion , or in which the person induced to perform such act has not attained 18 years of age ; or the recruitment , harboring , transportation , provision , or obtaining of a person for labor or services , through the use of force , fraud , or coercion for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude , peonage , debt bondage , or slavery .

there appears to be a consensus that prostitution by minors fits the definition of "severe forms of human trafficking" as defined under the tvpa .

this report examines the trafficking - related provisions in legislation that has at least been reported out of committee in the 113 th congress .

where applicable , it discusses companion legislation that may not have been considered in committee or other legislation that has received significant congressional interest .

the legislation includes the following: the trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2013 ( title xii of p.l .

113-4 ) enacted on march 7 , 2013 .

this act was part of the larger the violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 .

the e. clay shaw , jr .

missing children's assistance reauthorization act ( p.l .

113-38 ) , enacted on september 30 , 2013 .

the fraudulent overseas recruitment and trafficking elimination act ( h.r .

3344 ) .

the justice for victims of trafficking act of 2013 ( h.r .

3530 ) , passed by the house on may 20 , 2014 .

the companion legislation ( s. 1738 ) has not been taken up in committee .

the stop exploitation through trafficking act of 2013 ( h.r .

3610 ) , as passed by the house on may 20 , 2014 .

the companion legislation ( s. 1733 ) has not been taken up in committee .

the preventing sex trafficking and improving opportunities for youth in foster care act ( h.r .

4058 ) , as passed by the house on may 20 , 2014 .

the save act of 2014 ( h.r .

4225 ) , as passed by the house on may 20 , 2014. international megan's law to prevent demand for child sex trafficking ( h.r .

4573 ) , as passed by the house on may 20 , 2014 .

the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) , as passed by the senate on june 27 , 2013 .

the supporting at - risk children act ( s. 1870 ) , as ordered reported by the senate finance committee on december 12 , 2013 .

the following sections lay out issues raised in the bills .

the issues are grouped under the following themes: ( 1 ) restoring victims through services and benefits , ( 2 ) unaccompanied minor trafficking victims , ( 3 ) protection of foreign national workers , ( 4 ) criminal justice , ( 5 ) improving data , ( 6 ) domestic sex trafficking of children , and ( 7 ) other issues that include inter - agency coordination and sex offender registry and notification .

in general , the trafficking business feeds on continuing demand and conditions of vulnerability , such as youth , gender , poverty , and social exclusion .

actors engaged in human trafficking range from amateur family - run organizations to sophisticated transnational organized crime syndicates .

trafficking victims are often subjected to mental and physical abuse in order to control them .

abuses may include debt bondage , social isolation , removal of identification cards and travel documents , violence , and fear of reprisals against them or their families .

a major aspect of u.s. anti - trafficking efforts is victim assistance: providing immediate services when victims are identified and helping the victims recover from the victimization and reclaim their lives .

pending legislation ( h.r .

3610 / s. 1733 and h.r .

3530 / s. 1738 ) seeks to improve victim services and provide greater access to resources for victims .

congress has expressed concern that unaccompanied minors attempting to enter into the united states may be victims of trafficking or may be at heightened risk of becoming trafficking victims .

unaccompanied minors are aliens who are in the united states without a parent or guardian .

the 2013 tvpa reauthorization ( p.l .

113-4 ) contains provisions related to the custody and care of unaccompanied minor trafficking victims .

p.l .

113-4 requires that the dhs secretary create a pilot program to provide independent child advocates at immigration detention sites for child trafficking victims and other vulnerable unaccompanied alien children .

in addition , p.l .

113-4 specifies that children in the custody of hhs who receive u status ( for crime victims ) are eligible for programs and services to the same extent as refugees , and the federal government will reimburse states for foster care provided to these children .

beyond these newly enacted protections , s. 744 contains additional provisions that seek to protect unaccompanied alien children from becoming victims of human trafficking .

the bill would transfer , from hhs to doj , the responsibility for ensuring , to the greatest extent possible , that unaccompanied alien children in dhs custody have counsel to represent them and access to child advocates .

it would require that the secretary of dhs , in consultation with child welfare experts , create mandatory training for dhs customs and border protection ( cbp ) personnel and other personnel who come in contact with unaccompanied alien children .

in addition , the bill would direct hhs to hire child welfare professionals to provide assistance in no fewer than seven of the cbp offices or stations with the largest number of unaccompanied minors .

such professionals would be required to have trauma - centered and developmentally appropriate interviewing expertise and , among other duties , would be responsible for screening unaccompanied alien children to ensure that they are not trafficking victims , among other items .

some members of congress have argued that migrant workers and other foreign workers are especially vulnerable to exploitation at the hands of foreign labor contractors , smugglers , and human traffickers .

contractors often play a critical role in the labor migration process by matching willing workers with willing employers .

yet because many prospective migrants depend on such "middle men" to help them enter the united states ( legally or otherwise ) and to connect them with employers , contractors may take advantage of migrant workers to extract unfair payments or other such concessions .

current law has outlined some protections for foreign workers .

the 2013 tvpa reauthorization ( p.l .

113-4 ) , requires that a video be shown in consular waiting rooms to provide information on the rights and responsibilities of employees under u.s. immigration , labor , and employment law .

further , p.l .

113-4 made it a criminal offense to knowingly destroy , or for a period of more than 48 hours , conceal , remove , confiscate , or possess another person's passport , or immigration or personal identification documents in the course of committing or attempting to commit the offense of fraud in foreign labor contracting , alien smuggling , or in order to unlawfully maintain , prevent , or restrict the labor or services of the individual .

s. 744 , as passed by the senate , and h.r .

3344 would establish new requirements to regulate foreign labor contractors and to combat human trafficking .

the bill would require foreign labor contractors to provide workers with written information ( in english and the worker's native language ) about the terms and conditions of employment , including information about the worker's visa , among other items .

employers and contractors would be prohibited from discriminating against workers on the basis of race , sex , national origin , religion , age , disability , or other similar factors ; and could not charge workers a fee for contracting activity .

to facilitate enforcement of these provisions , contractors would be required to register with the department of labor ( dol ) every two years , to provide annual reports on their activities , and to post a bond ensuring their ability to fulfill their responsibilities .

the secretary of labor would maintain a list of registered contractors , and the secretary of state would provide relevant information to certain nonimmigrant visa applicants .

dol would establish procedures to investigate complaints and impose civil fines against noncompliant contractors or employers ; and individuals also could sue contractors for civil damages .

employers would be required to use registered contractors .

while the united states has a number of statutes that can and have been used to combat human trafficking , law enforcement and policy makers have been interested in ways to enhance investigations and prosecutions of individuals who commit trafficking offenses .

in general , federal law enforcement has targeted criminal networks that may involve individuals operating in a number of capacities .

in an effort to help law enforcement combat the advertising side of commercial sexual exploitation , h.r .

4225 aims to permit the prosecution of entities ( including websites ) that "knowingly" advertise a person , knowing , or in reckless disregard of the fact , that force or fraud has been used to cause the person to engage in a commercial sex act or that the victim is a minor .

for entities that have not advertised , but "benefit" from participating in a venture which has engaged in such advertising , reckless disregard of the fact that force or fraud has been used or that a minor was involved would not be enough ; they would have to know either fact exists .

in addition , in order to enhance law enforcement targeting of criminal enterprises engaged in human trafficking , s. 1738 would , among other things , set forth provisions prohibiting "aggravated human trafficking racketeering. .

s. 1738 would also expand state and local prosecutors' ability to obtain wiretap orders from state courts for certain investigations by including human trafficking , child sexual exploitation , and child pornography production as allowable investigations .

in addition to expanding law enforcement's "toolbox" for investigating sex trafficking , s. 1738 would enhance penalties for certain crimes involving human trafficking , child exploitation , and repeat sex offenders .

the bills would also revise the statutes related to travel for purposes of engaging in illicit sexual conduct .

such provisions are intended to help law enforcement combat sex tourism .

domestic sex trafficking of children is trafficking within the united states involving a commercial sex act in which the person induced to perform such act has not attained 18 years of age .

regardless of whether a child is believed to have consented to sex or whether the child represents himself / herself as an adult , the child is considered a trafficking victim under federal law .

the exact number of child victims of sex trafficking in the united states is unknown because of challenges in defining the population and varying methodologies used to arrive at estimates .

most of the victims are u.s. citizens and lprs .

commercial sexual exploitation of children appears to be fueled by a variety of individual ( eg , homelessness or history of child abuse ) , relationship ( eg , family conflict or dysfunction ) , community ( eg , peer pressure or gang involvement ) , and societal ( eg , sexualization of children ) variables .

these factors may interact in ways that can increase the risk of exploitation .

as part of its 2013 report on child sex trafficking , the national academy of sciences recommended that multiple stakeholders — such as the federal government , state and local governments , academic and research institutions , foundations and nongovernmental organizations , and the commercial sector — collaborate to address this issue .

the 113 th congress has taken up legislation to address sex trafficking of children .

the legislation touches on a variety of policy areas ( eg , the child welfare system , juvenile justice , runaway and homeless youth ) .

congress passed h.r .

3092 ( enacted as p.l .

113-38 ) , which requires the federal missing and exploited children's program to provide assistance to law enforcement on child sex trafficking .

other legislation ( h.r .

3530 and s. 1738 ) would direct funds to provide support to child victims of pornography and human trafficking , and require reporting of children missing from foster care .

in addition , two bills under consideration ( s. 1870 and h.r .

4058 ) would require state child welfare agencies and hhs to respond to sex trafficking of children , including those who may or may not be in foster care .

further , another bill ( s. 1733 and its companion , h.r .

3610 ) would , in different ways , incentivize states to enact "safe harbor laws" that would discourage charging minors for prostitution or sex trafficking offenses , and encourage the diversion of these minors to child protective services .

there have been concerns about possible duplication of efforts and a lack of coordination among the agencies that conduct anti - trafficking activities , and whether the fact that so many agencies are involved with anti - trafficking policy leads to duplication or funds not being used in the most efficient manner .

the tvpa established the senior policy operating group ( spog ) in part to facilitate coordination on anti - trafficking policy across u.s. government agencies to ensure that there is not a duplication of efforts .

however , the federal government does not currently have a national strategy broadly directed at combating human trafficking .

s. 1733 would direct the attorney general to implement and maintain a national strategy for combating human trafficking .

this strategy would be required to include , among other things , ( 1 ) integrated efforts ( at the federal , state , local , and tribal levels ) to investigate and prosecute human trafficking ; ( 2 ) internal department of justice case coordination ; ( 3 ) federal interagency coordination on the prevention , investigation , and apprehension of persons who target and exploit others for trafficking ; and ( 4 ) measurable objectives and quantifiable goals for combating human trafficking .

in addition , s. 1733 would require the attorney general , as part of the annual report to congress on u.s. government trafficking activities , to report the number of human trafficking investigations opened by fbi , dhs , dol or the human smuggling and trafficking center ; and the number of such investigations that were reported to the u.s. attorneys , the doj human trafficking and prosecution division , or the doj child exploitation and obscenity section .

the sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) provides a set of minimum standards for sex offender registration and notification in the united states .

sorna defines sex offenders according to three tiers , tier iii being the highest classification and includes those individuals convicted of the most egregious crimes ( predicate offenses for sex offender registration and notification ) .

the sorna requirements involve tier iii offenders being subject to the strictest registration and notification requirements .

tier i: predicate offenses include whatever offenses do not support a higher classification , such as misdemeanor registration offenses and child pornography possession .

tier ii: predicate offenses include most felonious sexual abuse or sexual exploitation crimes involving victims who are minors , including distribution and production of child pornography .

tier iii: predicate offenses generally encompass sexual assaults involving sexual acts regardless of victim age , sexual contact offenses against children below the age of 13 , nonparental kidnapping of minors , and attempts or conspiracies to commit such offenses .

currently , a tier ii sex offender means , among other things , a sex offender whose offenses are "comparable to or more severe than" offenses including sex trafficking when committed against a minor .

s. 1733 would , among other things , amend sorna so that a tier ii sex offender no longer includes sex trafficking , and would instead amend the definition of a tier iii sex offender to mean , among other things , a sex offender whose offenses are "comparable to or more severe than" offenses including sex trafficking when committed against a minor , or an attempt or conspiracy to commit such an offense against a minor .

in addition , h.r .

4573 , as passed by the house , would direct the secretary of dhs to establish a center in ice , to be known as the "angel watch center. .

the angel watch center would receive information on travel by child - sex offenders , and would establish procedures for notifying or making the decision not to notify a destination country of current or impending travel by a child - sex offender .

h.r .

4573 would also express a sense of congress that the president should negotiate bilateral agreements with foreign governments to transmit and receive information on international travel by child - sex offenders , including u.s. citizens who are arrested or convicted for child - sex offenses in a foreign country .

