the magnuson stevens fishery conservation and management act ( msfcma , 16 u.s.c .

§§1801 et seq. ) .

governs the management and conservation of commercial and recreational fisheries in u.s. federal waters ( 3-200 nautical miles from shore ) .

although the msfcma has been amended a least 30 times since it was enacted in 1976 , the act has retained many of its original elements .

the act decentralized the federal management process by setting up regional fishery management councils and requiring extensive public comment during the development of fishery management plans .

the msfcma also has evolved with changes to fishery resources , the u.s. fishing industry , recreational fishing , and seafood markets .

generally , the challenges of fisheries management have shifted from developing fisheries to addressing conservation of fish populations and the marine environment .

the msfcma was last reauthorized and extensively amended in 2006 ( p.l .

109-479 ) .

although the authorization of appropriations under the msfcma expired at the end of fy2013 , the act's requirements continue in effect and congress has continued to appropriate funds to administer the act .

historically , reauthorization has also provided the opportunity to introduce significant amendments to the act .

as congress considers reauthorization , it faces the ongoing challenge of balancing utilization and conservation of fish populations .

some of the main questions revolve around stopping overfishing and rebuilding fish stocks while maintaining the well - being of fishermen and fishing communities .

related management issues involve the quality of data and stock assessments used for managing fisheries and the amount of flexibility allowed in the management process .

during the last three congresses , a number of bills have been introduced to address these issues and other concerns related to fisheries management .

house and senate committees have been pursuing efforts to reauthorize the msfcma during the 113 th congress .

oversight and reauthorization hearings have been held by the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation and the house committee on natural resources .

in december 2013 , the chairman of the house committee on natural resources released a reauthorization discussion draft .

the draft includes several sections that reflect topics covered by bills introduced in previous sessions of congress .

in early april 2014 , the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation also released a draft to stakeholder groups .

an ongoing issue for managers , fishermen , and environmentalists is the balance between conservation and utilization of fish populations .

although there is general agreement that stocks should not be overfished and overfished stocks should be rebuilt , questions remain with regard to the timing of management actions , the choice of management objectives , how stock management objectives should be achieved , and the information needed to make these determinations .

several interrelated issues have emerged during the ongoing debate over requirements to use annual catch limits ( acls ) and to rebuild fish populations .

general categories of issues include ( 1 ) providing for greater flexibility during stock rebuilding ; ( 2 ) incorporating new data and uncertainty when using acls ; ( 3 ) improving the decision - making process ; ( 4 ) establishing limited access privileges ; and ( 5 ) reducing bycatch .

meanwhile , managers must also contend with environmental factors over which they often have no control such as climate change and the loss and degradation of fish habitat .

decreasing environmental quality may be the greatest long - term threat to the productivity of many fish populations .

the house committee on natural resources and the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation have been pursuing efforts to reauthorize the msfcma during the 113 th congress by holding hearings and by releasing discussion drafts composed of potential amendments to the act .

the house draft has been posted on the natural resources committee website to gather public input on proposed changes .

proposals include topics related to flexibility in rebuilding fish stocks and setting acls , standards and procedures for developing catch share programs , relationships to other laws , data confidentiality , and red snapper management .

the senate committee draft has been distributed to different stakeholders and has been posted on several websites .

the draft addresses topics such as subsistence uses , forage fish , use of capital funds , rebuilding timeframes , and review of allocation among sectors .

both committees intend to release refined proposals and continue progress on reauthorization issues during 2014 .

although science is often looked to for answers , societal values also play an important role when developing national policies .

often the fishing industry faces hardships associated with the natural variability of marine fish populations and management efforts to sustain populations above specific levels .

these hardships are compounded when stock rebuilding becomes necessary .

a critical fisheries policy question is whether it is in the national interest to provide greater management flexibility , increase resources for management and research , and generally expand support for commercial fishing and associated communities .

seafood is the last major food source that depends on harvest of wild populations from the natural environment .

when fisheries were being developed fishermen often had flexibility to target different species or move to different areas if resource abundance decreased .

as limits to natural production were reached and most fish stocks become fully or overexploited , regulations become more rigid and complex .

fishery managers and fishermen have little or no control over natural production except to change fishing effort and associated fishing mortality .

these regulatory efforts can increase fish population abundance and production in some fisheries , but with timing and outcomes that are often uncertain .

in the agricultural sector , programs have been developed to help farmers manage financial risks caused by variations in the natural environment such as drought , floods , or disease .

to some degree the well - being of producers , communities , lending institutions , and other input sectors are protected by programs such as crop insurance and other types of disaster relief .

some have questioned whether similar programs are needed for the fishing industry , albeit with refinements that consider the unique nature of fisheries .

many agree that more resources for data collection and stock assessments are needed to improve the understanding of marine ecosystems and marine populations .

they reason that through more precise information and by reducing the risk of overfishing , the need for precautionary measures could be lessened and fishing could be increased while remaining within biological limits .

however , the benefits associated with marginal improvements in information will decrease with increasing investments in this area .

at some point the costs associated with collecting more information become greater than the associated benefits .

regardless of how much data , assessments , and management are improved , constraints to fishing associated with limits to natural production and unpredictable variations in the natural environment will still occur .

managers must also contend with environmental factors over which they have no control such as climate change and the loss and degradation of fish habitat .

environmental degradation reduces the resiliency of marine and coastal ecosystems and the productivity of marine resources .

it also decreases or shifts the geographic range and size of marine populations such as fish and protected species ( marine mammals and endangered species ) .

managers are challenged to find ways to maintain the productivity and health of marine systems and associated populations while minimizing constraints on a variety of economic activities .

this may require greater reliance on developing management systems that recognize linkages across government agencies , scientific disciplines , and different oceans activities .

some would question whether current management institutions can incorporate resource constraints and variability while minimizing disruption of livelihoods and the nature of coastal communities .

some have advocated for catch share programs because of the flexibility they can provide to fishermen .

however , many fishermen are skeptical of catch share programs because of issues related to allocation and unanticipated outcomes .

further progress in this area will require integration of social and cultural concerns as well as bioeconomic analysis .

cooperative research and greater industry input during data collection and analysis have also been considered as management costs have increased and information collection requirements have expanded .

as marine fisheries evolve many will continue to question the respective roles and investments of public ( federal , regional , and state ) , and private institutions .

appendix a. msfcma background federal fisheries management history historically , coastal states managed marine sport and commercial fisheries in nearshore state waters , where most seafood was caught .

on september 28 , 1945 , president truman issued two proclamations addressing u.s. rights to marine resources beyond the u.s. 3-mile territorial sea .

the proclamations expressed the need to conserve and manage living resources and to establish conservation zones in areas of the high seas adjacent to the coasts of the united states .

however , the rights proclaimed for fishing did not provide for exclusive jurisdiction over fisheries resources .

as fishing technology advanced and market demand increased , fishermen built up fishing capacity , increased catches , and fished more intensively in offshore areas .

in the 1950s and 1960s , increasing numbers of foreign fishing vessels began operating in waters adjacent to the united states .

since the united states only claimed a 3-mile jurisdiction , foreign vessels could fish many of the same stocks caught by u.s. fishermen .

u.s. fishermen deplored this "foreign encroachment" and alleged that overfishing was causing stress on , or outright depletion of , fish stocks .

united nations law of the sea treaty negotiations in the early and mid - 1970s as well as actions by other coastal nations provided impetus for unilateral u.s. action to declare jurisdiction over fisheries resources within 200 miles of the coastline .

when the united states enacted the fishery conservation and management act ( fcma , p.l .

94-265 ) , later renamed the magnuson fishery conservation and management act ( mfcma , p.l .

97-191 ) and more recently the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ( msfcma , 109-479 ) , it created a new system of federal fishery management .

after several years of debate the fcma was signed into law on april 13 , 1976 .

on march 1 , 1977 , marine fishery resources within 200 miles of all u.s. coasts , but outside state waters , came under federal jurisdiction .

initially a substantial portion of the fish caught from federal offshore waters was allocated to foreign fishing fleets .

however , the 1980 american fisheries promotion act ( title ii of p.l .

96-561 ) and other fcma amendments provided incentives to expand domestic fishing and processing industries and decrease foreign catch allocations .

on march 10 , 1983 , the 200-mile fishery conservation zone was superseded by a 200-mile exclusive economic zone ( eez ) , proclaimed by president reagan ( presidential proclamation 5030 ) .

management under the msfcma with the enactment of the fcma in 1977 , an entirely new , regional management system was established to regulate fisheries with priority given to domestic fishermen .

primary federal management authority was vested in the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs , also popularly referred to as noaa fisheries ) within the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) of the u.s. department of commerce .

the fcma established eight regional fishery management councils , which include new england , mid - atlantic , south atlantic , gulf of mexico , caribbean , pacific ( west coast ) , alaska , and western pacific .

each council is comprised of marine fishery management agency representatives from each state in the region , the nmfs regional director , and members appointed by the secretary of commerce .

appointments are made from lists of candidates knowledgeable about fishery resources that are submitted by state governors .

councils receive input from a variety of advisory committees , species committees , and ad hoc committees .

each council has a scientific and statistical committee ( ssc ) and , depending on the council , various subcommittees for specific species .

the ssc provides the council with scientific advice by developing , collecting , evaluating , and reviewing information during development of fishery management plans and amendments .

members of sscs include individuals knowledgeable in fisheries from state and federal agencies , universities , and the public .

fishery management plans ( fmps ) are prepared by each council for those fisheries occurring primarily in federal waters and which require active federal management .

fmps consist of management measures and related actions needed to manage stocks such as catch limits , minimum sizes , seasons , closed areas , vessel permitting , and other measures .

public input is a major element of the council process where the public , including fishermen and environmentalists , provides information and comments during the fmp development process .

most data collection and scientific assessments that support development of fmps are undertaken by nmfs .

most information is collected and analyzed at nmfs regional science centers and associated laboratories while management functions are conducted from nmfs regional headquarters .

after review of the recommendations of appropriate council committees and approval by the council , a proposed action is then submitted to nmfs for review .

the review is governed by a strict process that includes additional opportunity for public comment and subsequent approval , partial approval , or disapproval by the secretary of commerce .

approved plans are implemented through regulations drafted by nmfs regional management offices and published in the federal register .

these regulations are enforced by nmfs , the coast guard , and state fishery enforcement agencies .

plans are amended periodically to account for changes in the fishery and the need for new management approaches .

together these councils and nmfs have developed and implemented 46 fmps for various fish and shellfish resources , with additional fmps and fmp amendments in various stages of development .

some plans are created for an individual species or a few related ones ( eg , fmps for red drum by the south atlantic council and for species of shrimp by the gulf of mexico council ) .

others are developed for larger species assemblages inhabiting similar habitats ( eg , fmps for gulf of alaska groundfish by the north pacific council and for reef fish by the gulf of mexico council ) .

nmfs manages wide - ranging atlantic highly migratory species such as tunas , sharks , swordfish and billfish .

many of the implemented plans have been amended ( some more than 30 times ) , and some plans have been developed and implemented jointly by two or more councils .

fisheries statistics the united states has the largest eez in the world which includes areas in three oceans ( pacific , atlantic , and arctic ) with a total area of 3.4 million square nautical miles .

these areas also contain some of the most productive fisheries in the world .

after passage of the fcma , foreign catch from the u.s. fcz declined from about 3.8 billion pounds in 1977 to zero since 1992 .

accompanying the decline of foreign catch , domestic offshore catch in federal waters increased dramatically , from about 1.6 billion pounds ( 1977 ) to more than 6.3 billion pounds in 1986-1988 .

after this peak , annual landings from federal waters have generally ranged from 5 to around 6.5 billion pounds .

 ( figure a - 1 . ) .

in 2012 , u.s. fishermen landed 10.2 billion pounds of unprocessed fish and shellfish from state , federal , and outside u.s. waters ( high seas areas and eezs of other countries ) with a value of $5.63 billion at the dock .

total domestic ( state and federal ) landings totaled 9.63 billion pounds of which 3.19 billion pounds were from state waters and 6.43 billion pounds were from federal waters .

landings for human food from both state and federal waters totaled 7.48 billion pounds while 2.16 billion pounds were landed for industrial purposes such as animal feeds .

the top five species ranked by volume were pollock ( 2.9 billion pounds ) , menhaden ( 1.8 billion pounds ) , cod ( 728 million pounds ) , flatfish ( 702 million pounds ) and salmon ( 635 million pounds ) .

the value of domestically produced edible products was $9.5 billion while the value of industrial products was $747 million .

the top five species by value were crabs ( $680 million ) , scallops ( $561 million ) , shrimp ( $490 million ) , salmon ( $489 million ) , and lobster ( $465 million ) .

in 2012 , u.s. per capita consumption of seafood was 14.4 pounds , down 0.8 pounds from 2011 .

approximately 91% of the seafood consumed in the united states is imported from other countries .

in 2012 , imports of edible fishery products were 5.4 billion pounds with a value of $16.7 billion .

exports were 3.3 billion pounds valued at $5.5 billion .

imports are generally composed of relatively high valued species such as shrimp and salmon , and products that have been processed to some degree .

u.s. consumers spent an estimated $82.6 billion on edible seafood in 2012 of which $55.2 billion was spent in restaurants and other food service establishments .

in 2012 , nearly 9.4 million anglers made approximately 70 million marine recreational fishing trips in the united states .

marine recreational anglers caught an estimated 380 million fish in 2012 .

recreational catch that was retained totaled approximately 140 million fish and weighed about 203 million pounds .

most fishing trips were taken on the atlantic coast ( 38 million ) , followed by the gulf coast ( 24 million ) , and the pacific coast ( 5.7 million ) .

in 2011 , a nationwide survey , conducted every five years , estimated that saltwater recreational anglers spent more than $10.3 billion on their fishing trips and equipment .

constituencies a variety of groups are involved in managing and utilizing marine fisheries .

although they often share general goals related to maintaining productivity and healthy ecosystems , they often disagree on how to achieve these goals .

the following characterizations are general and may vary considerably depending on region and fishery .

as congress considers reauthorization of the msfcma , these diverse groups are likely to advocate for a wide range of policies .

advocates of most categories of groups also include national , regional , and local representation as well as individuals or informal groups .

recreational recreational interests include a broad variety of users with different approaches and motivations to fishing .

in contrast to commercial fishing , most recreational activities are closely related to the satisfaction that individuals derive from the experience of fishing or observing fish .

generally , activities include a range of often overlapping categories such as non - extractive sports such as snorkeling and scuba diving where utility is gained from observing the marine environment ; catch and release fishing where the experience of catching fish is the main objective ; and extractive recreational fishing where anglers catch fish for consumption .

different modes of recreational angling include fishing from shore , boats , and charters or party boats .

charters and party boats are commercial operations which provide fishing opportunities to sport anglers for a fee .

recreational interests are often concerned about decisions affecting access to fisheries and allocation of fishing quotas among different interests .

issues and types of recreational interests also vary by region , species targeted , and mode of fishing .

commercial commercial fishing is composed of diverse interests , but it generally involves the harvest of fish for commercial sale .

however , in many cases the commercial fishing participants also gain satisfaction from maintaining their livelihood and independence .

commercial fishing can be divided according to target species , scale , and region .

for example , even within a specific fishery , commercial users may have different views depending on fishing gear ( eg , trawl , gillnet , pots , or longline ) , port , or fishing grounds ( eg , inshore or offshore ) .

there are also many fishing dependent businesses that supply fishermen ( eg , ice , nets , vessel maintenance ) and businesses that use the harvest such as processors , wholesalers , and others .

during the last two decades increasing emphasis has been placed on the inter - dependence between fishing dependent business and maintaining fishing communities .

although national issues often emerge during reauthorizations , regional issues are sometimes reflected in specific provisions of the act .

most fishing associations and representatives are regional in nature and offer regional perspectives .

environmental during the last several decades , national and regional environmental groups have gained greater influence in the fishery management process .

initially environmental advocacy focused on indirect harm from the take in fishing gear of marine mammals , sea turtles , and sea birds .

environmental groups expanded their concerns to include overfishing , bycatch , habitat , and marine biodiversity .

interests of environmentalists and fishermen sometimes conflict when fishing may be constrained by greater regulation or coincide for issues such as degradation of habitat from activities other than fishing .

native american many native american groups are concerned with marine fishing because of their cultural , traditional , and subsistence links to marine resources .

in some cases the federal government is required to protect and maintain the treaty rights of some tribes that guarantee access to certain fishery resources .

the long - term goals of tribes and indigenous peoples generally include safeguarding cultural traditions , promoting economic stability , and encouraging resource sustainability .

fishery scientists and managers fishery scientists and mangers are generally concerned with conserving and managing fishery resources to ensure future benefits .

scientists from academia , the private sector , and state and federal agencies analyze biological , social , cultural , and economic effects of federal fisheries management policy .

one of their primary concerns is the availability of adequate funding for data collection , stock assessments , and other analyses necessary to inform fishery managers .

fishery managers develop fishery policies and implement the msfcma management measures .

management measures are developed by rfmc members and staff , and noaa personnel .

noaa personnel also implement management measures by drafting , implementing and enforcing fishery regulations .

consumers consumers are concerned with the availability , quality , and safety of seafood products .

there is also growing public concern with making choices that promote sustainable fisheries .

a number of non - governmental organizations have developed ecolabels and seafood guides to inform the choices of consumers and seafood buyers .

another growing concern is fraudulent seafood sales and marketing — an act of defrauding buyers of seafood for economic gain , such as mislabeling products or substituting a low valued species for high valued species .

seafood safety and seafood fraud are regulated under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act of 1938 ( ffdca ; 21 u.s.c .

§§301 et seq .

 ) , which is administered by the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

appendix b. magnuson - stevens act reauthorization in 109 th congress on january 12 , 2007 , the president signed the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management reauthorization act of 2006 ( msfcma ) ( p.l .

109-479 , 16 u.s.c .

§§1801 , et seq. ) .

major congressional goals of the 2006 reauthorization included ending overfishing , developing guidelines for catch shares , improving science and the use of science in federal policy decision - making , modifying fishery management council procedures , and enhancing international cooperation .

the following summaries focus on amendments that many consider to be most significant .

conservation and management overfishing and annual catch limits section 104 of the msfcma mandated the use of annual catch levels ( acls ) to prevent overfishing and to maintain sustainable harvests .

councils are now required to set fishing limits within the range of scientific recommendations .

major changes included the following: mandating every fishery management plan establish acls at levels such that overfishing does not occur in the fishery ; requiring acls by 2010 for fisheries already subject to overfishing and by 2011 for all other fisheries ; and requiring councils to develop and implement a rebuilding plan within two years of a stock being declared overfished .

regional fishery management councils section 103 of the legislation increased the role of science in decision - making through a number of provisions focused on the rfmcs' scientific and statistical committees ( sscs ) by: specifying that the sscs are to provide their councils with scientific advice needed for management decisions ; requiring the regional councils to develop five - year research priorities for fisheries , fisheries interactions , habitats , and other areas of research necessary for management ; modifying regional council fishery management plan procedures , including a requirement to improve coordination of the msfcma regulatory process and environmental review under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c .

§§4321 , et seq. ) .

 ( §107 ) ; requiring the sscs to advise the councils on a variety of issues , including stock status and health , acceptable biological catch , overfishing , bycatch , rebuilding targets , habitat status , social and economic impacts , and sustainability of fishing practices ; and requiring the ssc appointees be federal , state , academic , or independent experts with strong scientific or technical credentials and experience .

section 103 of the msfcma amendments also modified requirements for appointing and training rfmc members .

activities by rfmcs and panels were also modified to enhance transparency of the management process .

provisions of this section sought to inform and strengthen rfmcs by: establishing a rfmc training program on the fishery management process for existing council members and new council members ; and clarifying conflict - of - interest and recusal requirements by ensuring that rfmc members and scientific and statistical committees ( sscs ) disclose any financial arrangements that might involve conflict of interest .

limited access privilege programs section 106 of the legislation authorized national guidelines for limited access privilege programs ( lapps ) commonly known as catch shares , individual transferable quotas ( itqs ) , or individual fishing quotas ( ifqs ) .

lapps are federal management systems that divide the total allowable catch of a fishery among fishery participants for their exclusive use .

use of lapps is intended to avoid "derby" fishing where many vessels are competing for limited resources .

features of lapps , as provided in the act , include the following: allows for allocation of harvesting privileges to individuals , corporations , fishing communities , or regional fishery associations ; allows only fisheries that have been operating under a limited access system to be eligible for management under a lapp system ; directs the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) to develop criteria for eligibility by considering several factors , such as traditional fishing practices , the cultural and social elements of the fishery , and the severity of projected economic and social impacts of lapps ; allows processors to hold lapps and participate in the normal allocation process ( but not by allocation of a separate processor quota ) ; and requires a formal and detailed review five years after implementation of each program , and thereafter review within every seven years .

information and research recreational fisheries section 201 required improvements in data collection from recreational fisheries .

programs and priorities included the following: establishing a national program to create eight regional registry programs for marine recreational fishermen ; directing the secretary to exempt individuals from the regional registry where state programs meet defined criteria ; and improving the marine recreational fishery statistics survey .

cooperative research section 204 of the msfcma amendments directed the secretary to establish a cooperative research and management program .

requirements of this program include identifying projects to be competitively funded by the secretary , with priority given to collecting data to improve stock assessments , assessing bycatch and mortality , designing technology to reduce bycatch , identifying important habitat , and collecting social and economic data ; directing the secretary of commerce to establish guidelines to ensure that participation does not result in the loss of a participant's catch history or unexpended days - at - sea as part of a limited entry system ; and requiring the secretary of commerce to issue regulations for expediting regionally based experimental fishery permits .

regional ecosystem research section 210 of the 2006 amendments focused on developing information to implement pilot projects by: requiring the secretary of commerce , in consultation with the councils , to study the state of the science for advancing the concepts and integration of ecosystem considerations in regional fishery management ; including recommendations in the study for scientific data , information , and technology requirements for understanding ecosystem processes , and methods for integrating information from different sources ; incorporating broad stakeholder participation , recommendations to account for environmental variation , and a description of existing and new efforts to implement ecosystem approaches ; and providing technical advice and assistance to councils for developing and designing regional pilot programs .

other research other research efforts include establishing a deep sea coral research and technology program ( §211 ) ; and researching and promoting new gear technologies to further reduce bycatch ( §116 ) ; international conservation and management illegal , unreported , and unregulated fishing sections 401-403 of the msfcma amendments included provisions to strengthen the ability of international fishery management organizations and the united states to appropriately enforce conservation and management measures for high seas fisheries .

provisions included undertaking activities to improve international compliance and monitoring of high seas fisheries , and report to congress on progress in reducing illegal , unreported , and unregulated fishing ( iuu ) ( §401 ) ; strengthening the ability of fishery management organizations to stop iuu fishing ( §403 ) ; requiring the secretary of commerce to define iuu , and specifying that the definition must include violations of quotas or other rules established by international agreement ( §403 ) ; and allowing for the use of measures authorized under the high seas driftnet act to force compliance in cases where regional or international fishery management organizations are unable to stop iuu fishing ( §403 ) .

western and central pacific fisheries convention ( wcpfc ) title v ( §§501-511 ) implements provisions of the wcpfc by: providing for u.s. participation in the western and central pacific fisheries commission such as appointment of commissioners , and other administrative matters ; defining the authorities of the secretary of state and secretary of commerce ; and making conservation and management measures adopted by the wcpf commission legally binding upon nations and vessels subject to u.s. jurisdiction .

other provisions additional provisions included the following: authorizing appropriations of $338.8 million in fy2007 with a $9.84 million annual increase for implementing activities through fy2013 ( §7 ) ; establishing marine education and training programs for western and north pacific communities to improve communication , education , and training on marine resource issues and increase scientific education opportunities for marine - related professions among coastal community residents ( §109 ) ; establishing regional economic transition programs to provide disaster relief at the request of governors of affected states ( §113 ) ; and implementing the pacific whiting act of 2006 between the united states and canada ( §§601-611 ) .

nmfs has summarized various activities associated with implementing p.l .

109-479 in a table that lists tasks .

examples of implementation activities include ( 1 ) a report by nmfs to congress on implementing new provisions relating to reduce illegal , unreported , and unregulated ( iuu ) fishing activities and ( 2 ) final guidance amending national standard 1 , designed to end overfishing through new requirements for annual catch limits and other accountability measures .

in addition , nmfs released a new national policy on the use of catch shares in fishery management plans .

appendix c. acronyms acls – annual catch limits aff – asset forfeiture fund ams – accountability measures eez – exclusive economic zone esa – endangered species act fmp – fishery management plan ifqs – individual fishing quotas itqs – individual transferable quotas iuu – illegal , unreported , and unregulated lapps – limited access privilege programs msy – maximum sustainable yield nepa – national environmental policy act nrc – national research council oy – optimum yield rfmc – fishery management council rfmo – regional fishery management organization ssc – scientific and statistical committe .

