the degree to which foreign nationals ( noncitizens / aliens ) should be accorded access to certain benefits as a result of their presence in the united states , as well as the responsibilities of such persons given their legal status ( eg , immigrants , nonimmigrants , unauthorized aliens ) , often figures into policy discussions in congress .

these issues become particularly salient when congress considers legislation to establish new immigration statuses or to create or modify benefit and entitlement programs .

the 111 th congress enacted the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 ) , which has been amended by the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-152 ) and several other bills .

 ( aca refers to p.l .

111-148 as amended by p.l .

111-152 and the other legislation. ) .

the aca created new responsibilities ( eg , the requirement that most people in the united states obtain health insurance ) and new benefits ( eg , tax credits to help certain people purchase health insurance ) , and it addressed the eligibility and responsibility of foreign nationals for these provisions .

one issue that has arisen during debates to amend provisions in the aca and during discussions of immigration reform is the eligibility of foreign nationals for some of the aca's key provisions .

this report opens with a discussion of several different statutory and regulatory definitions of lawfully present .

on the surface , alien eligibility for provisions under the aca appears straightforward .

in general , those who are lawfully present are eligible , and those who are not lawfully present are not eligible .

however , due to differing definitions of "lawfully present" and the interaction between the treatment of noncitizens under tax law , the immigration and nationality act , and the aca , the eligibility of individuals with certain immigration statuses for these provisions can become more complicated .

this report then analyzes the eligibility of foreign nationals for key provisions in the aca that have restrictions based on immigration status: the requirement to maintain health insurance , the ability to purchase insurance through an exchange , and eligibility for the premium tax credit and cost - sharing subsidies .

it includes consideration of the implementing regulations and the impact of the supreme court's ruling in national federation of independent business v. sebelius .

this report concludes with information on the alien - status verification process .

the following section discusses alien eligibility for the following provisions under the aca: the health insurance mandate , the exchanges ( the marketplace ) , and premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies .

in general , aliens are separated into two groups for eligibility purposes under the aca: aliens who are "lawfully present in the united states" are eligible for these provisions , while aliens who are not "lawfully present in the united states" are ineligible .

to enforce the alien eligibility requirements under the act , section 1411 of the aca requires the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to establish a program to determine whether an individual who is to be covered through an exchange plan or who is claiming a premium tax credit or reduced cost - sharing is a citizen or national of the united states or an alien lawfully present in the united states .

this requirement is similar to and compatible with the department of homeland security ( dhs ) systematic alien verification for entitlements ( save ) system established by section 1137 ( d ) of the social security act .

the verification system created under the aca uses three pieces of personal data to verify citizenship and immigration status .

the social security administration ( ssa ) verifies the name , social security number , and date of birth of the individual .

for those attesting to be u.s. citizens , the attestation is considered substantiated if it is consistent with ssa data .

for individuals who do not claim to be u.s. citizens but attest to be lawfully present in the united states , the attestation is considered substantiated if it is consistent with dhs data .

the aca requires such verification of all individuals seeking exchange coverage regardless of whether they would be federally subsidized or would pay premiums entirely on their own .

some argue that because the verification system does not include a biometric identifier , it could lead to identity theft ; however , requiring applicants to provide documents with biometric identifiers could lead to the inappropriate denial of credits and subsidies to eligible persons .

the system only verifies that the name , ssn , and date of birth match the ssa's records and that immigration documents match dhs records ; as a result , a person ( eg , a u.s. citizen , a not - lawfully present alien ) who is using the documents of an eligible person would not necessarily be denied access to an exchange or disallowed the premium credit and cost - sharing subsidies .

nonetheless , while all lawfully present noncitizens have documents with biometric identifiers , u.s. citizens do not necessarily have such documents , and , as a result , requiring such biometric identifiers could make it more difficult for some eligible u.s. citizens to gain access to an exchange and to claim the premium credits and cost - sharing subsidies .

in an evaluation of the e - verify system for employment , a system that is often compared to the system under the aca because it electronically verifies both u.s. citizens and noncitizens , researchers estimated that 6.2% of all queries relate to unauthorized aliens , and that in about half ( 54% ) of these queries the unauthorized aliens receive an inaccurate finding of being work - authorized , primarily due to identity theft .

thus , the researchers estimated that about 3.3% of all queries receive a false positive verification .

in other words , it is estimated that of the unauthorized aliens that are run through the system , approximately 54% who are using false documents are not identified by the system .

in an effort to better detect and deter identity fraud , dhs ( which administers e - verify ) is taking steps that include adding more photographs to the system and developing methods to prevent stolen identities from being used in the system .

one concern that has been raised is that noncitizens who are part of mixed - status families , ( i.e. , families where at least one member of the family is not authorized to be in the united states ) may not apply for coverage through an exchange or for the credits and subsidies because they are worried that their application may trigger an immigration enforcement action .

dhs has stated that it will not use information obtained for determining eligibility as the basis for "pursuing a civil immigration enforcement action against such individuals or members of their household. .

in addition , under regulation , exchange plan applications "may not request information regarding citizenship , status as a national , or immigration status for an individual who is not seeking coverage for himself or herself on any application or supplemental form. .

in addition , some immigrant advocates have expressed concerns that noncitizens may be hesitant to enroll in an exchange plan and apply for premium credits and cost - sharing subsidies because it may trigger the "public charge" ground of inadmissibility and deportability .

an faq released by the obama administration states: applying for medicaid or chip , or getting help with health insurance costs in the marketplace [through an exchange] , does not make someone a "public charge. .

it will not affect someone's chances of becoming a lawful permanent resident or u.s. citizen .

the one exception is for people receiving long - term care in an institution at government expense .

these people may face barriers [obtaining lpr status] .

appendix a .

definition of lawfully present under the aca "lawfully present" was first defined for the purposes of eligibility for the high risk pools for uninsured people with pre - existing conditions .

since then , all regulations regarding the aca have referenced that definition .

for the provisions of the aca , "lawfully present" means 1 .

a qualified alien as defined in section 431 of the personal responsibility and work opportunity act ( prwora ) ; 2 .

an alien in nonimmigrant status who has not violated the terms of the status under which he or she was admitted or to which he or she has changed after admission ; 3 .

an alien who has been paroled into the united states under ina section 212 ( d ) ( 5 ) for less than one year , except for an alien paroled for prosecution , for deferred inspection or pending removal proceedings ; 4 .

an alien who belongs to one of the following classes: aliens currently in temporary resident status pursuant to ina §210 or 245a ; aliens currently under temporary protected status ( tps ) , and pending applicants for tps who have been granted employment authorization ; aliens who have been granted employment authorization under 8 cfr 274a.12 ( c ) ( 9 ) , ( 10 ) , ( 16 ) , ( 18 ) , ( 20 ) , ( 22 ) , or ( 24 ) ; family unity beneficiaries pursuant to section 301 of p.l .

101-649 as amended ; aliens currently under deferred enforced departure ( ded ) ; aliens currently in deferred action status except an individual with deferred action under the dhs's deferred action for childhood arrivals process , as described in the secretary of homeland security's june 15 , 2012 , memorandum , shall not be considered to be lawfully present ; aliens whose visa petitions have been approved and who have a pending application for adjustment of status ; 5 .

a pending applicant for asylum under ina section 208 ( a ) or for withholding of removal under ina section 241 ( b ) ( 3 ) or under the convention against torture who has been granted employment authorization , and such an applicant under the age of 14 who has had an application pending for at least 180 days ; 6 .

an alien who has been granted withholding of removal under the convention against torture ; or 7 .

a child who has a pending application for special immigrant juvenile status .

appendix b .

the estimated size of the noncitizen population in the united states using the 2015 american community survey 1-year estimates , in july 2015 , there were approximately 43.3 million foreign - born persons residing in the united states , approximately 13.5% of the total u.s. population .

the foreign - born population was comprised of approximately 20.7 million naturalized u.s. citizens and 22.6 million noncitizens .

crs does not estimate the unauthorized ( illegal ) alien population ; however , the pew research center's hispanic trends project produces estimates of the number of unauthorized aliens in the united states .

researchers at the pew hispanic trends project assigned a specific immigration status ( eg , legal permanent resident , unauthorized alien ) to each foreign - born survey respondent and used a methodology to estimate the illegally present population .

the pew hispanic trends project estimated that in march 2014 there were approximately 43.6 million foreign - born persons in the united states , and of the noncitizen population , approximately 32.5 million were legal permanent residents ( lprs ) and naturalized citizens , 1.7 million were temporarily in the united states ( i.e. , nonimmigrants ) , and 11.1 million ( 25.5% ) were estimated to be unauthorized ( illegal ) aliens .

"quasi - legal" migrants not all unauthorized aliens lack legal documents , leading many observers to characterize these documented aliens as "quasi - legal" migrants .

according to the researchers at pew , data on this population are very limited , but this "quasi - legal" group could account for as much as 10% of the unauthorized population .

specifically , there are certain circumstances in which the department of homeland security issues temporary employment authorization documents ( eads ) to aliens who are not otherwise considered authorized to reside in the united states .

aliens with eads , in turn , may legally obtain social security cards .

these "quasi - legal" unauthorized aliens fall in several categories: the government has given them temporary humanitarian relief from removal , such as temporary protected status ( tps ) .

they have sought asylum in the united states and their cases have been pending for at least 180 days .

they are immediate family or fiancées of legal permanent residents ( lprs ) who are awaiting in the united states their legal permanent residency cases to be processed .

they have overstayed their nonimmigrant visas and have petitions pending to adjust status as employment - based lprs .

none of the aliens described above have been formally approved to remain in the united states permanently , and many with pending cases may ultimately be denied lpr status .

only about 25% of asylum seekers , for example , ultimately gain asylum .

approximately 80% to 85% of lpr petitions reportedly are approved .

importantly for the discussion of the aca , some of the noncitizens included in the estimates of "unauthorized aliens" are considered lawfully present under the aca regulations ( see the discussion entitled " definition of lawfully present " ) .

