senate rules , procedures , and precedents give significant parliamentary power to individual senators during the course of chamber deliberations .

many decisions the senate makes — from routine requests for additional debate time , to determinations of how legislation will be considered on the floor — are arrived at by unanimous consent .

when a unanimous consent request is proposed on the floor , any senator may object to it .

if objection is heard , the consent request does not take effect .

efforts to modify the original request may be undertaken — a process that can require extensive negotiations between and among senate leaders and their colleagues — but there is no guarantee that a particular objection can be addressed to the satisfaction of all senators .

the senate hold emerges from within this context of unanimous - consent decision - making as a method of transmitting policy or scheduling preferences to senate leaders regarding matters available for floor consideration .

many hold requests take the form of a letter addressed to the majority or minority leader ( depending on the party affiliation of the senator placing the hold ) expressing reservations about the merits or timing of a particular policy proposal or nomination .

an example of a hold letter is displayed in appendix a .

more often than not , senate leaders — as agents of their party responsible for defending the political , policy , and procedural interests of their colleagues — honor a hold request because not doing so could trigger a range of parliamentary responses from the holding senator ( s ) , such as a filibuster , that could expend significant amounts of scarce floor time .

unless the target of a hold is of considerable importance to the majority leader and a supermajority of his colleagues — 60 of whom might be required to invoke cloture on legislation under senate rule xxii — the most practical course of action is often to lay the matter aside and attempt to promote negotiations that could alleviate the concerns that gave rise to the hold .

with hold - inspired negotiations underway , the senate can turn its attention to more broadly - supported matters .

holds can be used to accomplish a variety of purposes .

although the senate itself makes no official distinctions among holds , scholars have classified holds based on the objective of the communication .

informational holds , for instance , request that the senator be notified or consulted in advance of any floor action to be taken on a particular measure or matter , perhaps to allow the senator to plan for floor debate or the offering of amendments .

choke holds contain an explicit filibuster threat and are intended to kill or delay action on the target of the hold .

blanket holds are leveled against an entire category of business , such as all nominations to a particular agency or department .

mae west holds intend to foster negotiation and bargaining between proponents and opponents .

r etaliatory holds are placed as political payback against a colleague or administration , while rolling ( or rotating ) holds are defined by coordinated action involving two or more senators who place holds on a measure or matter on an alternating basis .

until recently , many holds were considered a nonymous ( or secret ) because the source and contents of the request were not made available to the public , or even to other senators .

written hold requests emerged as an informal practice in the late 1950s under the majority leadership of lyndon b. johnson as a way for senators to make routine requests of their leaders regarding the senate's schedule .

early usage was largely consistent with prevailing expectations of senate behavior at that time , such as reciprocity , deference , and accommodation of one's senate colleagues .

over time , holds have evolved to become a potent extra - parliamentary practice , sometimes likened to a "silent filibuster" in the press .

"the hold started out as a courtesy for senators who wanted to participate in open debate," two senators wrote in 1997 .

since then , "it has become a shield for senators who wish to avoid it. .

these and other senators were concerned that keeping holds confidential tended to enable senators who placed holds to block measures or nominations while leaving no avenue of recourse open to their supporters .

accordingly , rather than restricting the process itself , recent attempts to alter the operation of holds have focused on making the secrecy of holds less absolute .

the senate has considered a variety of proposals targeting the senate hold in recent years , two of which the chamber adopted .

both sought to eliminate the secrecy of holds by creating a process through which holds — formally referred to in the new rules as "notices of intent to object to proceeding" — would be made public within some period of time if certain criteria were met .

prior to these rules changes , hold letters were written with the expectation that they would be treated as private correspondences between a senator and his or her party leader .

senate holds are predicated on the unanimous consent nature of senate decision - making .

the influence they exert in chamber deliberations is based primarily upon the significant parliamentary prerogatives individual senators are afforded in the rules , procedures , and precedents of the chamber .

as such , efforts to regulate holds are inextricably linked with the chamber's use of unanimous consent agreements to structure the process of calling up measures and matters for floor debate and amendment .

while not all holds are intended to prevent the consideration of a particular measure , some do take that form , and senate leaders justifiably perceive those correspondences as implicit filibuster threats .

as agents of their party , senate leaders value the information that holds provide regarding the policy and scheduling preferences of their colleagues .

for this reason , rules changes that require enforcement on the part of senate leaders — as both efforts discussed here do — tend to conflict with the managerial role played by contemporary senate leaders and the expectation on the part of their colleagues that leaders will defend their interests in negotiations over the scheduling of measures and matters for floor consideration .

a second challenge to hold regulation involves the nature of the transmission itself .

both recent proposals address a particular kind of communication: a letter written and delivered to a senator's party leader that expresses some kind of reservation about the timing or merits of a particular proposal or nomination .

hold requests might be conveyed in less formal ways as well ; in a telephone call to the leader's office , for instance , or in a verbal exchange that occurs on or off the senate floor .

an objection to a unanimous consent request transmitted through the "hotline" represents another common method of communicating preferences to senate leaders .

some senate offices have circulated "dear colleague" letters specifying certain requirements legislation must adhere to in order to avoid a hold being placed .

it remains unclear , however , whether or not these alternative forms of communication fall within the purview of recent hold reforms .

appendix a .

a hold letter appendix b .

the "notice of intent to object" section of the calendar of business appendix c. a notice of intent to objec .

