this report briefly summarizes and discusses the economic impact of selected business - related tax provisions that had expired at the end of 2014 and were extended or made permanent by the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) , signed into law on december 18 , 2015 .

provisions not made permanent would expire at the end of 2016 or the end of 2019 .

in the past , these provisions have been extended one , or in some cases two , years in each piece of legislation .

in the 113 th congress , these provisions were extended as part of the tax increase prevention act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-295 ) , signed into law on december 19 , 2014 .

this law made most tax provisions that had expired at the end of 2013 available to taxpayers for the 2014 tax year .

the senate finance committee had earlier reported legislation , the tax relief extension act of 2015 ( s. 1946 ) , that would have retroactively extended expired tax provisions , for two years , through 2016 .

this report discusses provisions that include several employer - related benefits , international provisions that provide exceptions to the subpart f rules , special cost recovery provisions , provisions related to regulated investment companies ( rics ) , and several other business - related provisions .

a complete list of these provisions , along with a notation of their status as permanent , extended through 2019 , or extended through 2016 , can be found in table 1 .

note that bonus depreciation , which allows a deduction of 50% of equipment investment , would be reduced to 40% in 2018 and 30% in 2019 , before expiring .

the consolidated appropriations act's extenders provisions cost $628.8 billion over fy2016-2025 .

it includes as "extenders" provisions liberalizing the child credit , education credits , and the earned income tax credit that have not yet expired and had not been included in the previous version of the "extenders" bill ( s. 1946 ) .

if these provisions ( accounting for $198.1 billion ) plus a small provision temporarily suspending the medical device tax ( also not in s. 1946 ) are excluded , the total remaining cost is $426.8 billion .

of that amount , $301.4 billion , or 71% , was due to business - related provisions discussed in this report that were made permanent ; $36.1 billion ( 8.5% ) was due to provisions extended through 2019 , and $1.4 billion ( 0.3% ) was due to provisions extended through 2016 .

overall , of these standard extenders , 79% of the cost was associated with business - related tax provisions discussed in this report .

three provisions made permanent account for 63% of the $426.8 billion total extenders: ( 1 ) the research and experimentation credit , accounting for 27% ; ( 2 ) the small business ( section 179 ) expensing provision , accounting for 18% ; and ( 3 ) the deferral of tax on active financing income earned abroad , accounting for 18% of the total .

extending expired tax provisions through 2016 , as proposed in s. 1946 , would have cost $96.9 billion over the 10-year budget window , excluding any macroeconomic effects .

more than 60% of this cost ( $59.5 billion ) is from the extension of business - related provisions discussed in this report ( see table 1 ) .

with macroeconomic effects included , the cost of extending expired provisions , as proposed in s. 1946 , would have been $86.6 billion over the 10-year budget window .

according to the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) , extending expired provisions affecting businesses , particularly the provision allowing businesses to expense 50% of investments , was expected to increase economic growth in the near term .

thus , the cost estimate when macroeconomic effects are included was less than the cost estimate that does not incorporate macroeconomic effects .

since s. 1946 was projected to increase the federal debt , part of the gain in economic growth from extending expired business - related tax provisions is expected to be offset by higher interest rates , which tend to slow economic growth .

extending expiring provisions retroactively for one year , as was done in the tax increase prevention act of 2014 , cost $41.6 billion over the 10-year budget window .

more than half of this cost ( $22.3 billion ) is from the extension of business - related provisions discussed in this report .

the tax extender provision with the largest cost was tax credit for research and experimentation expenditures .

the one - year extension enacted late in the 113 th congress cost $7.6 billion .

table 1 provides information on the revenue cost of the one - year extension enacted as the tax increase prevention act of 2014 .

in recent years , the house has considered legislation to make permanent certain business - related extender provisions .

in the 114 th congress , america's small business tax relief act of 2015 ( h.r .

636 ) , which passed the house on april 13 , 2015 , would have made section 179 expensing and the treatment of built - in gains of subchapter s corporations permanent .

the american research and competitiveness act of 2015 ( h.r .

880 ) , which would have expanded and made permanent the r&e tax credit , was passed in the house on may 20 , 2015 .

the house committee on ways and means had also reported other legislation that would have made certain business - related extenders provisions permanent .

specifically , h.r .

961 would have permanently extended the subpart f exemption for active financing income and h.r .

1430 would have made permanent the look - through treatment of payments between related controlled foreign corporations .

the house committee on ways and means had also approved , in the 114 th congress , legislation that would have modified and made permanent bonus depreciation ( h.r .

2510 ) and provisions allowing for 15-year straight - line cost recovery for qualified leasehold , restaurant , and retail improvements ( h.r .

765 ) .

legislation to make certain business - related extender provisions permanent was also considered in the 113 th congress .

on september 18 , 2014 , the house passed the jobs for america act ( h.r .

4 ) , which would have made permanent five of the expired provisions discussed in this report ( see table 1 ) .

the cost of making permanent these five provisions is $499.3 billion over the 10-year budget window .

the total cost estimate for h.r .

4 , which also includes a repeal of the medical device tax and the save american workers act of 2014 ( h.r .

2575 ) , was $572.2 billion over the 10-year budget window .

during the 113 th congress , the house committee on ways and means also reported legislation that would have permanently extended two other expiring provisions .

h.r .

4429 would have amended the internal revenue code of 1986 to permanently extend the subpart f exemption for active financing income and h.r .

4464 would have made permanent the look - through treatment of payments between related controlled foreign corporations .

these measures did not pass the house .

the president's fy2016 budget identified several expiring provisions that should be permanently extended ( and in some cases substantially modified ) .

specifically , the provisions addressed in the president's fy2016 budget include ( 1 ) the increased expensing for certain businesses under section 179 ; ( 2 ) the 100% exclusion for qualified small business stock ; ( 3 ) the research and experimentation ( r&e ) tax credit ; and ( 4 ) certain employment - related credits ( the work opportunity tax credit [wotc] and the indian employment credit ) .

the president's budget also proposed permanently extending the exception under subpart f for active financing income and the look - through treatment of payments between related controlled foreign corporations ( cfcs ) as part of a broader reform to the u.s. international tax system .

for certain cost recovery provisions , the 10-year revenue cost of a permanent extension is substantially greater than the cost of temporarily extending the provision .

for example , the revenue cost of temporarily extending bonus depreciation for one year , through 2014 , was $1.2 billion .

making bonus depreciation permanent would cost $244.7 billion .

this estimate is likely reduced , relative to a stand - alone provision , due to interaction effects with other provisions , most notably section 179 .

for example , it was estimated that a permanent extension , as proposed in h.r .

4718 in the 113 th congress , would have cost $263 billion over 10 years .

with a temporary extension , tax liability is deferred , with much of the cost recovered in the later years in the budget window .

even when extended ( and phased down ) through 2019 , as in the consolidated appropriations act of 2015 , the cost of $11.3 billion is less than 5% of the permanent 10-year cost .

a similar pattern is observed for the proposed increase in the section 179 expensing allowances , with a temporary one - year extension having cost an estimated $1.4 billion .

a permanent extension , however , would cost $77.1 billion over the 10-year budget window .

this report does not include provisions that in the past have been classified as charitable , community development , individual , or housing - related provisions .

these provisions are included in the following crs reports: crs report r43517 , recently expired charitable tax provisions ( "tax extenders" ) : in brief , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43541 , recently expired community assistance - related tax provisions ( "tax extenders" ) : in brief , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43688 , selected recently expired individual tax provisions ( "tax extenders" ) : in brief , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r43449 , recently expired housing related tax provisions ( "tax extenders" ) : in brief , by [author name scrubbed] .

tax incentives have been used at the federal level to encourage employers to hire employees from certain groups or to encourage employers to provide certain forms of compensation or benefits .

the first two credits discussed below , the work opportunity tax credit ( wotc ) and the indian employment tax credit , encourage employers to hire selected types of employees .

the third provision , the employer wage credit for employees on active military duty , encourages employers to provide "differential pay" to employees whose military pay is less than their civilian salary .

in general , income earned abroad by foreign incorporated subsidiaries is not taxed until it is repatriated ( paid to the u.s. parent as a dividend ) .

foreign subsidiaries are not allowed to circumvent this tax by making other payments to the parent such as loans .

the tax due on repatriated income is offset by credits for foreign income taxes paid .

for passive income ( such as interest income ) and certain types of payments which can be easily manipulated to reduce foreign taxes , tax rules require this income to be taxed currently ( referred to as subpart f income to indicate where in the code its tax treatment is specified ) .

the two international provisions in the extenders package provide exceptions from the subpart f rules .

the cost of assets that provide services over a period of time , such as machines or buildings , is deducted over a period of years as depreciation .

the schedule of depreciation deductions depends on the life of the asset and the distribution of deductions over that life .

straight - line depreciation is used for structures , where equal amounts are deducted in each year .

for equipment , deductions are accelerated with larger amounts deducted in earlier years .

equipment is most commonly depreciated over 5 or 7 years , but some short - lived assets are depreciated over 3 years and some longer - lived assets are depreciated over 10 , 15 , or 20 years .

non - residential structures are depreciated over 39 years .

aside from the desire for economic stimulus , traditional economic theories suggest that tax depreciation should match as closely as possible economic ( physical ) depreciation of assets .

the depreciation provisions discussed below all allow earlier deductions for depreciation , which are valuable because of the time value of money .

expensing provisions allow a firm to deduct the cost of an asset the year it is placed in service .

a regulated investment company ( ric ) is an entity that meets the following conditions: ( 1 ) its income is generally earned from passive investments ; ( 2 ) it distributes at least 90% of its income ; and ( 3 ) it elects to be taxed as an ric .

mutual funds are examples of rics .

the research and experimentation credit ( or the research credit ) is 20% of the amount by which qualified research expenses exceed a base amount , with a minimum of 50% of current research expenses .

the base amount is a past fixed amount of spending that increases over time with the increase in gross receipts .

there is also an alternative credit of 14% for research in excess of 50% of the average qualified research over the past three years .

because this alternative credit has a base that increases with research expenditures of the firm , an additional dollar of spending in year one increases the base for future spending , which reduces the incentive to an estimated 7.9% .

the incentive in the regular credit is also reduced from 20% to 10% through this mechanism if the credit's base is limited by the 50% of total spending minimum .

the credit also has a basis adjustment so that credit amounts cannot also be deducted .

for a corporation expensing these costs and at the top tax rate , the credit is reduced by 35% , so the effective credit rate is 13% ( 6.5% if the 50% minimum rule applies , and 5.1% if the alternative credit is used ) .

there are two additional credits: 20% ( in excess of a base ) for university basic research that is not directed at commercial objectives and 20% ( without a base ) for contract energy research .

qualified research expenditures must be experimental , for the purpose of discovering information that is technological in nature and used in the development of a new or improved product , process , computer software technique , formula or invention that is to be leased , licensed , or used by the firm .

these expenses include wages and salaries of researchers , supplies , costs of using computers , and from 65% to 100% of contract research .

equipment and structures are not eligible .

research must be conducted in the united states .

the original research credit was adopted in the economic recovery act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-34 ) , at a 25% rate and without a basis adjustment .

it was in excess of a base equal to the average of the past three years of research spending .

as in the case of the current alternative credit , an additional dollar increased the base in the future but had a more powerful effect , reducing the effective credit to about 3% .

the credit has been extended numerous times , lapsed for one year , and has been extended retroactively .

it was also revised in a variety of ways , some of which remain and some of which were overtaken by other changes .

among significant changes the tax reform act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-514 ) reduced the rate to 25% .

the technical and miscellaneous revenue act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-647 ) added a partial ( half ) basis adjustment .

a major change was made in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1989 ( p.l .

101-239 ) , which created a three - year fixed base for the credit that was then adjusted by the growth in gross receipts , significantly increasing the effective credit .

that legislation also added the full basis adjustment .

a different alternative credit was added in the small business job protection act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-188 ) , but the current form of the alternative credit was added in tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) , so that for a time there were two alternatives .

the earlier alternative credit was repealed in the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) .

many economists agree that there is an economic justification for subsidizing research and development ( r&d ) because private firms are not able to capture the full return from an innovation , so that the total amount they invest is likely to fall short of the level of investment warranted by the social returns .

this outcome is called a market failure because value of the benefits is greater than the cost for the last dollars spent and additional spending could yield benefits above the additional costs .

despite patents and secrecy , an innovation may provide information to others that can be exploited .

evidence suggests that the social return ( the return to other firms and customers as well as to the original firm ) is higher than the private return .

the research credit , however , arguably is a blunt instrument to address this market failure since it does not vary based on the size of the spillover effect .

targeted grants are an alternative method of subsidizing research .

others suggest that some types of research ( such as creating computer games ) should not be subsidized .

additionally , the uncertainty over whether the credit will be extended likely reduces its effectiveness .

the consolidated appropriations act allows small businesses with receipts of $50 million or less to take the credit against payroll taxes .

for more information , see crs report rl31181 , research tax credit: current law and policy issues for the 114th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

qualified railroad track maintenance expenditures paid or incurred in a taxable year by eligible taxpayers qualify for a 50% business tax credit .

the credit is limited to $3,500 times the number of miles of railroad track owned or leased by an eligible taxpayer .

qualified railroad track maintenance expenditures are amounts , which may be either repairs or capitalized costs , spent to maintain railroad track ( including roadbed , bridges , and related track structures ) owned or leased as of january 1 , 2005 , by a class ii or class iii ( regional or local ) railroad .

eligible taxpayers are smaller ( class ii or class iii ) railroads and any person who transports property using these rail facilities or furnishes property or services to such a person .

the taxpayer's basis in railroad track is reduced by the amount of the credit allowed ( so that any deduction of cost or depreciation is only on the cost net of the credit ) .

the credit cannot be carried back to years before 2005 .

the credit is allowed against the alternative minimum tax .

the amount eligible is the gross expenditures , not taking into account reductions such as discounts or loan forgiveness .

the provision was enacted in the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) .

the provision relating to discounts was added by the tax relief and health care act ( p.l .

109-432 ) .

the credit was allowed against the alternative minimum tax by the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) .

this provision substantially lowers the cost of track maintenance for the qualifying short line ( regional and local ) railroads , with tax credits covering half the costs for those firms and individuals with sufficient tax liability .

class ii and iii railroads account for 31% of the nation's rail miles .

these regional railroads are particularly important in providing transportation of agricultural products .

while no rationale was provided when the credit was introduced , sponsors of earlier free - standing legislation and industry advocates indicated that the purpose was to encourage the rehabilitation , rather than the abandonment , of short - line railroads .

these railroads were spun off in the deregulation of railroads in the early 1980s .

advocates also indicated that this service is threatened by heavier 286,000-pound cars that must be used to connect with longer rail lines .

they also suggested that preserving these local lines will reduce local truck traffic .

there was also some indication that a tax credit was thought to be more likely to be achieved than grants .

the arguments stated by industry advocates and sponsors of the legislation are also echoed in assessments by the federal railroad administration ( fra ) , which indicated the need for rehabilitation and improvement , especially to deal with heavier cars .

the fra also suggested that these firms have limited access to bank loans .

in general , special subsidies to industries and activities tend to lead to inefficient investment allocation , since in a competitive economy businesses should earn enough to maintain their capital .

nevertheless it may be judged or considered desirable to subsidize rail transportation to reduce the congestion and pollution of highway traffic .

at the same time , a tax credit may be less suited to remedy the problem than a direct grant since firms without sufficient tax liability cannot use the credit .

closely held corporations ( 100 or fewer shareholders ) can elect to be taxed as s corporations , where income flows through to the individual owners as is the case with a partnership .

firms that first operate as a corporation ( a c corporation ) , and switch to an s corporation , are taxed separately at the top corporate rate of 35% on gain that is attributable to the years when the corporation was a c corporation .

this treatment applies for the first 10 years the firm is an s corporation .

an individual income tax also applies to the gain , net of the corporate level tax .

the extender provision reduces that period to five years .

if a c corporation converts to a partnership or other non - corporate entity , the conversion triggers both a corporate - level and an individual - level tax on gains .

without the built - in gains requirement , c corporations converting to s corporations ( where a taxable event is not triggered ) could sell assets after conversion with a single level of tax on gains at a relatively low rate .

this provision requires gains recognized over a period of years that are gains from the c corporation period to be taxed at a higher rate .

the 10-year period was reduced to seven years by the american recovery and reinvestment tax act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

it was further reduced to five years by the small business jobs act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-240 ) .

the reduction to five years allows more gains to avoid this tax .

it also increases the incentive to convert to s corporation status rather than partnership form .

s corporations are limited to 100 shareholders .

therefore , this benefit accrues to businesses that are likely to be closely held .

no specific rationale has been given for including this provision in a stimulus bill ( arra ) .

firms are potentially subject to an alternative minimum tax ( amt ) applied to a broader base , but with a lower rate for large corporations and high income business owners .

since the higher amt tax may arise from timing shifts ( because of the longer depreciation period under the amt base ) , a credit is allowed for the excess of the amt over regular tax if the regular tax exceeds the amt tax in future years , up to the amount of the excess regular tax .

under the provision , firms may elect to forgo bonus depreciation as well as regular accelerated depreciation for purposes of calculating both amt and regular income tax liability .

in turn , firms can increase the amount of amt credits by 20% of bonus depreciation .

these credits are refundable , but are limited to the lesser of $30 million , or 6% of credit forwards generated before january 1 , 2006 , whichever is smaller .

this election can provide firms that would not use bonus depreciation because of lack of tax liability some tax reductions .

this provision was first enacted for both research and experimentation credits and amt credits in the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) , shortly after bonus depreciation was enacted in mid - 2008 .

it was subsequently extended , but the extension in the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-312 ) limited the provision to the amt credit .

it continued to be extended through 2014 .

this provision was part of the stimulus proposals enacted to combat the 2007-2009 recession .

the provision does not directly affect marginal investment , but it does affect cash flow .

most forecasters believe this type of cash flow benefit has to have a minimal effect on economic stimulus .

for firms that are in distress , however , cash flow may be more likely to contribute to spending .

most federal excise taxes do not apply in the united states virgin islands ( usvi ) and puerto rico ( pr ) or the other possessions .

an exception , however , is a special excise tax on items produced in pr or the usvi and shipped to the united states .

the tax was first imposed to ensure that producers in the possessions would not have a tax advantage over producers in the united states that are subject to excise taxes .

in the case of rum that is produced in either the usvi or pr and sold in the united states , most of the revenue from the so - called equalization tax is returned ( "covered over" ) by the federal government to the treasuries of pr and the usvi .

the cover - over provisions for rum extend as far back as 1917 for pr and 1954 for the usvi .

the scope of the cover - over was expanded by the caribbean basin economic recovery act of 1983 ( p.l .

98-67 ) which provides that all revenue from federal excise taxes on rum imported into the united states from any source — including any foreign country — is remitted to the treasuries of pr and the usvi by a formula that is roughly based upon the shares of rum produced by the two possessions .

the deficit reduction act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-369 ) placed a cap on the rebate of excise taxes on rum and other distilled spirits based upon a $10.50 rate even as the federal tax rate on spirits rose to $12.50 and later $13.50 per proof - gallon .

subsequently , temporary increases in this limit have routinely been enacted .

the justification for the return of the revenues was to provide for the welfare of the territories and return revenue generated from their products , since the territories could not participate in federal provisions benefitting the states .

controversy about the provision arose from the use of funds in the usvi to subsidize rum producers , which then led to increased subsidies by pr , which had previously had a limit on the share of the cover - over that could subsidize the rum industry .

from the federal government's perspective , state and local incentives for industrial development are a redistribution of tax dollars from state and local governments to manufacturing firms without a net gain in national gdp .

from this perspective , the incentives shift economic activity from one location in the united states to another .

the intended improvement of social welfare ( i.e. , helping economically disadvantaged areas ) is usually the justification for such policies in light of what many economists identify as the "zero - sum" nature of the incentives .

the recent recession and related budget situation have elevated the interest in the rum cover - over program .

from the perspective of u.s. taxpayers , some may question the efficacy of the rum cover - over , regardless of the historical precedent .

further , proponents of restrictions on the use of covered - over revenue have alluded to the possibility that congress may reconsider the cover - over principle generally , possibly ending the program , if the recipients use the revenue for "unreasonable" subsidies .

for more information , see crs report r41028 , the rum excise tax cover - over: legislative history and current issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

under current law , gains on the sale of capital assets held longer than one year generally are taxed at rates lower than the rates for ordinary income .

individual taxpayers in the 10% and 15% tax brackets pay no tax on long - term capital gains , whereas long - term gains reported by most taxpayers in higher brackets are taxed at a fixed rate of 15% .

for taxpayers in the 39.6% tax bracket , capital gains are taxed at a fixed rate of 20% .

the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) contained a provision that allowed an exclusion from gross income of 50% of any gain from the sale or exchange of qualified small business stock ( qsbs ) issued after august 10 , 1993 .

this provision is permanent .

in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) , an exclusion of 75% was allowed .

the small business jobs act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-240 ) increased the exclusion to 100% .

subsequent extensions and modifications of the provision allow for a full exclusion of any gain for stock acquired after september 27 , 2010 , and before january 1 , 2015 .

to be eligible , the taxpayer must acquire the stock at its original issue and hold it for a minimum of five years .

there is an annual limit on the exclusion for gains on the sale of qsbs issued by the same firm: the exclusion cannot exceed the greater of $10 million , less any cumulative gain excluded by the taxpayer in previous tax years , or 10 times a taxpayer's adjusted basis in the stock .

the original provision was adopted when capital gains were taxed as ordinary income .

part of the reason for adopting the increased exclusion was that the benefit was lessened or disappeared with the lower tax rates on capital gains .

the special benefit for this small business stock appears to have been intended to facilitate the formation and growth of small firms organized as c corporations involved in developing new manufacturing technologies .

the provision provides investors an incentive to acquire a sizable equity stake in small firms .

an exclusion of part ( or all ) of the gain from small business stock allows for investors in firms of different sizes to face different effective tax rates .

along with the effect on equity , the provision may also reduce economic efficiency through its distortionary effect on the allocation of capital .

the provision could , however , increase economic efficiency if it were to correct for capital market imperfections and allow for optimal small business formation and growth .

the section 199 domestic production activities deduction reduces tax rates on certain types of economic activity , primarily domestic manufacturing activities .

qualified domestic manufacturing activities qualify for a deduction equal to 9% of the lesser of taxable income derived from qualified production activities or taxable income .

the effect of the deduction is to reduce the effective tax rate on income from qualified activities by 3.15 percentage points , from 35% to 31.85% .

the section 199 domestic production activities deduction is a permanent part of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

when the section 199 deduction was enacted as part of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( ajca ; p.l .

108-357 ) , the term "united states," as used for the purposes of determining eligible domestic activities , included the 50 states and the district of columbia , but not u.s. possessions or territories .

in 2006 , as part of the tax relief and healthcare act ( p.l .

109-432 ) , special rules that allowed puerto rico to be considered a part of the united states for the purposes of the section 199 domestic production activities deduction were temporarily enacted .

this temporary provision has recently been extended as part of "tax extenders" legislation .

the u.s. tax code generally treats u.s. possessions as foreign countries , and puerto rico maintains an independent tax system .

there are , however , many special rules interconnecting the puerto rican and u.s. tax systems .

before 1996 , domestic corporations with business operations in the u.s. possessions could generally eliminate their u.s. tax liability on foreign - source income from operations in the possessions using the possessions tax credit .

from 1996 through 2005 , the puerto rico economic activity credit was available for domestic corporations with activities in puerto rico .

following the expiration of the possessions tax credit and puerto rico economic activity credit , companies with operations in puerto rico may find it more advantageous to structure as a controlled foreign corporation ( cfc ) , thus benefitting from the option to defer u.s. tax on active income from those operations .

allowing the section 199 production activities deduction to be claimed on manufacturing activities in puerto rico can be viewed as an effort to provide similar tax treatment to income from manufacturing activities taking place in puerto rico and from the rest of the united states .

absent this provision , u.s. - based manufacturers with operations in puerto rico , operating in flow - through form ( eg , a branch or partnership ) , would face a higher effective tax rate on manufacturing activities in puerto rico than other domestic manufacturing activities .

allowing the section 199 deduction for activities in puerto rico essentially extends a tax benefit designed for domestic corporations to a possession that is generally treated as a foreign country for tax purposes .

this raises the question of why this tax benefit has been provided to puerto rico but no other u.s. possessions .

concerns have also been raised that extending section 199 to puerto rico would create an incentive for u.s. companies operating in puerto rico to adopt a bifurcated structure , with certain activities being undertaken by a cfc with other activities , specifically those that qualify for section 199 , being undertaken in a flow - through structure .

since other domestic businesses do not have this organizational flexibility , this would provide greater potential benefits to manufacturers with operations in puerto rico .

this could be the intent of the policy , if extending section 199 to businesses in puerto rico is intended , in part , to encourage additional manufacturing activity in puerto rico .

for general information on the section 199 deduction , see crs report r41988 , the section 199 production activities deduction: background and analysis , by [author name scrubbed] .

tax - exempt organizations are required to pay taxes on unrelated business taxable income ( ubti ) , which is defined as income resulting from business activities that are unrelated to their charitable or tax - exempt purpose .

rents , royalties , interest , and annuities ( passive income ) are generally not considered business taxable income , except when such payments are received from a "controlled entity. .

the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-280 ) included special rules temporarily providing that certain payments , including rents and royalties received by a tax - exempt entity from a controlled entity or subsidiary , are not considered unrelated business income .

payments that are in excess of an arms - length price cannot be excluded from ubti .

since being enacted , these rules have regularly been extended as part of "tax extenders" legislation .

the purpose of including payments received from controlled entities in business taxable income is to prevent tax - exempt organizations from using separate but controlled entities to avoid unrelated business income taxes .

for example , one concern is that a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) charitable organization could set up a controlled subsidiary to engage in a profitable activity ( eg , selling merchandise ) .

if the charity had sold the merchandise itself , the income would be subject to the unrelated business income tax .

to avoid the tax , the charity could set up a controlled subsidiary to sell the merchandise , which would pay royalties to the charity ( lease the charity's logo , for example ) .

the controlled subsidiary would deduct the royalty payments as a cost of doing business , and the charity would receive royalty income , which would not be considered unrelated business income .

in this scenario , the charity would avoid paying tax on business activities .

treating rent , royalty , interest , and annuity payments from controlled organizations as ubti while similar types of payments from third parties are not taxed may raise questions related to fairness .

tax - exempt entities could claim that as long as tax - exempt parents' dealings with controlled subsidiaries are done at arm's length , the scope for abuse should be limited .

it is this logic that led to the enactment of the provision modifying the tax treatment of certain payments to controlling exempt organizations .

