this report analyzes u.s. - malaysia relations as well as malaysia's domestic politics , economy , environment , external relations , and geopolitical context within southeast asia .

congress has expressed interest in a variety of issues with regard to malaysia which are explored below .

the report also provides background information on current events and policy debates related to malaysia to assist congressional decision - makers .

the relationship between the united states and malaysia is a complex one .

bilateral ties are considerably closer than they may appear to some observers , but political sensitivities in malaysia as well as concerns related to allegations of corruption and mistrust lingering from less amicable periods constrain the establishment of a deeper strategic relationship .

malaysia , a majority muslim nation of 31 million people , is a partner in numerous u.s. security and economic initiatives in southeast asia .

it is a major u.s. trading partner and a site of substantial u.s. investment .

malaysia , for many years one of the leading voices behind building "asia - only" regional institutions , more recently has been an advocate of a strong u.s. presence in the asia - pacific region .

some experts believe that malaysian concerns about china's assertiveness in the south china sea have been a primary driver behind closer u.s. - malaysia strategic ties .

yet , some issues have proven contentious over recent years — particularly malaysia's human rights record and u.s. counter - terrorism strategy and policy in the middle east — and many observers still perceive a ceiling on the degree to which the two countries can deepen their relationship .

like many southeast asian nations , malaysia has long maintained a foreign policy that hedges between the united states , china , and other powers — a policy that continues under prime minister najib razak .

the former obama administration's strategic "rebalancing" of foreign policy priorities to asia placed increased attention on the nations of southeast asia , including malaysia .

although the rebalancing did not feature high - profile bilateral initiatives with malaysia , some observers say u.s. - malaysia relations warmed considerably .

malaysia is one of the 12 nations that signed the proposed trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) from which the trump administration decided to withdraw .

malaysia had placed high priority on being part of the u.s. - led initiative .

the united states and malaysia also conduct numerous military exchanges , training exercises , and port visits and cooperate in counter - terrorism and maritime domain awareness .

malaysia harbors a strong self - image as a moderate leader within the islamic world , and plays an active role in the organization of islamic cooperation ( oic ) .

malaysia has criticized u.s. military interventions in the middle east and u.s. support for israel , maintaining that these policies created a perception that the united states is "anti - islam," and that u.s. rhetoric generated broader support for islamic militancy .

malaysian statements along these lines have moderated in recent years , especially under prime minister najib .

some observers , however , point to stronger voices among some conservative islamist malaysians as a sign of rising tension among some of malaysia's muslim leaders .

the united states' withdrawal from the tpp agreement , and other actions taken by the trump administration , such as seeking to block arrivals to the united states from select muslim nations , has created uncertainty in malaysia about the united states' approach and commitment to the region , and has contributed to perceptions that the u.s. may turn inward or may become anti - islamic .

such ambiguity and uncertainty regarding u.s. policy shifts towards the region may influence how states in the region calibrate their relationships with both the united states and china .

the asia rebalance was welcomed by many in asia , including malaysia , as a reassuring sign of the united states' commitment to the region .

questions about whether that commitment may wane under the new administration are emerging .

bilateral ties between the united states and malaysia have been both highly cooperative and publicly contentious .

malaysia is a strong partner in many u.s. security and economic initiatives , but domestic malaysian sensitivities , particularly regarding the nation's identity in the muslim world , have constrained malaysian leaders from undertaking high - profile partnerships with the united states .

the decision to "elevate" the u.s. - malaysia relationship to a "comprehensive partnership," announced during former president obama's april 2014 visit , indicated that the two countries were cooperating on a wider range of issues than they had previously .

malaysian prime minister najib razak has spoken frequently about building stronger relations with the united states .

former president obama was the first u.s. president to visit malaysia since 1966 , and his visit served as a catalyst to promote bilateral cooperation in several areas .

he particularly highlighted people - to - people ties , for example the fulbright english teaching assistant program , which brings american youth to teach in malaysia .

the najib government has taken visible steps to support u.s. initiatives .

in 2010 , malaysia enacted legislation to strengthen its restrictions on the shipment of nuclear materials and in 2014 officially joined the u.s. - led proliferation security initiative .

malaysia sent 40 military medical personnel to bamiyan province in afghanistan in 2010 , and it subsequently has rotated deployments to support afghan reconstruction — a notably public move in a muslim - majority nation where u.s. actions in iraq have led to large protests at the u.s. embassy in kuala lumpur .

the najib government has condemned the islamic state organization and cooperated with the united states in stemming the flow of foreign fighters and financing to terrorist groups in syria .

the visibility of these initiatives marked a change for the bilateral relationship .

u.s. relations with malaysia were particularly fraught under long - time prime minister mahathir , who was a vocal advocate of "asia - only" regional organizations such as the east asia economic caucus ( eaec ) , which he proposed in 1990 .

malaysians were particularly upset both by u.s. criticism of malaysia's economic policy during the asian financial crisis in 1998 and by high - level u.s. criticism of malaysia's judiciary after anwar ibrahim's conviction in 1999 .

following mahathir's retirement as prime minister in 2003 , some of the barriers to warmer bilateral ties eased , although malaysia continues to oppose u.s. support for israel .

efforts to negotiate a bilateral u.s. - malaysia free trade agreement in the mid - 2000s did not bear fruit , but malaysia joined the tpp negotiations in 2010 , one year after the united states .

the emergence in 2015 of new corruption scandals linked to prime minister najib poses a dilemma for u.s. policy toward malaysia .

on one hand , najib has prioritized good relations with the united states and supported several u.s. initiatives , as described above ; he is known as one of the most pro - american leaders in malaysia .

on the other hand , signs of u.s. support for najib , especially indications of a warm relationship between najib and former president obama , risked giving the impression that the united states is not concerned about corruption allegations or that the united states can tolerate some amount of corruption for the sake of maintaining u.s. - malaysia cooperation .

some analysts assert that u.s. support for najib might alienate segments of the malaysian public that want to eliminate cronyism and might spur cynical reactions to u.s. democracy - promotion efforts .

the u.s. justice department announced in july 2016 that it was filing a civil forfeiture complaint "seeking the forfeiture and recovery of more than $1 billion in assets associated with an international conspiracy to launder funds misappropriated from a malaysian sovereign wealth fund. .

this is the single largest action ever brought under the kleptocracy asset recovery initiative .

with today's complaints , the united states seeks to recover more than $1 billion laundered through the united states and traceable to the conspiracy .

1mdb was created by the government of malaysia to promote economic development in malaysia through global partnerships and foreign direct investment , and its funds were intended to be used for improving the well - being of the malaysian people .

instead , as detailed in the complaints , 1mdb officials and their associates allegedly misappropriated more than $3 billion .

allegedly , some of the funds from the fraud scheme were used to fund the movie the wolf of wall street .

the united states periodically has raised concerns about human rights and democracy issues in malaysia .

in march 2014 , after malaysia's highest appeals court overturned the acquittal of opposition leader anwar ibrahim on a separate sodomy charge — a decision that many observers deemed politically motivated — the u.s. state department said , "the decision to prosecute mr. anwar and his trial have raised a number of concerns regarding the rule of law and the independence of the courts. .

although former president obama spoke out on human rights issues during his april 2014 visit , he did not meet personally with opposition political leaders , who met with national security advisor susan rice .

this apparent consideration for the ruling party contrasts with former vice president al gore's praise for anwar and the opposition reformasi ( reform ) movement during a visit to kuala lumpur in 1998 .

the official u.s. reaction to malaysia's most recent nationwide parliamentary elections in may 2013 , in which opposition parties alleged that widespread electoral fraud contributed to the ruling coalition's victory , was restrained .

the state department upgraded malaysia's ranking in its trafficking in persons ( tip ) report from tier 3 ( the worst ranking ) in 2014 to tier 2 watch list in 2015 , sparking a controversy .

critics of the state department's decision , including the more than 175 members of congress who signed letters to the secretary of state , allege that the state department overlooked evidence that the malaysian government has failed to improve its human trafficking problems .

in may 2015 , authorities discovered large camps on both sides of the malaysia - thailand border where migrants , likely from burma , apparently had been abused and possibly even murdered by smugglers .

according to some media reports , senior state department officials overruled state department tip analysts allegedly in an effort to maintain good relations with malaysia and to ease the approval of the tpp .

the trade promotion authority legislation passed in 2015 ( p.l .

114-26 ) does not confer expedited legislative procedures to implementing legislation for a trade agreement with a country that receives a tier 3 ranking in the tip report .

the state department has denied political interference in the tip report rankings .

deforestation , driven primarily by clearing for palm oil plantations , and related declines in wildlife habitat , are major environmental and health problems in malaysia .

malaysia and indonesia are the world's top two producers of palm oil and collectively account for 85% of world production .

according to one source , palm oil and pulp wood companies are responsible for more than half of the deforestation in the malaysian part of the island of borneo .

according to another report , malaysia lost 28% of its original forest cover on borneo between 1973 and 2015 with an estimated 60% of the cleared land being converted to plantations .

another report indicates that malaysia overall lost 14.4% of its original forest cover between 2000 and 2012 or an area roughly the size of denmark .

malaysia has made a commitment to maintain 50% forest cover and to reduce its economy's carbon intensity by 40% over 2005 levels by 2020 .

malaysia's forest cover was estimated to be 53% in 2012 .

malaysia also signed the united nations' paris climate agreement on april 22 , 2016 .

clearing and related burning associated with establishing palm oil plantations have been a major contributor to carbon emissions which contribute to global climate change and undermine biodiversity and health in malaysia .

one huge source of global warming emissions associated with palm oil is the draining and burning of the carbon - rich swamps known as peatlands .

peatlands can hold up to 18 to 28 times as much carbon as the forests above them ; when they are drained and burned , both carbon and methane are released into the atmosphere — and unless the water table is restored , peatlands continue to decay and release global warming emissions for decades .

the burning associated with the conversion of native forest to palm plantation is also a threat to people's health .

according to one study conducted by columbia and harvard universities , it is estimated that forest fires and related haze led to the death of over 100,000 people in southeast asia in 2015 .

the study estimated that 91,600 people in indonesia , 6,500 in malaysia and 2,200 in singapore may have died prematurely [in 2015] because of exposure to fine particle pollution from burning forests , in particular carbon - rich peatlands .

the study said those figures were nearly 2.7 times higher than the 37,600 estimated deaths in the three countries because of exposure to fine particles during a fire and haze crisis in 2006 .

in a nonbinding motion , the european parliament voted 640 to 18 to call for a single certified sustainable palm oil ( cspo ) scheme for european destined palm oil in order to ensure that such oil is produced in an environmentally sustainable manner .

malaysia strongly opposes the resolution which links the palm oil industry to deforestation .

the threat to biodiversity in malaysia is of particular concern to conservationists and others as borneo has been identified as one of the world's biodiversity "hotspots. .

the government - led heart of borneo initiative , which is supported by nongovernmental organizations , is seeking to assist malaysia , brunei , and indonesia to conserve 240,000 km of land in borneo's central highland forests , and the biodiversity that these forests sustain .

there are an estimated 221 mammals , 620 species of birds , 15,000 plant species and over 1,000 insects in the area .

the most visible species under threat is the bornean orangutan which is listed as critically endangered and faces an extremely high risk of extinction in the wild .

it is estimated that the orangutan population will decline by 86% between 1973 and 2025 largely due to habitat destruction , degradation and fragmentation .

it is reported that illegal logging and uncontrolled burning remain continual threats .

in the decades leading up to the 2008 global financial crisis , malaysia had been one of the fastest growing economies in the world .

due to counter - cyclical fiscal policies and intra - regional demand , malaysia recovered from the global recession and an economic downturn in 2009 comparatively quickly , and its economic performance since 2010 has been close to pre - crisis level .

at the same time , however , prime minister najib remained under some domestic pressure to find ways of achieving the nation's self - proclaimed goal of becoming a developed nation by 2020 , while addressing the country's regional and income disparities .

economic growth in malaysia has been impaired by an economic slowdown in china , one of malaysia's largest export markets , as well as declining prices of natural gas , oil , and other commodities .

malaysia's economy is regionally and sectorally diversified .

the state of selangor , which surrounds the capital of kuala lumpur , is the largest contributor to the nation's gdp , followed by kuala lumpur .

the state of johor , located next to singapore , and the state of sarawak , on the island of borneo , also are significant contributors to the gdp .

these four regions are malaysia's most prosperous areas and form the core for the nation's manufacturing and services sectors .

najib has promoted the development of information technology businesses in these areas .

by contrast , the states of kedah , kelantan , perak , and perlis , along the border with thailand , as well as the state of sabah on the northern tip of the island of borneo , are relatively poorer regions of malaysia with less manufacturing and services activity .

malaysia also is economically divided along urban / rural lines and between its ethnicities .

malaysia's urban centers , such as kuala lumpur , are relatively prosperous and support a growing middle class , while its rural areas are comparatively underdeveloped .

malaysia's major ethnic groups face differing economic conditions .

the chinese - malaysians are generally prosperous and play an important role in the nation's commercial and trade sectors .

the indian - malaysians are split into a comparatively wealthy few and a comparatively poor many .

though they constitute a majority of the population , malays and other indigenous people ( i.e. , bumiput ra ) traditionally have been considered economically disadvantaged , leading to the 1971 introduction of the new economic policy ( nep ) mentioned above .

roughly half of malaysia's gdp comes from the services sector .

trade - related services ( such as finance , insurance , and business services ) and tourism dominate the services sector .

in 2016 , malaysia's gdp composition by sector of origin was as follows: agriculture 8.2% , industry 37.8% , and services 54% .

malaysia is a significant exporter of oil and natural gas .

malaysia mainly manufactures consumer electronics , much of it parts and components for export and use in regional manufacturing supply chains .

malaysia exports three major crops: cocoa , palm oil , and rubber .

malaysia harbors a strong self - image as one of southeast asia's regional leaders and as a moderate , muslim - majority state that can be a political and economic model for others in the islamic world .

it also has been a mediator in seeking to resolve some regional conflicts , most prominently peace talks between the philippine government and a separatist group in the southern philippines .

malaysia was one of the six founding members of asean , southeast asia's primary multilateral forum , and it has been a proponent of the consensus - based model for regional coordination .

kuala lumpur was chosen to chair asean in 2015 .

a major goal of the asean economic community is to harmonize certain trade regulations and practices to move asean incrementally toward becoming more of a common market and production zone .

malaysia is active in many asean initiatives , including the asean defense ministers meeting - plus ( admm+ ) , where it worked with australia as co - chairs of a multilateral maritime security exercise in september 2013 .

among other important issues for malaysia in its relations with neighboring countries are managing relations with singapore , with which malaysia has a deep economic interdependency ; dealing with the sometimes - violent separatist insurgency in southern thailand , along thailand's borders with malaysia ; combatting piracy in the straits of malacca along with indonesia and singapore ; repelling philippine armed groups that claim parts of malaysian territory in sabah ; and managing immigration and migrant labor communities from burma , indonesia , and other neighbors .

the large flow of refugees and migrants from burma and bangladesh in april - june 2015 tested the will and ability of asean to manage a complex crisis .

many of the refugees were muslims from the rohingya ethnic group fleeing discrimination and persecution in burma .

in recent years , the united states and malaysia have made efforts to maintain a good working relationship .

however , political observers believe that neither country appears to seek a fundamentally deeper political and strategic partnership .

u.s. concerns about prime minister najib's standing and the sense in malaysia of a growing u.s. - china strategic rivalry may inhibit deeper bilateral cooperation .

the united states faces the familiar but difficult challenge of balancing countervailing impulses in its relationship with malaysia .

some questions that members of congress may wish to consider are: should the united states maintain close ties with najib despite the allegations of corruption and policies that restrict civil liberties ? .

is public or private pressure more likely to be effective in improving the malaysian government's efforts to curb corruption and uphold human rights ? .

and is the united states engaging a sufficiently broad portion of the political sphere , or is it overly reliant on those who advocate closer ties with washington ? .

the future of domestic politics in malaysia is difficult to forecast with confidence .

the ruling bn coalition no longer has a stranglehold on political power , but the opposition is less unified than it was in the last national election .

on one hand , the distribution of seats in favor of rural constituencies and the deference of the mainstream press to government narratives will continue to favor the umno - led coalition .

on the other hand , dissatisfaction with government inefficiency and corruption could give the opposition enough popular support to improve its electoral standing .

najib could be seen by some as a political liability for umno if the taint from 1mdb scandal lingers .

corruption allegations against the prime minister add a layer of complexity to possible struggles for control of the party that remains malaysia's dominant political institution .

some observers believe the nep's set of ethnic preferences also will be a key issue for malaysia in the years ahead .

although the nep has been given some credit in addressing malaysia's income disparities and maintaining peaceful relations among ethnic groups , it also has fostered resentment among malaysia's chinese and indian minorities .

some analysts see the nep as a bedrock of the malaysian political economy and believe that any move strongly to scale back preferences for bumiputra would face deep opposition from many members of the malay ethnic majority .

former prime minister mahathir long promoted a "vision 2020," which sought to make malaysia into a developed country by that year , and the 2020 goal has been taken up by subsequent umno - led governments .

although malaysia's gdp has grown steadily in the last decade , several challenges remain .

within southeast asia and worldwide , malaysia faces stiff competition from low - wage countries attempting to promote their manufacturing sectors and grow exports .

some observers argue that the quality of the education system is not sufficient for development of a high - technology economy .

many of malaysia's top students go abroad for higher education , or find work overseas after graduation .

many of malaysia's challenges in the years ahead will mirror those of other southeast asian nations .

like others in asean , malaysia continually seeks to balance the involvement of the united states , china , japan , india , and others in regional affairs , while maintaining its own independence and that of asean broadly .

as a claimant to maritime territory in the south china sea , malaysia seeks to uphold its own interests while preventing the escalation of conflict over disputed areas .

southeast asian nations must decide how deeply to proceed with economic integration aimed at promoting a broader regional trading and investment hub .

malaysia faces challenges in balancing the region's trade and investment agendas , while also providing leadership on regional security issues such as lowering tensions in the south china sea .

