the surge of central american children coming to the united states who are not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian and who lack proper immigration documents is raising complex and competing sets of humanitarian concerns and immigration control issues .

adults and families from the same three countries — el salvador , guatemala , and honduras — have also been coming in increasing numbers over the same period .

these three countries have been experiencing high violent crime rates , poor economic conditions fueled by relatively low economic growth rates , high rates of poverty , and the presence of transnational gangs .

although these factors may prompt nationals of these countries to emigrate and may also elicit a humanitarian response from the receiving nations , the factors do not necessarily lead to a determination that those fleeing are refugees or asylees under the law .

current law requires that unaccompanied alien children are treated differently than unauthorized adults or unauthorized families with children who come to the united states seeking asylum .

the treatment of adults and families with children is prescribed by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as notably amended by the illegal immigrant reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 .

by contrast , two statutes and a legal settlement ( as well as the ina ) most directly affect u.s. policy for the treatment and administrative processing of unaccompanied children: the flores settlement agreement of 1997 ; the homeland security act of 2002 ( hsa ; p.l .

107-296 ) ; and the trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2008 ( tvpra , p.l .

110-457 ) .

this report focuses on unaccompanied alien children as asylum seekers .

to bring clarity to the unique policies toward unaccompanied children , this report compares their treatment to that of unauthorized adults and families with children in the specific contexts of asylum and expedited removal .

it further builds on a set of crs reports analyzing the issues surrounding unaccompanied alien children .

under the ina , foreign nationals present in the united states may apply for asylum with the united states citizenship and immigration services bureau ( uscis ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) after arrival into the country , or may seek asylum before the department of justice's ( doj's ) executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) during removal proceedings .

to receive asylum in the united states , foreign nationals must demonstrate a well - founded fear that if returned home , they will be persecuted based upon one of five characteristics: race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

because "fear" is a subjective state of mind , assessing the merits of an asylum case rests in large part on the credibility of the claim and the likelihood that persecution would occur if the alien is returned home .

foreign nationals — specifically in this context adults and families with children — apprehended along the border or arriving at a u.s. port of entry who lack proper immigration documents or who engage in fraud or misrepresentation are placed in a procedure known as expedited removal ; however , if they express a fear of persecution , they receive a "credible fear" hearing with a uscis asylum officer and — if found credible — are referred to an eoir immigration judge for a hearing .

the most notable and recent revisions to asylum policy that pertain to unaccompanied children were included in the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act ( tvpra ) of 2008 .

the asylum provisions of the tvpra were part of a larger set of provisions that revised the initial processing , temporary placement , and immigration relief options for unaccompanied children .

prior to the tvpra revisions , the unaccompanied child who sought asylum did so during a removal proceeding before an immigration judge in eoir .

the legislative road to the tvpra provisions on asylum for unaccompanied children began in the 1980s and 1990s , when immigration rights and child welfare advocacy groups challenged the policies of treating unauthorized children much the same as unauthorized adults under the ina .

as congress faces the challenges posed by an influx of unaccompanied alien children , whether to revise the law on how unaccompanied children are treated in terms of asylum and expedited removal is a key question .

on one hand , some call for revising the tvpra so that unaccompanied children would be subject to expedited removal .

in this case , proponents maintain that the children would be afforded a credible fear screening , as adults currently are .

only those who meet the credible fear threshold would be able to request asylum before an eoir immigration judge during their formal removal proceeding .

on the other hand , some call for a more generous "child - sensitive" standard of immigration relief for unaccompanied children , particularly those fleeing violence .

in this instance , advocates emphasize that the "best interests of the child" should be the governing principle , even when it might conflict with the ina provisions on unauthorized migration .

those who support current law assert that the policies in place strike the proper balance , notably by affording unaccompanied children the opportunity to recover from their potentially traumatizing journey before they make their asylum claims .

rather , proponents of current law maintain that the prudent response to the surge of unaccompanied children is to temporarily increase appropriations so that it can be expeditiously implemented .

