medicaid was established in 1965 to provide basic medical services to certain low - income populations .

it is a means - tested entitlement program that financed the delivery of primary and acute medical services , as well as long - term services and supports , to an estimated 56.7 million people in fy2012 , at a total cost of $431 billion with the federal government paying $249 billion ( about 58% ) of that total .

each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules .

state variability is the rule rather than the exception in terms of eligibility levels , covered services , and how those services are delivered and reimbursed .

benefit packages have always varied across states and across eligibility groups .

beginning in 2005 , the deficit reduction act ( p.l .

109-171 ) added benchmark benefit packages ( now called alternative benefit plans or abps ) as a state option .

as of january 1 , 2014 , the affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) required states to provide abp coverage to the newly established optional eligibility group that includes all citizens with income at or below 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

not everyone enrolled in medicaid has access to the same set of services .

different eligibility classifications determine available benefits , as described below .

this report begins with a summary of major medicaid eligibility pathways .

then traditional medicaid benefits and alternative benefit plans ( previously called benchmark benefit plans ) are described .

the final section provides an analysis of state experiences with abps as of mid - april 2014 .

additional crs resources on medicaid are provided at the end of this report .

historically , eligibility for medicaid was subject to "categorical restrictions" that generally limited coverage to the elderly , persons with disabilities , members of families with dependent children , certain other pregnant women and children , among others .

as of january 1 , 2014 , federal law allows states to expand medicaid eligibility for citizens with income up to 133% of the federal poverty level who do not fit into these traditional categories .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that the coverage expansion provisions in the aca would increase enrollment in both the medicaid and the state children's health insurance programs by about 7 million in cy2014 , rising to 13 million by cy2024 .

to qualify for medicaid , applicants must have income ( and sometimes assets ) that meet financial requirements .

these financial criteria are usually tied to specific percentages of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , and are sometimes based on certain cash assistance programs ( eg , supplemental security income or ssi ) .

below is a description of services available for medicaid beneficiaries by eligibility classification .

first , "categorical needy" individuals represent the vast majority of people enrolled in medicaid , most of whom receive traditional medicaid benefits ( described in more detail in the " traditional medicaid benefits " subsection ) .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) required that a newly established categorically needy group consisting of poor nonelderly , non - pregnant adults with income below 133% fpl receive medicaid benefits through alternative benefit plans ( abps ) .

however , on june 28 , 2012 , the united states supreme court issued a decision in national federation of independent business v. sebelius making this aca medicaid expansion optional .

for the medically needy subgroup , states may offer a more restrictive benefit package than is available to most categorically needy individuals .

such individuals include people who meet the main categorical restrictions described above but may have higher income .

states electing the medically needy option must provide coverage to certain pregnant women ( i.e. , prenatal and delivery services ) and children under age 18 .

finally , states also use waiver authority to design benefit packages .

under section 1115 waivers , states tailor benefits to state - specified subpopulations that can include both currently authorized groups and / or new groups not specified in federal statute .

each such waiver delineates the unique terms and conditions that are negotiated between a given state and the federal centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) .

 , table 1 provides examples of medicaid benefits available by selected eligibility classifications .

mandatory benefits are services that a state must cover in its state medicaid plan .

likewise , there are also a number of optional benefits that states may choose to cover .

as illustrated , different medicaid subpopulations may have access to benefit packages that can be quite varied , and can be categorized into two broad groups: ( 1 ) traditional benefits , and ( 2 ) alternative benefit plans ( abps ) .

additional details are described further below .

crs report r43357 , medicaid: an overview crs report r41210 , medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) provisions in aca: summary and timeline crs report r42978 , comparing medicaid and exchanges: benefits and costs for individuals and families crs report r43328 , medicaid coverage of long - term services and support .

