t he export - import bank of the united states ( ex - im bank or the bank ) operates under a renewable general statutory charter ( export - import bank act of 1945 , as amended ) , extended through september 30 , 2019 , by the export - import bank reform and reauthorization act of 2015 ( division e of p.l .

114-94 , a surface transportation authorization measure ) .

enacted on december 4 , 2015 , this act generally lowered ex - im bank's statutory lending authority ( "exposure cap" for outstanding portfolio ) to $135 billion for each of fy2015-fy2019 , and made reforms in a number of areas , including to ex - im bank's policies or operations in risk management , fraud controls , and ethics , as well as to the u.s. approach to international negotiations on export credit financing .

this report addresses frequently asked questions about ex - im bank , grouped in the following categories: ( 1 ) congressional interest ; ( 2 ) organizational structure and management ; ( 3 ) market context and programs ; ( 4 ) statutory requirements and policies ; ( 5 ) international context ; ( 6 ) activity ; ( 7 ) risk management , fraud control , and ethics ; ( 8 ) budget and appropriations ; ( 9 ) sunset in authority ; and ( 10 ) historical and current approaches to reauthorization .

see appendix a for a summary of selected key crs resources related to ex - im bank .

the primary method of continuing the bank's authority has been through the enactment of provisions that extend the sunset date in 12 u.s.c .

635f , most typically in authorizing laws .

these laws are listed in appendix c of this report , in table c - 1 .

such extensions of the bank's authority during the first two decades of its existence tended to be for between about five and seven years .

since that time , the length of these extensions has varied , from periods of days or weeks , to about six years .

the most recent such extension , in 2015 , was for a period of about three years and ten months ( p.l .

114-94 ) .

provisions in other laws , most typically appropriations acts , have also been used to provide for the continuation of bank functions during periods when the sunset date had lapsed and not yet been extended .

these laws and their relevant provisions are listed in appendix c of this report , in table c - 2 .

while such provisions have varied in form , they have generally indicated congressional intent that the bank's operations should continue during a specified time period .

for example , the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2002 , which was enacted on january 10 , 2002 , carried the following provision: sec .

588 .

[ ... ] provided , that notwithstanding the dates specified in section 7 of the export - import bank act of 1945 ( 12 u.s.c .

635f ) and section 1 ( c ) of p.l .

103-428 , the export - import bank of the united states shall continue to exercise its functions in connection with and in furtherance of its objects and purposes through march 31 , 2002 .

the most recent extension of ex - im bank authority , through a provision in an appropriations act , allowed the bank to exercise its functions through june 30 , 2015 ( p.l .

113-164 ) .

shorter extensions in the past arguably have given congress the opportunity to weigh in on ex - im bank operations on a more frequent basis through the lawmaking process .

on the other hand , ex - im bank and certain stakeholders have asserted that longer - term extensions can enhance the bank's long - term planning ability and provide more assurance to clients of the bank's viability .

continuing resolutions ( crs ) are appropriations laws that provide temporary or full year appropriations in the absence of regular appropriations being enacted .

after the first cr is enacted for a fiscal year , usually by the beginning of the fiscal year , one or more additional crs may be enacted until the annual appropriations process has concluded .

over the past several decades , crs have often been used to temporarily extend authorizing provisions that are scheduled to expire at the beginning of a fiscal year , or to provide authority to continue functions notwithstanding applicable sunset provisions .

in the case of ex - im bank , such provisions have been enacted on a number of occasions to authorize the bank to continue its functions , either during the duration of the cr or some other specified period ( see appendix c of this report , table c - 2 ) .

this occurred , for example , at the beginning of fy2012 , when the bank's authority sunsetted and an extension of that sunset date was not enacted until may 30 , 2012 ( p.l .

112-122 ) .

provisions in the first cr for the fiscal year ( p.l .

112-33 ) provided authority for the bank to continue its functions through the duration of the cr: sec .

137 .

the export - import bank act of 1945 ( 12 u.s.c .

635 et seq. ) .

shall be applied by substituting the date specified in section 106 ( 3 ) of this act for "september 30 , 2011" in section 7 of such act .

further e xtensions of this authority were enacted in subsequent crs for fy2012 .

most recently , the fy2015 cr ( p.l .

113-164 ) , which was enacted on september 19 , 2014 , extended ex - im bank's authority through the following provision: sec .

147 .

the export - import bank act of 1945 ( 12 u.s.c .

635 et seq. ) .

shall be applied through june 30 , 2015 , by substituting such date for "september 30 , 2014" in section 7 of such act .

the export - import bank reform and reauthorization act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-94 ) , enacted december 4 , 2015 , extended ex - im bank's general statutory authority to the close of business on september 30 , 2019 .

this act also generally lowered ex - im bank's statutory lending authority to $135 billion for each of fy2015-fy2019 , and made reforms to , among other things , ex - im bank's policies or operations in risk management , fraud controls , and ethics , as well as the u.s. approach to international negotiations on export credit financing ( see table 4 ) .

congress could take a range of approaches related to ex - im bank's authorization status .

at one end of the spectrum is the option of a "clean renewal" of ex - im bank's charter , with an extension of its termination date .

at the other end of the spectrum is the option of a sunset in ex - im bank's authority , such as by taking no legislative action ( since sunset provisions are contained in ex - im bank's charter in 12 u.s.c .

section 635f ) , or passing legislation with specific parameters for a wind - down in ex - im bank's functions .

in between are options including a renewal of ex - im bank's charter with limited changes ( such as revising its exposure cap ) or renewal with more substantive reforms ( such as to its authorities , policies , and practices ) .

reforms may be motivated by a range of reasons , including enhancing ex - im bank's ability to fill in gaps in private sector financing and offset competition from foreign ecas ; limiting its size and scope and exposure to u.s. taxpayers ; and furthering efforts to eliminate all eca activity internationally .

proposed reforms may raise , among other things , issues regarding the extent to which such changes would balance ex - im bank's core mission to boost u.s. exports and jobs with supporting other u.s. policy interests .

other options also exist , such as reorganization of ex - im bank's functions .

to this end , various proposals have been considered over time , including president obama's proposal in 2012 to reorganize the business - and trade - related functions of ex - im bank and five other agencies into an umbrella "department of trade," a proposal reiterated in the president's subsequent budget requests .

such proposals prompt debates about whether reorganization would reduce costs and duplication and improve the effectiveness of trade policy programs , or undermine the effectiveness of federal agencies , given their differing missions , and result in the creation of a larger , more costly bureaucracy .

members of the 114 th congress actively debated ex - im bank and ultimately reauthorized the bank with bipartisan support .

division e of a surface transportation authorization measure ( h.r .

22 / p.l .

114-94 ) , enacted on december 4 , 2015 , renewed ex - im bank's charter through the end of fy2019 .

the senate passed an amended version of h.r .

22 on july 30 , 2015 , including an ex - im bank extension , as an amendment ( voted 64-29 ) .

the ex - im bank provisions are substantively identical to those in s. 819 ( kirk ) .

the house voted ( 363-64 ) on november 5 , 2015 , on further changes to the highway bill , which also included the ex - im bank extension , as an amendment to the senate amendment to h.r .

22 .

congress used conference proceedings to resolve differences on the house and senate - passed versions of h.r .

22 ( h.rept .

114-357 ) .

the house action on h.r .

22 followed a vote on october 27 , 2015 , in favor ( 313-118 ) of h.r .

597 ( fincher ) which , as amended , was substantively the same as the ex - im bank extension in the senate - passed version of h.r .

22 .

the house considered and passed h.r .

597 pursuant to h.res .

450 , which was a special rule that the house voted to discharge from the committee on rules ( 246-177 ) .

multiple stand - alone bills related to ex - im bank , many focusing on "reforms," also were introduced in the 114 th congress .

in addition to s. 819 ( kirk ) and h.r .

597 ( fincher ) ( discussed above ) , others included s. 824 ( shaheen ) , h.r .

1031 ( waters ) , h.r .

1605 ( amash ) , and h.r .

3847 ( issa ) .

ex - im bank reauthorization was an active issue in debates over other legislative issues in the 114 th congress .

for example , senator cantwell filed amendments to h.r .

1314 , the vehicle in the senate for trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , to reauthorize ex - im bank: three ( s.amdt .

1376 , s.amdt .

1377 , and s.amdt .

1415 ) would have provided short - term extensions of authority , and one ( s.amdt .

1248 ) appeared to be substantively identical to s. 819 ( kirk ) .

additionally , a motion to table s.amdt .

1986 ( kirk ) — an amendment to reauthorize ex - im bank that was offered to h.r .

1735 , the national defense authorization act for fy2016 — failed by a vote of 31-65 .

the amendment was later withdrawn , but was characterized as a "test vote" on bipartisan support in the senate for ex - im bank reauthorization .

as discussed in the above sections , ex - im bank continues to present possible issues of oversight and legislative interest in the 114 th congress .

appendix a .

selected crs resources general resources crs report r43581 , export - import bank: overview and reauthorization issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs in focus if10017 , export - import bank of the united states ( ex - im bank ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

international and market context crs report rs21128 , the organization for economic cooperation and development , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42744 , u.s .

implementation of the basel capital regulatory framework , by [author name scrubbed] .

budget and appropriations crs report r42632 , budgetary treatment of federal credit ( direct loans and loan guarantees ) : concepts , history , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42098 , authorization of appropriations: procedural and legal issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

federal export promotion programs crs report r41495 , u.s. government agencies involved in export promotion: overview and issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43155 , small business administration trade and export promotion programs , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report 98-567 , the overseas private investment corporation: background and legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r42555 , trade reorganization: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

appendix b .

examples of ex - im bank financial product structures appendix c. laws and final legislative action related to the sunset date of ex - im bank functions the tables below list the public laws that created the ex - im bank and extended its authority .

the tables include the specific statutory text as well as the new sunset date set by the amending act .

table c - 1 contains the original law and amendments that were identified through analysis of the statutory notes to 12 u.s.c .

section 635f .

specifically , they are the laws listed in the "amendments" section .

in contrast , in some cases , particularly in the modern era , an extension of the authority of the export - import bank was provided through an appropriations act , such as a consolidated appropriations bill or a continuing resolution .

table c - 2 reflects these provisions .

as such , it contains provisions allowing the export - import bank to continue to exercise its functions as described in the "continuation of bank functions" section of the statutory notes accompanying 12 u.s.c .

section 635f , as well as some additional such provisions that were independently identified by crs and the wall street journal .

while crs has made every attempt to be comprehensive , it is possible that some laws that extended the bank's authority did not come up in our search .

the final two columns of both tables contain information on the last action taken by the senate and house , respectively , on the legislative vehicle that became law .

if the action was taken by roll call vote , the number of yea and nay votes , as well as the number of members not voting , is also presented .

 ( the one instance that a bill was approved through a division vote is also noted. ) .

additional actions , including roll call votes , might have occurred during other stages of consideration of these measures , for example , house and senate votes on earlier versions of these measures prior to action on resolving differences , such as through a conference report .

in addition , legislative vehicles proposing to extend the authority of ex - im bank that did not become law are also not listed in the table .

information on final disposition of the measure in each chamber since the 93 rd congress ( 1973-1974 ) was gathered from the legislative information system ( lis ) .

information for the period not in lis was collected from the congressional record , and page citations are provided in the table .

