this technology assessment was undertaken by pennsylvania state university , with contributions from michael arthur , seth blumsack , thomas murphy , david yoxtheimer , and ross pifer .

their work was performed under contract to crs , and was part of a multiyear crs project to examine various aspects of u.s. energy policy .

[author name scrubbed] , assistant director of the resources , science , and industry division , served as crs project coordinator .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in environmental policy , [author name scrubbed] , specialist in energy and natural resources policy , and nicole carter , specialist in natural resources policy , served as crs reviewers and editors of this report .

this assessment is one of two reports produced by the authors ; see also crs report r43636 , u.s. shale gas development: production , infrastructure , and market issues .

the material in this report is current as of 2013 .

the report will not be updated .

this report was funded , in part , by a grant from the joyce foundation .

this report provides an assessment of current and emerging water procurement and management technologies and practices related to shale energy development in the united states .

water resource management issues associated with shale energy development are of concern to policy makers because shale energy represents an opportunity as well as a challenge .

shale oil and natural gas present significant new energy resources , but their development also may pose risks to water quality and other water uses .

the intersection of evolving technology , environmental protection , hydrocarbon energy demand , and national and geopolitical energy and trade interests provide the context for this study .

shale gas and shale oil ( collectively referred to as shale energy ) , which were long considered "unconventional" hydrocarbon resources , are now experiencing significant development in the united states .

shale oil and gas represent substantial fossil fuel resources for heating , electricity generation , transportation fuel , and industrial use .

economical extraction relies on directional drilling and hydraulic fracturing ( "fracking" ) .

this well - completion technique involves the injection of large volumes of water , along with water - conditioning chemicals and sand or other proppants , to pressurize and fracture shale formations to increase reservoir permeability .

the proppant holds the fracture open , allowing gas and oil to move to the well bore .

a portion of the injected water , commonly referred to as "flowback," and naturally occurring water from the shale formation itself , referred to as "produced water," then return to the surface with the oil and / or gas .

for the purposes of this report , the combination of flowback and produced water , unless distinguished separately , will be referred to as "produced fluids. .

the term "wastewater" is also used , and includes produced fluids as described above , but may also contain other fluids produced during the drilling and development of shale energy wells .

the current level of freshwater used for fracturing and the management ( reuse or disposal ) of the produced fluids from the extraction are seen by some stakeholders as limiting factors in shale energy development .

shale energy development also poses the potential for contamination of surface water and groundwater resources through multiple pathways: accidental surface spills of chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing ; accidental spill of wastewaters from well operations ; improper disposal of wastewaters ; well fluids leaking from valves and casings , including uncontrolled blowouts ; and leakage and migration of gas and fluids at wells ( eg , improper well construction ) .

while some of these concerns are specific to shale development , others are common to most energy development activities .

however , the large volumes of fluids , chemicals , and injection pressures associated with high - volume hydraulic fracturing have posed new well development and wastewater management challenges for the industry and regulators .

this report discusses the water inputs to shale energy development , wastewater management related to shale energy development ( including some related topics such as induced seismicity ) , and emerging water technologies for both the production of shale energy and the disposal of wastewaters .

the report is intended to be a snapshot of current knowledge about water issues and technology development related to shale energy development , and will not be updated .

this report is limited to well development - related issues ; it does not discuss water - related risks associated with transport of shale - derived energy resources .

the extraction of shale energy has the potential to affect u.s. energy security by reducing quantities of crude oil and refined petroleum products purchased in global markets .

additionally , shale gas contributes to the united states' effective independence regarding natural gas .

when used as a fuel , natural gas , composed primarily of methane , is viewed as having lower emissions of many air pollutants relative to coal or oil as a fuel source , and is seen by some as a "bridge fuel" to a less greenhouse - gas - intensive energy future .

while these are some of the drivers behind interest in shale energy , how shale energy is developed bears directly upon its impact on water resources .

this section provides a brief introduction to how shale energy is developed in the united states .

hydraulic fracturing fluid must exhibit the proper viscosity and low friction pressure when pumped and used for well development .

the fluid chemistry may be water - based , oil - based , or acid - based , depending on the properties of the formation .

water - based fluids , sometimes referred to as slickwater , are the most widely used , especially in shale formations because of their low cost , high performance , and ease of handling .

water used in hydraulic fracturing may be piped or trucked from the source to the well - drilling area , depending on distance , rights - of - way , access , and topography .

water storage will typically occur on or near the well pad in either lined or earthen impoundments ( typically built to codes determined at the state and local level ) , steel tanks , or temporary above - ground modular storage impoundments .

the water is pumped from storage through a system of pipes , chemical blenders , pump trucks , valves , and pressure control devices ( i.e. , blowout preventers ) , and is then mixed with the desired proportion of proppants and chemical additives .

fracturing initially requires significant water inputs , but while a well is producing there are few freshwater requirements unless refracturing is performed .

refracturing might be used to stimulate a well as production declines , possibly after a number of years .

there are alternatives to water use for such procedures , but it is not known presently whether most shale energy wells will require refracturing or whether it will be economical to do so .

second , industry practices for water utilization , transportation , and treatment ( or disposal ) are evolving rapidly .

the following water sourcing topics for shale energy development are discussed below: water sources ; costs associated with water inputs ; water transport and storage ; and access to water sources .

once a well has been fractured and prior to coming on line , approximately 10% to 50% of the injected fluids may be returned to the surface over the course of several days to weeks , depending on the geology of the shale play .

these fluids are commonly known as flowback water , and consist primarily of the fluids used to fracture the shale formation .

flowback water is different from naturally occurring water in shale formations ( "produced water" ) that typically is also brought to the surface following well completion .

the produced formation water can be highly saline , and often is referred to as produced brines .

at some point , water recovered from a natural gas well will transition from mostly flowback water to mostly produced water .

in produced water , total dissolved solids ( tds ) values range widely by shale play , from approximately 13,000 to more than 280,000 milligrams per liter ( mg / l ) , with an average range of 13,000 to 120,000 mg / l , and can range as much as 120,000 to more than 280,000 mg / l within a play , as shown in table 2 .

produced waters may also contain constituents that are leached out from the shale formation , including barium , calcium , iron , and magnesium , as well as naturally occurring dissolved hydrocarbons and naturally occurring radioactive materials ( norm ) .

flowback water , shown in figure 6 , typically has elevated concentrations of tds , which may include salts , metals , clays , and fracturing fluid chemical additives .

the concentration of salts in flowback water increases rapidly during the first week or two after well completion .

no clear demarcation exists between the two fluid flows .

proper storage and management of these fluids can prevent the potential contamination of groundwater and surface water that would occur if released into the environment .

during the production phase of a well , some portion of the injected fluids in the shale formation may slowly flow out of the well as part of the produced water , along with natural gas or oil , typically at a rate of up to a few barrels per day , with the rate decreasing slowly over time ( see figure 7 ) .

the mixture of flowback and produced water is referred to in this report as "produced fluids. .

practices for managing produced fluids vary widely by operator and by location .

there is no identifiable set of best practices for water management for the shale gas or shale oil sectors as a whole .

in texas , for example , injection wells are widely utilized for wastewater disposal , whereas geologic disposal is utilized less frequently in the appalachian region .

wastewaters from shale energy wells in the appalachian region are more likely to be managed using a combination of underground injection , surface disposal ( such as impoundments ) , onsite treatment and blending for reuse or transport to water treatment plants for reuse , surface discharge , or other disposal .

surface disposal represents one of the lowest - cost ways to manage wastewaters from shale energy projects , but also introduces contamination pathways if impoundments are not properly constructed or managed .

hauling of water by truck to treatment facilities ( or to geologic disposal wells if these wells are not located close to production areas ) is among the highest - cost management strategies , and introduces potential contamination pathways if spills or other incidents occur during the transportation process .

proper management of fluids derived from drilling and hydraulic fracturing operations remains a substantial environmental management challenge .

many operators have significantly improved their management of fluids by utilizing advances in technologies such as lining well pads to capture releases , using closed loop drilling systems , and recycling flowback and produced fluids .

continued improvement in fluids management practices is likely as companies further refine their operations to meet environmental challenges and regulatory requirements .

new treatment and reuse technologies are currently being deployed to further refine the treatment and recycling of flowback and produced fluid .

deep underground injection wells ( referred to as class ii wells under the federal underground injection control ( uic ) program ) are used to dispose of the portion of oil and gas wastewaters not recycled or sent to other locations for off - site treatment and disposal .

treatment and reuse technologies and practices for water sourcing , transport , and storage vary by operator and region .

in addition , cost is always a consideration in fluid management practices .

table 3 shows a range of costs associated with a variety of produced fluid treatment methods .

while disposal is a common management approach , others are seeking to identify ways to beneficially use these waste streams .

the commercial or public - sector use of certain produced fluids , for example , is being permitted in pennsylvania and west virginia .

that is , if the brines meet specified water quality requirements , they are being applied in winter to treat roadways in those states , rather than being disposed of geologically or treated in designated facilities .

identification of uses for waste materials that may be considered beneficial could be important to the process of designing regulatory frameworks that will allow drilling companies and potential users of materials that would otherwise be considered waste streams to make better decisions .

the pace of technological change in water sourcing and water management for shale energy development is rapid , but uneven .

trends in water management have generally been influenced by local disposal costs , regulations , and geologic conditions , rather than by water scarcity alone .

some regions , particularly those where regulations restrict the discharge of wastewater to surface waters , and which have relatively few options for wastewater disposal ( due to a combination of geologic and regulatory factors ) , have seen shifts toward closed - loop water management systems that utilize recycled flowback water extensively and minimize the use of disposal wells .

these systems have also been used more extensively , and by necessity ( because of a lack of wastewater injection wells ) , in emerging unconventional production areas such as the marcellus shale play than in regions with recent growth in shale development , but that have a long history of active oil and gas production , such as texas .

this section discusses the status of emerging technology options for reducing the potential impacts of shale energy activities on groundwater and surface water resources .

much of the research is being conducted by private industry , often in close partnership with government agencies and university scientists .

common approaches for shale energy water management have included trucking of water from the source to the site ; storing water in lined , earthen impoundments ; and recycling of some portion of produced fluids for reuse in hydraulic fracturing , either at a fixed site or in the field , with the remainder of the fluids disposed of through injection wells or by some other treatment and disposal method .

this type of water management approach has limitations , including the production of wastes requiring disposal and the use of significant volumes of fuel for water and waste transport , typically at significant cost .

in order to make the process more cost - effective with less environmental impact , new approaches are being sought — for example , the use of lesser - quality sources of water , piping of water where possible , modular water storage , and recycling of produced fluids .

chemical precipitation for scalant removal and mechanical vapor recompression for desalination appear to be the most widely used treatment approaches to date ; however , emerging technologies including electrochemical treatment and forward osmosis appear promising .

the use of uic wells for disposal is also heavily relied upon , especially in ohio and texas , as a means to manage the portion of produced fluids not being recycled .

long - term viability and capacity of disposal wells are an area of active research to better understand the sustainability of this practice in various shale plays .

technological progress or changes in water management practices could address some of the most visible impacts on water resources and reduce the risk of impacts on groundwater and surface water quantity and quality .

widespread adoption of fracturing practices that minimize the use of freshwater ( groundwater , surface waters , or municipally sourced waters ) may reduce pressures from the shale energy sector on scarce water supplies in more arid areas such as texas and the rocky mountain states .

in the appalachian region , overall water supplies are not scarce , but the transportation of water from source to drilling site can involve high trucking costs .

wastewater management practices that minimize the handling of produced fluids and the use of multiple transportation and storage modalities could reduce the risk of impacts to water supplies .

adoption of drilling and completion practices that are less water - intensive and that minimize truck transportation could benefit water quality through reduced erosion along dirt and gravel access roads constructed alongside streams .

while reduction of stresses on water supplies and water quality would represent an environmentally positive step , it is important to realize that water management issues will not disappear entirely .

some freshwater will still be required for shale energy production — for example , in mixtures with flowback water for reuse in subsequent fracturing jobs .

the shale energy sector is increasingly recognized as a water consumer ( alongside agriculture , municipalities , industry , and electric utilities and other forms of energy production and conversion ) in regional water planning and state and local allocation practices .

adoption of emerging technologies and processes that minimize the water - use intensity of fracturing will have its own challenges , beyond the key issue of cost .

for example , public perception is an important consideration in determining which technologies or processes are ultimately adopted and widely deployed .

the use of carbon dioxide foam for fracturing , for example , replaces one intensive transportation need with another , since trucks will be required or a dedicated pipeline network will need to be built to deliver the fracking fluid commodity to the drilling location .

industry may be hesitant to adopt alternative technologies and processes if their use reduces energy production or increases costs from shale energy formations .

there continue to be fundamental uncertainties surrounding the acceptable or optimal chemical composition of fracking fluids that would meet emerging environmental concerns but still be effective fluids for hydraulic fracturing and shale oil and gas extraction .

for example , even when treated to drinking water standards , acidic mine drainage may still have high sulfate concentrations that increase the potential for downhole precipitation with metals .

metal precipitation could cause plugging of fractures , thereby lowering rates of oil and gas production .

the treatments required to lower sulfate concentrations in abandoned mine drainage , and even the extent to which different sulfate concentrations are associated with higher or lower oil and gas production rates , are uncertain and require more study .

the equipment , personnel , and other capital needed for the production of shale energy are highly mobile .

costs can increase or decrease as regional shale development patterns shift .

drilling rigs tend to be moved to those areas with the highest economic returns ( for example , away from dry gas to oil producing areas ) .

the mobility of drilling capital suggests that the demand for fracking fluids and wastewater management or treatment services will vary over the course of years or even months .

most treatment facilities , on the other hand , are built in fixed locations , and movement of treatment facilities imposes high costs .

mobile treatment facilities could be developed , but first - generation systems would likely have high costs due to first - of - a - kind engineering and an inability to take advantage of scale economies in water treatment .

variable demand for such facilities may imply that truck transportation , which can be costly and variable , will likely continue to be used until the costs of mobile treatment facilities decline .

water management issues are relevant to the entire life cycle of shale energy development , because fluids will continue to be produced even after a well is drilled , fractured , and producing oil and / or natural gas .

there also are multiple pathways for potential freshwater contamination .

therefore , research that views shale energy production in a life - cycle and materials - flow context may facilitate the identification of technologies and processes that can mitigate potential impacts along different stages of the shale energy development life cycle .

