members of congress have more choices and options available to communicate with constituents than they did 20 years ago .

in addition to traditional modes of communication such as townhall meetings , telephone calls , and postal mail , members can now engage their constituents via email , websites , tele - townhalls , online videos , social networking sites , and other electronic - based communications applications .

the rise of electronic communications has altered the traditional patterns of communication between members and constituents .

although virtually all members continue to use traditional communications tools , the use of new technology is increasing .

for example , past research on the adoption of twitter has shown that by august 2009 , 29% of members had adopted it .

the percentages of members who adopted had increased to 38% by september 2009 , 57% by december 2010 , and 79% by january 2012 .

by january 2013 , 100% of senators and 90% of representatives had adopted twitter .

more recently , members have begun to adopt video and picture sharing social media services .

this report examines members' use of one of these new electronic communications platforms: vine .

after providing an overview of vine , the report analyzes patterns of members' use of vine .

finally , the report offers a discussion of the implications of the rise of video sharing services like vine , and of social media more generally .

vine is a social media video sharing service , owned by twitter , which allows users to create six - second videos that can be short snippets of conversation , a series of still shots , or a moving panorama that automatically repeats in a loop .

these videos ( vines ) can be shared with vine followers and on twitter and facebook .

vine is primarily designed for use on mobile devices such as iphone , android , and windows supported devices .

vine combines many features of twitter — short posts and hashtags — with the ability to share short , looping videos or compilations of pictures .

it also allows users to reach followers with both text and video images .

up to 140 characters of text can accompany a vine post .

this report analyses the following questions related to members' use of vine: what proportion of members use vine ? .

how often do members use vine ? .

what do members vine about ? .

the use of vine by members of congress is an evolving phenomenon .

as members continue to embrace new technologies , their use of social media applications , like vine and other platforms , may increase .

vine allows members to communicate directly with constituents ( and others ) in a potentially interactive way that is not always possible using more traditional modes of communication .

for members and their staff , the ability to transmit real time information through videos and pictures , and observe how that information is shared across the internet , could be influential for issue prioritization , policy decisions , and voting behavior .

unlike other forms of social media such as twitter , vine's emphasis is on visual instead of written communication .

whereas twitter's focus is on communicating short bursts of information in 140 characters or fewer , vine has the ability to translate those written thoughts into short series of pictures or videos that could potentially allow members of congress to disseminate their messages more effectively .

one strength of social media , including vine , is the potential for posts to go "viral," which would allow members to communicate policy ideas , stake out positions , or announce events to an audience potentially far wider than just their followers .

further , vine allows for a clear distinction between member and staff postings .

twitter , and other text - centric social media platforms , can obscure whether posts are coming directly from a representative or senator or from a staff member .

to combat this problem , some offices have the member sign his or her tweets , often with initials , to indicate that the post came directly from the member .

for vine , this process can be straightforward because a member can appear on camera to deliver his or her message directly .

if the member does not appear in the vine , then the public may assume that staff posted the message .

even with the ability to provide short video contents , vine is currently not nearly as popular as twitter or many other social media sites .

while specific analysis on the percentage of adults using vine is not currently available , the pew internet research project conducted a study on the use of vine - like applications to watch videos on smartphones and the web .

the pew project found that "... apps such as vine are emerging which allow users to easily record and share short videos .

among online video consumers , 17% say they watch videos using a cell phone app like vine .

and among online video posters , 23% say that they have posted a video using this kind of app. .

the use of video sharing applications is becoming more popular .

consequently , the opportunities for members of congress to use these applications and websites to disseminate public policy positions and constituent services information are also increasing .

how members use social media continues to evolve .

some reports have suggested that members are dedicating additional staff ( or hiring new staff ) to handle social media as part of their messaging and communications strategy .

in the current budget climate , how members allocate staff — especially in the house of representatives , which limits the number of full time staff that a member can hire — is crucial .

if members spend more resources on social media , the priorities of other representational functions possibly could change .

further research on the adoption and use of social media platforms — such as vine — could provide insight into the changing approaches to representation , messaging to constituents and non - constituents , internal congressional communications ( i.e. , members interacting with other members through social media ) , and potential regulations .

also , while official member communications cannot include campaign rhetoric , what members say on official house or senate social media accounts arguably can be used in elections .

the impact of a video sharing service like vine , as compared to a text - based service like twitter , is unknown .

potential challengers could possibly use a member's appearance in a vine more directly than a member's twitter statement .

the potential use of a vine as part of a campaign commercial , for example , could alter a member's decision on the type of contents included in future vines .

electronic communications have also raised some concerns .

while a complete discussion of this topic is beyond the scope of this report , a few observations warrant mentioning .

first , existing law and chamber regulations on the use of communications media such as the franking privilege have proven difficult to adapt to new electronic technologies .

currently , house regulations largely treat social media communications as similar to franked mail .

several key differences , however , exist between electronic communications and franked mail — most notably the lack of marginal cost for sending electronic communications , the inability to differentiate between constituents and non - constituents , the opt - in nature of social media , and the ability of campaign challengers to adopt and utilize identical applications .

these factors raise questions about both the suitability and necessity of applying the franking model to social media communications .

second , the use of social media communications is rapidly changing .

in 2012 , vine did not exist .

going forward , there is no way to predict whether vine , or other similar video - sharing services , will continue to enjoy popularity .

policy makers thus may choose to seek general rather than specific structures when considering social media regulation , to avoid the need to revisit policies as new technologies are developed .

similarly , members of congress may choose to adopt social media platforms that provide similar user experiences in order to simplify messaging and the impact on staff time .

