the north atlantic treaty organization's ( nato's ) 2014 summit was held in newport , wales , united kingdom ( uk ) , on september 4-5 .

this was the first meeting of nato's 28 heads of state or government since russia's annexation of crimea and subsequent military support of separatist fighters in eastern and southern ukraine — actions that some allies view as having fundamentally altered the european security environment .

accordingly , summit deliberations centered largely on the appropriate nato response to russian aggression and the extent to which the alliance should alter its longer - term strategic approach and defense posture toward russia .

the summit was the last presided over by outgoing nato secretary general anders fogh rasmussen , who will be succeeded in october by former norwegian prime minister jens stoltenberg .

the formal summit agenda focused on three main areas: enhancing allied readiness and strengthening collective defense and military capabilities , including through increased troop rotations and military exercises in central and eastern europe ; marking the conclusion of nato's decade - long mission in afghanistan at the end of 2014 and launching a planned follow - on training mission ; and enhancing nato's support of partner countries outside the alliance , including through a new "defense capacity building initiative. .

at the behest of several allied governments , including the united states and the uk , the allies also discussed the security implications for nato of ongoing instability in the middle east and north africa , and particularly the emergence of the islamic state of iraq and the levant ( isil ) .

however , although nato condemned isil and noted significant security concerns in the region , the alliance as a whole did not commit to a substantive response beyond saying that it would consider any future request from the iraqi government for assistance in training iraqi security forces .

ongoing disagreement within the alliance over the extent to which russia poses a sustained threat to european security exposes longer - standing tensions regarding nato's strategic focus .

since the end of the cold war , nato has evolved from maintaining an exclusive focus on territorial defense in europe to overseeing a range of military and crisis management operations across the globe .

this transformation was predicated largely on the perception that russia no longer posed a security threat to nato , and on a conviction that the primary security challenges facing the allies emanated from beyond the euro - atlantic region .

however , some allies , including many former members of the communist bloc , have consistently expressed concern that nato's transformation could come at the expense of its capacity to uphold its commitment to collective defense , enshrined in article 5 of the north atlantic treaty .

after more than a decade of war in afghanistan and against the backdrop of a resurgent russia , allies such as poland and the baltic states have called for a renewed nato focus on collective defense and deterring russia .

among other things , they have advocated a permanent eastward shift in nato's defense posture .

others , including germany and italy , have cautioned that permanently basing nato forces in eastern europe could unnecessarily provoke russia and impede efforts to restore more cooperative relations with moscow .

debates about nato's mission come against the backdrop of continued economic stagnation in europe and long - standing u.s. concerns about a downward trend in european defense spending , shortfalls in european defense capabilities , and burden sharing within the alliance .

nato officials have argued that russian aggression should spur allied governments to boost defense spending and cooperation , or at least to allocate projected savings from the end of military operations in afghanistan to defense modernization initiatives .

however , since the annexation of crimea in march , only a handful of allies have announced defense spending increases .

in wales , the allies committed to halting any further cuts in national defense spending and agreed to aim to meet nato's target of spending 2% of gdp on defense within a decade .

nonetheless , some analysts caution that nato's latest effort to boost defense spending and enhance military capabilities could face the same challenges as the long line of similar post - cold war capabilities initiatives that have had mixed success , at best .

they contend that the limited outcomes may reflect a general lack of public support for military engagement , as well as divergent threat perceptions both across the atlantic and within europe .

no substantive progress on nato enlargement was announced at the wales summit .

the allies did , however , reaffirm their commitment to nato's "open door" policy and said that they would make a decision by the end of 2015 on whether to invite montenegro to join the alliance .

they also agreed to boost nato's partnership with aspiring member georgia .

this fell short of the u.s. administration's stated goal of granting georgia a membership action plan ( map ) at the summit .

many western european governments oppose granting a map to georgia , largely due to a perception that nato has enlarged too quickly and that the alliance should first agree on resolving a host of other issues , including relations with russia .

obama administration officials outlined several key objectives for the wales summit , including securing additional european contributions to reassurance and military readiness initiatives in central and eastern europe and pledges to increase defense spending and enhance military capabilities .

the administration also underscored its commitment to the transatlantic security relationship and to defending nato allies , particularly in response to russia's action in ukraine .

among other things , president obama highlighted the proposed $925 million european reassurance initiative ( eri ) , for which the administration has requested congressional approval in the department of defense's fy2015 overseas contingency operation ( oco ) budget request .

the formal agenda for the wales summit focused on three main issues: adoption of collective defense and military capabilities initiatives aimed at reassuring allies and deterring russia ; marking nato's transition in afghanistan ; and enhancing support of partner countries outside the alliance .

before russia's annexation of crimea in march , nato's wales summit was expected to be defined largely by leaders' efforts to outline a new , and perhaps more modest , set of priorities for an alliance moving on from a taxing decade of war in afghanistan .

to many analysts , the end of the afghanistan mission represents the next step in nato's post - cold war evolution from a regional defense organization focused exclusively on deterring the soviet union to an alliance confronting an array of complex security challenges across the globe .

however , russia's ongoing intervention in ukraine has caused some allies to question one of the key premises on which nato's transformation has been based — that russia no longer poses a significant security threat to the alliance .

accordingly , these allies have advocated a renewed nato focus on territorial defense in europe and deterring russia .

in wales , nato leaders reaffirmed their condemnation of russia's intervention in ukraine and announced a slate of collective defense measures intended to deter further russian aggression .

however , they did not come to agreement on managing nato's relations with russia over the medium to long term .

furthermore , the summit exposed possibly growing tension within nato on the appropriate allied response to growing instability in the middle east and north africa .

the lack of consensus on these questions could have significant implications for nato's future .

key areas of concern include member state decisions on the kinds of military capabilities to develop , the direction of nato defense planning and overall force posture , and nato's willingness and capacity to address other security threats .

evolving allied perceptions of the longer - term threat posed by russia are also likely to be a key factor in u.s. decisions on future force posture in europe .

in light of these considerations , members of congress could focus on several key questions regarding nato's future in the aftermath of the summit .

these might include: addressing whether the alliance should adopt a new strategic concept that better reflects views of the security threat posed by russia ( nato's current strategic concept was adopted in 2010 ) ; examining nato's capacity and willingness to address other security threats to the euro - atlantic region , including from the middle east and north africa ; more seriously addressing the possible consequences of member states' failure to meet agreed defense spending targets ; assessing u.s. force posture in europe and the willingness of european allies to contribute to u.s. defense initiatives in europe such as the ballistic missile defense program and the proposed european reassurance initiative ; and revisiting the allies' commitment to nato's stated "open door" policy on enlargement .

