r ecent reports regarding an uptick in the number of alien minors apprehended at the u.s. border without a parent or legal guardian have prompted renewed questions regarding so - called unaccompanied alien children ( uacs ) .

many of these questions were previously raised in fy2013-fy2014 , when a significant number of uacs were apprehended along the southern u.s. border .

although the number of uac apprehensions dropped in fy2015 , the beginning of fy2016 has seen an increase in the number of uacs apprehended along the southern border in comparison to the same time period in the prior year .

some of these questions pertain to the numbers of children involved , their reasons for coming to the united states , and current and potential responses of the federal government and other entities to their arrival .

other questions concern the interpretation and interplay of various federal statutes and regulations , administrative and judicial decisions , and settlement agreements pertaining to alien minors .

this report addresses the latter questions , providing general and relatively brief answers to 15 frequently asked questions regarding uacs .

in particular , this report begins with questions and answers that give basic definitions and background information pertaining to uacs , including how federal law defines unaccompanied alien child and the difference between being a uac and having special immigrant juvenile ( sij ) status .

it then turns to questions and answers pertaining to custody , control , and enforcement of immigration laws as to uacs , such as federal agencies' responsibilities in maintaining custody of uacs , and uacs' eligibility for relief from removal .

it concludes with questions and answers regarding uacs' rights , privileges , and benefits while in the united states , including whether uacs have a right to counsel at the government's expense in removal proceedings and whether uacs are eligible for inclusion in the obama administration's deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) initiative .

other crs reports address the pre - fy2015 surge in the number of uacs encountered at the u.s. border with mexico , as well as how uacs who are apprehended by immigration officials are processed and treated .

these include crs report r43599 , unaccompanied alien children: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43628 , unaccompanied alien children: potential factors contributing to recent immigration , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43734 , unaccompanied alien children: demographics in brief , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs insight in10107 , unaccompanied alien children: a processing flow chart , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r43664 , asylum policies for unaccompanied children compared with expedited removal policies for unauthorized adults: in brief , by [author name scrubbed] .

yet other crs reports discuss the circumstances in foreign countries that some see as contributing to uacs' unauthorized migration to the united states .

these include crs report r43702 , unaccompanied children from central america: foreign policy considerations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r41731 , central america regional security initiative: background and policy issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl34112 , gangs in central america , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43616 , el salvador: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r42580 , guatemala: political , security , and socio - economic conditions and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl34027 , honduras: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] .

two separate provisions of federal law address uacs' access to legal counsel .

one provision — section 235 of the tvpra , as amended — generally requires the secretary of hhs to "ensure" that uacs in hhs or dhs custody "have counsel to represent them in legal proceedings or matters and protect them from mistreatment , exploitation , and trafficking. .

the other provision — section 462 of the homeland security act , as amended — requires the director of the orr at hhs to develop a plan to "ensure that qualified and independent legal counsel is timely appointed to represent the interests of each child. .

however , because both provisions describe such access as being "consistent with" section 292 of the ina and other provisions of federal law , they have not been construed as requiring the appointment of counsel at the government's expense since these provisions require that any such counsel be "at no expense to the government. .

in several cases , uacs and their advocates have challenged section 292 and the government's corresponding failure to provide counsel to uacs in removal proceedings , including on the grounds that it violates the due process clause of the u.s. constitution .

these challenges sometimes note that children in other types of civil proceedings have been found to have a categorical right to counsel at the government's expense , regardless of their individual circumstances .

they often also note that the consequences of potential removal for aliens are comparable to the consequences of these other proceedings .

courts have , to date , rejected these arguments , declining to recognize a categorical right to counsel at the government's expense for uacs or other aliens .

however , at least four federal courts of appeal have opined that the due process clause could potentially require the appointment of counsel on a case - by - case basis for individual aliens who are incapable of representing themselves due to "age , ignorance , or mental capacity. .

section 504 of the rehabilitation act has also been construed in such a way that it could result in the appointment of counsel at the government's expense for unrepresented immigration detainees with "serious mental disorders or conditions that may render them mentally incompetent to represent themselves in immigration proceedings. .

certain uacs could potentially be encompassed by the protections of section 504 .

the federal government's 2014 announcement that it would award $2 million in grants to enroll "about 100 lawyers and paralegals" to represent children in immigration proceedings prompted questions about whether the government is barred , under section 292 of the ina , from using appropriated funds to provide counsel to uacs in removal proceedings .

as previously noted ( see " do uacs have a right to counsel at the government's expense in removal proceedings ? .

" ) , section 292 generally governs aliens' right to counsel , and provides that , in any removal proceedings before an immigration judge and in any appeal proceedings before the attorney general from any such removal proceedings , the person concerned shall have the privilege of being represented ( at no expense to the government ) by such counsel ... as he shall choose .

some have previously suggested that this provision , by itself or in conjunction with 5 u.s.c .

§3106 — which generally bars agencies from "employ[ing] an attorney or counsel for the conduct of litigation in which the united states ... is a party" — precludes the government from providing or otherwise paying for aliens' counsel in removal proceedings .

those making this argument seemingly construe the language about aliens' "privilege" to have counsel at their own expense to mean that the government may not pay for counsel for them .

however , this interpretation does not appear to have been adopted by any court , and other interpretations could be advanced .

in particular , an argument could be made that these provisions only restrict aliens' ability to claim an entitlement to counsel at the government's expense , and do not preclude the government from paying for aliens' counsel pursuant to other provisions of law or at its discretion .

along with the vast majority of countries , the united states is a party to the vienna convention on consular relations ( vccr ) , a multilateral agreement codifying consular practices originally governed by customary practice and bilateral agreements .

pursuant to article 36 of the vccr , when a national of a state party ( i.e. , country ) is arrested or otherwise detained in another state party , appropriate authorities within the arresting state must inform the person arrested "without delay" of the ability to have his / her consulate notified .

the vccr does not require the arresting state to notify the appropriate consular officials in every instance ; rather , it requires the arresting state to notify the foreign national in its custody that he / she has the option of having his / her consulate notified .

a foreign consular officer also is provided the right to communicate and be provided access to a detained national , including the ability to visit the national in the detention facility and arrange legal representation .

dhs regulations require that "[e]very detained alien shall be notified that he or she may communicate with the consular or diplomatic officers of the country of his or her nationality in the united states. .

the united states also has bilateral agreements with a number of countries that require consular notification in the event that one of the parties arrests a national of the other party .

most uacs encountered by cbp along the u.s. - mexico border are from countries ( including mexico ) that are parties to the vccr but do not have separate agreements requiring mandatory consular notification .

the vccr identifies consular functions as including "safeguarding ... the interests of minors and other persons lacking full capacity who are nationals of the sending state , particularly where any guardianship or trusteeship is required with respect to such persons. .

some have argued that , consistent with the vccr's recognition of this function , consular officers should be notified whenever a uac or other alien child is taken into custody by immigration authorities , but current dhs regulations provide for mandatory consular notification only when a bilateral agreement expressly requires it .

the united states may also enter into both legally binding and nonlegal arrangements with foreign countries concerning the repatriation of their nationals .

in recent years , dhs and local ice or cbp field offices have entered nonlegal arrangements concerning the repatriation of mexican nationals , including uacs .

these arrangements typically call for notification of mexican consular officials and other mexican authorities when a uac is to be repatriated , and provide for repatriation to occur during daylight hours .

in addition to consular notification requirements relating to the detention of a foreign national , the vccr also provides that appropriate authorities within the host country notify the appropriate consular post "without delay of any case where the appointment of a guardian or trustee appears to be in the interests of a minor or other person lacking full capacity who is a national of the sending state. .

uacs who entered the united states in fy2014 are generally not eligible for deferred action — a type of temporary relief from removal , the receipt of which can result in aliens receiving work authorization and certain federal financial assistance — under the deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) initiative .

 ( as of the date of this report , the daca initiative is still being implemented , although the obama administration has been enjoined from implementing a proposed expansion of daca , as well as from establishing a daca - like program for certain unlawfully present aliens who are the parents of u.s. citizens or lprs. ) .

pursuant to the dhs guidelines regarding daca , eligibility is limited to aliens who have resided in the united states since june 15 , 2007 , and who were physically present in the united states on june 15 , 2012 .

such residence must have been "continuous," which is generally construed to mean that any absences from the united states are "brief , causal , and innocent. .

thus , even if individual uacs happened to be re - entering the united states after a prior period of presence , the requirement as to continuous residence could present issues .

immigration officials may , however , still grant deferred action to aliens outside of daca if they have prioritized other aliens for removal , or if humanitarian factors weigh in favor of allowing individual aliens to remain in the united states .

