agricultural exports are important to both farmers and the u.s. economy .

with the productivity of u.s. agriculture growing faster than domestic demand , farmers and agriculturally oriented firms rely heavily on export markets to sustain prices and revenue .

according to the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) economic research service ( ers ) , agricultural exports have exceeded agricultural imports in every year since 1960 ( table a - 1 ) .

the value of agricultural exports has exceeded imports by a wide margin in recent years , but this trend reversed course in fy2015 , with the positive balance expected to narrow further in fy2016 ( figure 1 ) .

in fy2014 , u.s. agricultural exports reached a peak of $152.3 billion , topping the previous record high of $141.1 billion in fy2013 .

agricultural imports have risen steadily over this period , climbing from $103.9 billion in fy2013 to $114 billion in fy2015 , narrowing the agricultural trade surplus from $43.1 billion in fy2014 to $25.7 billion in fy2015 .

looking to fy2016 , usda projects that the trends that resulted in a narrower farm trade surplus in fy2015 will persist .

the agency expects u.s. exports to recede to $125 billion while imports climb to $118.5 billion , resulting in a substantially smaller farm trade surplus of $6.5 billion in fy2016 and marking what would be the smallest surplus since fy2006 .

for perspective , usda estimates that during the most recent three years ( 2013-2015 ) , the value of u.s. agricultural exports accounted for between 10% and 11% of total u.s. exports , while u.s. agricultural imports made up 5% of total imports .

within the agricultural sector , the importance of exports looms even larger , accounting for 20% of the value of overall agricultural production in 2013 , the most recent year for which usda data are available .

foreign markets represent the largest outlet for a number of u.s. farm commodities while providing a substantial market for many other agricultural products .

during the 2014 / 2015 marketing year , export markets absorbed 69% of u.s. cotton production , 41% of wheat output , and 47% of the soybean harvest .

in the livestock sector , usda estimates the export share of pork , broiler meat , and beef production in 2015 amounted to 20% , 16% , and 10% , respectively .

foreign markets also represent the largest outlet for certain specialty crops , including tree nuts .

usda indicates that during the 2014 / 2015 season , export markets absorbed 71% of the marketable production of u.s. walnuts , 68% of almond production , 75% of the pecan crop , and 59% of pistachios .

the top country destinations for u.s. agricultural exports in fy2013 are given in table 1 .

in fy2012 , china surpassed north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) partner canada as the leading market for u.s. agricultural exports , and china retained the top spot in fy2015 .

the leading agricultural commodity exports by value in fy2015 are shown in table 2 .

strong demand for soybeans , especially from china , helped make soybeans the largest u.s. agricultural export commodity that year .

concerning the composition of agricultural exports , bulk commodities such as soybeans and corn continue to rank at the top of the list of farm exports by value , but the mix of exports continues to favor high value products ( hvps ) over bulk commodities .

the hvp category includes such products as live animals , fruits and vegetables , nuts , fats , hides , feeds , sugar products , meat , milk , grain products , and processed fruits and vegetables .

in fy2015 , hvp products comprised 67% of all u.s. agricultural exports , about the same as in fy2013 and compared with a 62% share in fy2010 .

usda projects that the hvp share of u.s. farm exports will continue to increase , potentially reaching 74% of the total by 2025 .

the growth in hvp sales is expected to be led by increases in animal - based products and horticultural products .

agricultural exports make a significant contribution to the overall u.s. economy .

usda estimates that each dollar of agricultural exports stimulates an additional $1.27 in business activity , while each $1 billion in agricultural exports supports 7,550 jobs .

nearly every state produces agricultural commodities that are exported .

actual exports of agricultural commodity production by state are not available as such , but usda provides estimates of commodity exports by state based on data for u.s. farm cash receipts .

table 3 provides a listing of the 10 states with the highest estimated shares of u.s. agricultural exports by value in calendar year ( cy ) 2014 .

these 10 states accounted for 56% of total u.s. agricultural exports that year .

u.s. and global trade are greatly affected by the growth and stability of world markets .

changes in world population , economic growth , and income ; tastes and preferences in foreign markets ; and exchange rates are most likely to alter global food demand .

u.s. domestic farm policies that affect price and supply , as well as trade agreements with other countries , also influence the level of u.s. agricultural exports .

according to usda , world economic growth — particularly sustained relatively high growth in developing countries — provides a foundation for increases in global food demand , trade , and agricultural exports .

developing countries are expected to drive most of the growth in demand for u.s. agricultural exports in the years ahead , reflecting the outlook for faster population growth in these countries and rising incomes associated with an expanding middle class .

these economic trends , coupled with younger population demographics and increased urbanization , are closely associated with greater diversification of diets and increased demand for meat , dairy products , and processed foods that tend to shift import demand in favor of feedstuffs and hvps .

global economic growth is projected to rise to 3.1% in 2016 from 2.8% in 2015 , according to usda .

table 4 contains a breakdown of growth prospects by major regions and key countries .

economic growth is expected to be led by moderately stronger growth in the united states , a further uptick in economic activity in the european union and africa , and relatively stable growth prospects in asia and oceania overall amid slower growth in china .

a further downturn in brazil's economic prospects may weigh on growth prospects in south america .

a leading factor in the decline in the value of u.s. agricultural exports in fy2015 was lower prevailing market prices for numerous farm commodities .

for instance , the average farm prices of 2014-crop soybeans and corn ( marketed from september 1 , 2014 , to august 31 , 2015 ) were lower than average prices for the 2013 crops by 22% and 17% , respectively .

farm prices for major animal products — including beef cattle , hogs , broilers , and milk — were also lower in 2015 compared to 2014 , thereby contributing to the lower dollar value of export sales in fy2015 .

another factor influencing u.s. agricultural trade is the value of the u.s. dollar relative to foreign currencies .

following a 10-year period of dollar depreciation from 2002 to 2011 , the u.s. currency has since strengthened .

the dollar is projected to continue to strengthen relative to most foreign currencies in 2016 , though not as sharply as it appreciated in 2015 ( figure 2 ) .

in part , the stronger u.s. dollar reflects relatively favorable economic prospects for the u.s. economy compared with circumstances elsewhere .

for agriculture , a stronger dollar makes u.s. commodities more expensive in local currency for foreign buyers and renders u.s. products less competitive in relation to commodities from export competitors with weaker currencies , such as brazil and argentina .

in this way the stronger dollar contributed to a lower level of farm exports in fy2015 with projected dollar strengthening expected to have a similar effect in fy2016 .

the stronger dollar also encourages increased levels of u.s. agricultural imports by making foreign products cheaper in u.s. dollar terms .

u.s. trade policy and geopolitical events also factor into the level of agricultural exports .

trade liberalization efforts aim to expand international commerce by lowering various barriers to trade and broadening access to foreign markets .

these efforts include multilateral agreements under the auspices of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) and its successor , the world trade organization ( wto ) , as well as regional trade agreements such as nafta , and bilateral free trade agreements , including the recent korea - u.s. free trade agreement ( korus fta ) .

geopolitical events , such as economic sanctions , can influence the scope of trade in agricultural products as well .

the effects of sanctions are often temporary , as commodities are fungible and trade flows tend to realign .

one such event was the embargo that president jimmy carter imposed on u.s. grain sales to the soviet union in january 1980 in response to the soviet invasion of afghanistan in december 1979 .

at the time , the soviet union was the largest importer of u.s. grain and feed .

the quantity of u.s. grain and feed exports to the soviet union plunged by 66% in 1980 , but total exports of u.s. grain and feed that year climbed by 10% as other importers absorbed the displaced grain .

more recently , on august 7 , 2014 , russia banned the import of certain foods — including certain beef , pork , poultry , fish , seafood , fruits , nuts , vegetables , sausages , and prepared foods — from a number of western countries , including the united states , in retaliation for economic sanctions imposed on russia for its actions in ukraine .

banned food imports from the affected countries amounted to 22% of the value of russia's food imports in 2013 .

the u.s. share of the affected product imports amounted to about 9% of the total but comprised only about 0.5% of annual u.s. agricultural exports .

in the wake of the ban , u.s. agricultural exports to russia have fallen from a total of 712,697 metric tons in 2013 to 565,652 metric tons in 2015 .

shipments of poultry meat and products have been severely affected , declining from 276,636 metric tons in 2013 prior to the ban to zero in 2015 .

recognizing the importance of agricultural exports to the financial well - being of the u.s. farm sector , farm bills have typically included programs that promote commercial agricultural exports .

the 2014 farm bill continues this pattern .

usda's foreign agricultural service ( fas ) works to improve the competitive position of u.s. agriculture in the global marketplace .

to this end , fas administers several export programs designed to improve the competitive position of u.s. agricultural goods in the world marketplace with the objective of facilitating export sales and improving foreign market access for u.s. farm products .

the trade title of the 2014 farm bill , the agricultural act of 2014 ( title iii of p.l .

113-79 ) , as signed into law on february 7 , 2014 , establishes policy for five years through fy2018 .

the law reauthorizes and amends usda's foreign agricultural export programs .

budget authority for these programs is mandatory and not subject to annual appropriations .

funds required for these export programs are provided directly by the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) through its borrowing authority .

agricultural export programs generally fit within three broad groupings: 1 .

export market development programs , 2 .

export credit guarantee programs , and 3 .

direct export subsidies .

the 2014 farm bill made several changes to title iii but left intact most programs that facilitate overseas market development and sales .

key changes include alterations to the export credit guarantee program to align it with wto rulings concerning its use in facilitating exports of u.s. cotton and the elimination of the dairy export incentive program ( deip ) , which effectively curtailed the use of direct export subsidies .

the bill also directs the secretary of agriculture to establish the position of under secretary of agriculture for trade and international affairs as part of a reorganization of the agency's trade functions .

the value of u.s. agricultural exports climbed by nearly 60% between fy2009 and fy2014 , reaching a record $152 billion .

thereafter , u.s. farm exports receded to $139 billion in fy2015 , and usda projects that exports will decline further to $125 billion in fy2016 , which would mark the lowest ebb for farm exports since fy2010 ( table a - 1 ) .

export earnings have declined in tandem with generally ample world harvests , resulting in lower market prices and a stronger u.s. dollar vis - a - vis trading partner currencies , which has reduced u.s. competitiveness in relation to other exporters , including brazil and argentina .

in fy2015 , the downturn in export sales was led by lower unit prices for several major commodities — such as wheat , corn , broiler meat , and pork — the effect of which was compounded by a reduction in the quantities of these commodities exported .

given that about 20% of u.s. agricultural production is shipped abroad , export sales are manifestly an important contributor to agricultural prices , farm income , and the financial well - being of a broad array of interests within the u.s. agribusiness sector , including crop and livestock processors and farm input suppliers , among others .

considering the sharp fall in net cash farm income in recent years — to a forecast $91 billion in 2016 from a peak of $135 billion in 2012 and 2013 — congress might consider the possible advantages and potential downsides of addressing opportunities and market circumstances that could contribute to an increase in u.s. agricultural exports , which could include the following three .

tpp , a regional fta that the u.s. government has concluded with 11 other pacific - facing countries , would , in part , provide improved access to these markets for agricultural products — through a reduction in tariff rates and expanded tariff - rate quotas — for a broad range of u.s. agricultural products ( see "u.s .

agricultural trade and the trans - pacific partnership agreement" textbox ) .

two tpp countries with which the united states does not have an existing fta are considered to be particularly attractive growth prospects for u.s. agricultural exports: japan , a food importer with a large population , high per - capita income , and highly protected agricultural sector ; and vietnam , in view of its sizable population and rapidly growing economy .

usda has argued that ftas ( such as nafta and numerous bilateral ftas ) have contributed substantially to a steep increase in u.s. agricultural exports in recent decades .

as noted earlier , the tpp agreement has drawn broad support within u.s. agriculture and within the agribusiness and food sectors generally .

but tpp also has its detractors , who contend that the terms are unbalanced and the potential benefits to u.s. agriculture and food industry interests are oversold while the downside risks are minimized .

among food and farm critics of the tpp are the united food and commercial workers international union and the national farmers union , both of which have broad objections to tpp , as well as elements of the u.s. rice industry and tobacco producers , which object to specific provisions in the agreement that concern treatment of their commodities .

congress would need to enact implementing legislation for tpp to have the force of law for the united states .

numerous farm and agribusiness groups have pointed to cuba as a market that could become a significantly larger importer of u.s. farm products .

this reflects cuba's heavy dependence on agricultural imports to feed its population of 11 million , the considerable transportation cost and delivery time advantages that u.s. exporters have over competitors ( such as brazil and vietnam ) due to the close proximity of major u.s. ports to cuba , and the broad range of u.s. agricultural products available for export .

title ix of the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 ( tsra , p.l .

106-387 ) opened a window in the long - standing u.s. embargo on trade with cuba by permitting exports of agricultural products .

thereafter , u.s. farm exports to cuba climbed from zero in 2000 to $685 million in 2008 but since then have receded , amounting to $149 million in 2015 .

in a report issued in 2015 , usda compared the potential for u.s. agricultural exports to cuba to the dominican republic , noting that the dominican republic market bears similarities to cuba in terms of population and per - capita income .

but whereas the dominican republic imported an annual average of $1.1 billion of u.s. farm products between 2012 and 2014 , cuba's average annual imports were far lower at $365 million over the same period .

tsra specifically prohibits the use of private financing to underwrite exports of agricultural products ( except through third - country financial institutions ) and prohibits any access to u.s. government export promotion programs for cuba .

numerous farm groups contend that the restrictions on financing , which in practice tend to limit sales to cuba to cash transactions , comprise a major impediment to expanding u.s. farm exports by making terms for u.s. products less competitive than those offered by alternative suppliers .

in a march 2016 report , the u.s. international trade commission concluded that u.s. agricultural exports to cuba could post significant gains if u.s. restrictions on trade were removed .

in particular , it noted that u.s. agricultural suppliers view the inability to offer credit and travel to cuba to facilitate transactions as key obstacles to increasing farm exports .

in 2015 , and in early 2016 , the obama administration issued a policy of general approval for the export to cuba of certain additional categories of goods and followed this up in january 2016 by permitting u.s. private export financing of these goods .

but agricultural products continued to be excluded from private u.s. financing due to the prohibition imposed under tsra .

critics of the obama administration's policy initiative to engage cuba diplomatically and move toward more normal bilateral relations point out that cuba remains a one - party communist regime with a poor record on human rights , and they contend that reforms that demonstrate a commitment to democracy and human rights should precede a relaxation in the u.s. sanctions regime .

in recent years , u.s. agricultural interests and policymakers have become increasingly concerned that u.s. agricultural exports are being displaced by developing country competitors .

the concern is that certain export competitors have benefited from increasingly generous government support — including domestic price support programs , production subsidies , and export subsidies — which has led to the accumulation of domestic surpluses irrespective of market conditions .

disposing of these surpluses can weigh on international market prices and distort trade patterns .

foreign surpluses resulting from high government support levels may displace both imports of u.s. farm products to countries that employ trade - distorting subsidies and u.s. exports to third country markets .

generous price supports and production subsidies — and in some cases export subsidies — have insulated producers from price signals in international markets and have led to exports that are often below domestic prices and production costs .

in 2015 , the house agriculture committee held several hearings on this topic .

the committee heard testimony from academics , economic consultants , and commodity groups , including representatives of the cotton , sugar , wheat , and dairy industries .

the testimony centered on the variety of methods by which advanced developing countries ( such as brazil , china , india , thailand , and turkey ) provide support that exceeds their wto obligations and , consequently , distorts trade to the detriment of u.s. agricultural interests .

establishing disciplines on agricultural support programs has traditionally been the province of the wto and its predecessor , gatt .

lodging a complaint with the wto against another member government for violating wto rules under dispute settlement provides an established framework for seeking redress .

beyond pursuing individual complaints via dispute settlement on a case - by - case basis , multilateral negotiations within a trade "round" can rewrite the rules of trade for wto members .

the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations that was launched in 2001 was intended to address agricultural trade issues broadly , including domestic support levels , market access , and export competition .

but the negotiations reached an impasse in 2009 and have made little progress since then .

another activity that might evoke continued congressional oversight involves the reorganization of the trade functions at usda as required by the enacted 2014 farm bill .

as noted above , following consultations with the house and senate agriculture committees , a report outlining the secretary of agriculture's reorganization plan was to have been submitted to those committees by early august 2014 , but by the end of april 2016 the reorganization plan had not been completed .

at a hearing of the house appropriations committee on march 17 , 2016 , deputy under secretary for farm and foreign agricultural services alexis taylor stated that usda hoped to provide the required report to congress by the end of the current year .

the fy2016 agricultural appropriations act ( p.l .

114-113 ) set a revised deadline of mid - june 2016 for transmitting the report on a proposed reorganization plan to congress .

as part of this reorganization proposal , the 2014 farm bill also calls for the secretary to establish within usda the position of under secretary of agriculture for trade and foreign affairs .

as noted previously , the creation of this new position implies the organizational separation of key domestic farm programs , such as crop insurance , from the main export - oriented programs discussed in this report .

considering that both of these functions currently fall within the purview of the under secretary for farm and foreign agricultural services — and in view of the importance of these program activities to the agricultural sector — congress might have a keen interest in considering the secretary's plan and in overseeing the subsequent reorganization effort .

historically , many members of congress have been highly supportive of map and cite the benefits the program brings to u.s. agricultural industries through export market development abroad .

although the program has its detractors , strong support for export market development programs has been reflected in congress's rejection in fy2010 and fy2011 of the administration's proposals to reduce map funding by 20% in each of those years .

the administration has not requested reductions in map funding since fy2011 .

also , the continuity that the 2014 farm bill provides in terms of extending most agricultural export programs speaks to ongoing congressional support for this type of activity .

the elimination of deip as part of the new law appeared to be mainly a function of fundamental changes the law makes in the structure of federal support programs for milk producers , a u.s. commitment to eliminate direct export subsidies , and a recognition that no activity had been recorded under deip since fy2010 .

at the same time , a concern raised by some members of congress with respect to map and fmdp is whether the federal government should play an active role at all in helping agricultural producer organizations and agribusiness entities market their products overseas .

some argue that map and fmdp are forms of corporate welfare in that they fund activities that private firms could and would otherwise fund for themselves .

other critics argue that the principal beneficiaries are foreign consumers and that funds could be better spent , for example , instructing u.s. firms on how to export .

program supporters emphasize that foreign competitors , especially eu member countries , also spend money on market promotion and that u.s. marketing programs help keep u.s. products competitive in foreign markets .

the concerns of critics notwithstanding , congress has continued to demonstrate support for programs that promote farm exports .

in considering the house agriculture committee - reported farm bill ( h.r .

1947 ) , the house in 2013 rejected by substantial margins two amendments that sought to retire two farm export promotion programs .

an amendment to repeal map ( h.amdt .

191 ) , offered by representative steve chabot , failed by a vote of 98-322 , while the house also turned down by 103-322 another amendment ( h.amdt .

193 ) offered by representative mo brooks that sought to terminate emp .

a core argument advanced in both cases was that taxpayer money ought not be spent on promotional activities that should and could be borne by private interests .

during the house agriculture committee's markup of the same bill in 2013 , no amendments that sought to eliminate or scale back farm export programs were considered .

similarly , in marking up its farm bill , s. 954 , in 2013 , the senate agriculture committee did not consider any amendments to curtail agricultural export programs .

likewise , during the floor debate on s. 954 in 2013 , the senate did not consider any amendments that sought to curb or end agricultural export programs .

in the early 1990s , some members raised specific concerns about the effectiveness of map operations , specifically questioning the program's cost - effectiveness and impact and citing its lack of support for small businesses and displacement of private sector marketing funds .

in response , congress directed usda to make significant changes to map .

in 1996 , congress through the appropriations process prohibited fas from providing direct assistance for brand - name promotions to companies that are not recognized as small businesses under the small business act .

in 1997 , congress prohibited large companies from receiving indirect assistance from map as well .

giving priority to small businesses did result in a substantial increase in the small business share of map assistance for brand - name promotion by 1997 .

fas also established a five - year limit ( a "graduation requirement" ) on the use of map funds for companies that use funds to promote a "specific branded product" in a "single market," unless fas determined that further assistance was still necessary to meet program objectives ( generic marketing was not subject to the graduation requirement ) .

fas later revised the regulations in 1998 to limit each company to no more than five years ( consecutive or nonconsecutive ) of map funding for brand - name promotions per country .

finally , congress added a requirement that each participant certify that map funds supplement — rather than supplant — its own foreign market development expenditures .

a 1999 study by the then general accounting office ( gao ) reviewed a number of studies looking at map's effectiveness and concluded that while changes had been made to the program , the economic benefits of export programs ( including map ) were unclear .

it stated that "few studies show an unambiguously positive effect of government promotional activity on exports. .

in 2009 testimony before the senate finance committee , gao said that u.s. export promotion activities were in need of strengthened performance management systems .

a 2010 report by ihs global insight sponsored by fas concluded that usda's market development expenditures have had a positive and significant impact on u.s. agricultural trade .

global insight concluded that increased spending on market development under map and fmd over the period 2002-2009 — from roughly $125 million per year in fy2001 to $234.5 million annually during the fy2002-fy2009 period — is estimated to have raised the u.s. share of foreign agricultural imports by 1.3 percentage points , a rise to 19.9% from 18.6% under a no - increase scenario .

global insight concluded that , in value terms , by fy2009 this additional market development activity was responsible for a 6% boost in u.s. agricultural exports to $96.1 billion that year , compared with $90.5 billion under a modeling scenario in which map and fmdp spending were held to the lower fy2001 levels .

