on may 6 , 2010 , the dow jones industrial average ( djia ) , a broad stock index , fell by nearly 1,000 points over the course of several minutes and then quickly rebounded .

this was one of the largest intraday declines in the history of the djia and was described by one commentator as "one of those eye - opening events that exposed many flaws in the structure of the market. .

dubbed the flash crash , the event led to several analytical studies and reports and to greater scrutiny of a broad trading protocol known as high - frequency trading ( hft ) , a form of algorithmic securities trading , which has no formal consensus definition .

in addition to the heightened scrutiny it received after the flash crash , hft , which accounts for a large share of total domestic securities trades , has raised other public policy concerns .

among them are whether ( 1 ) htf plays a role in exacerbating market fragility ; ( 2 ) it may heighten the market's systemic risk ; ( 3 ) it enhances or harms the quality of the securities market ; ( 4 ) certain kinds of hft may constitute an illegal form of front - running ; ( 5 ) hft helps foster a system of two - tiered trading markets that benefits certain traders at the expense of others due to their access to faster trading data and advantageous trade infrastructure ; and ( 6 ) the presence of hft has been to the detriment of non - hft investors and investor confidence in the securities market .

as in earlier major market disruptions , such as the october 1987 market crash ( when the djia lost almost 22% in a single day , setting off a global stock market decline ) , congressional interest in the flash crash derives in part from congress's decades - old legislative mandate that , among other things , delegated to the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) responsibility for investor protection ( through a regime of mandatory disclosure ) and maintaining fair and orderly markets .

in the 113 th congress , congressional interest in hft has been reflected in legislation that would levy securities transaction taxes on securities trades , presumably raising the cost and thus reducing the incidence of conducting hft .

specifically , in the 113 th congress , s. 410 ( harkin ) , h.r .

880 ( defazio ) , and h.r .

1579 ( ellison ) would levy taxes on various financial trades , including trades conducted by hft traders .

h.r .

2292 ( markey ) would require the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) to provide a regulatory definition of hft in the derivatives markets that the agency oversees .

it would also require high - frequency traders in derivatives to register with the cftc , submit semiannual reports to the agency , and conform to business conduct requirements that the cftc may issue .

h.r .

2292 would also grant the cftc the authority to impose civil penalties under the commodity exchange act for violations of a hft regulation .

the amount of the fine would be based on the duration of the violation .

in addition , in exercising congressional oversight authority over the sec and the cftc , a number of committee and subcommittee hearings have touched on the subjects of hft and the flash crash .

meanwhile , the cftc and the sec , which respectively regulate derivatives and equities , have both issued studies that provide far - reaching explorations of hft .

the studies also pose a number of questions about the value of hft and propose several ways to further regulate it or intervene to mitigate consequences of hft that some consider to be problematic .

interest in hft has also been heightened by the release of the book flash boys by michael lewis and its offshoots , including an interview with the author on 60 minutes and an adaptation of the book in the new york times .

among other things , a former securities trader at the canadian brokerage firm rbc charges that the hft firms on which lewis reports have significantly relied on a form of "legalized front - running" and observes that many major institutional investors , including various mutual funds , appear to have been unaware of the existence of such behavior , which could allegedly be costly to them .

the department of justice ( doj ) , federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , cftc , sec , new york attorney general , and massachusetts secretary of commerce are variously conducting investigations and probes into specific hft firms , certain hft strategies , and hft in general .

specifically , attorney general eric holder has announced that the doj is "investigating [hft] … to determine whether it violates insider trading laws. .

in addition , the fbi is reportedly probing ( 1 ) whether hft firms are trading ahead of other investors based on information that other market participants cannot see , a possible form of front - running , a type of illegal insider trading ; ( 2 ) practices in which a hft trader submits trade orders and then cancels them to foster the illusion of market activity , a possible form of market manipulation that may prompt others to respond to illusory trade orders ; and ( 3 ) the use of hft to place orders to hide transactions that may be based on an illegal tip .

to facilitate these probes , the agency has reportedly openly solicited traders and stock - exchange workers to divulge any evidence suggesting front - running and manipulation .

these inquiries reportedly derive from a multiyear agency probe of illegal insider trading , an effort that reportedly has led to at least 79 convictions of hedge - fund traders and others .

the new york attorney general is responsible for enforcing the state's martin act , a securities law that dates back to the 19 th century , which gives the attorney general statutory powers "to conduct investigations of suspected fraud in the offer , sale or purchase of securities [and] [w]here appropriate… [to] commence civil and criminal prosecutions … to protect investors. .

under the act's auspices , new york attorney general eric schneiderman has opened an investigation into whether stock exchanges provide hft firms with improper advantages , including accepting payment to locate hft firm computer servers within an exchange's data center .

the attorney general has also struck deals with several entities , including business wire and marketwired , that for a fee provided potentially market moving news releases to hft traders in advance of public release .

the entities agreed to suspend the advance news feeds .

reports also indicate that the attorney general has subpoenaed several hft firms as he investigates whether certain traders have an unfair advantage over others .

in the class action civil case city of providence , rhode island v. bats global markets incorporated et al .

 ( u.s. district court , southern district of new york , no .

14-2811 ) , the city of providence is suing bats global markets incorporated , the chicago board options exchange , nasdaq omx group , the new york stock exchange , and others for engaging in fraud designed to manipulate the markets .

the suit alleges that the fraud was conducted in conjunction with several brokerage firms and several hft firms and that it resulted in the diversion of "billions of dollars annually from buyers and sellers of securities to themselves. .

the suit is being brought by the city of providence on behalf of investors that acquired securities in the united states after april 2009 .

the civil case's allegation that hft has resulted in the diversion of billions of dollars from investors to a collective of market centers , brokerage firms , and hft firms is not unlike a commonly heard characterization that hft "is not trading — it is skimming … [or] legalized theft [that constitutes] ... a tax on investors. .

media reports also indicate that william f. galvin , the massachusetts secretary of commerce , has sent inquiries to investment advisers and private equity and hedge - fund firms in which he requested answers to a number of questions related to their hft practices , including their use of direct data feeds from exchanges and whether they have a computer server located within an exchange's data center .

spokespersons have reportedly said that the inquiries are a way to learn about "the extent of the [hft] practices. .

sec officials report that the agency is involved in "a number of ongoing investigations regarding various market integrity and structure issues , including high - frequency traders and automated trading. .

in june 2014 , sec chair mary jo white made what was arguably the first explicit agency discussion of prospective hft - related regulatory initiatives .

in the speech , which included a number of potential market structure regulatory reforms , white praised the benefits brought by algorithmic trading and electronic trading , such as the reduction of investor trading costs .

referencing hft , however , she said she had concerns with "aggressive , destabilizing trading strategies in vulnerable market conditions. .

such concerns over hft , she indicated , had prompted her to direct sec staff to develop recommendations for "an anti - disruptive trading rule" that would "apply to active proprietary traders in short time periods when liquidity is most vulnerable and the risk of price disruption caused by aggressive short - term trading strategies is highest" ; clarify "the status of unregistered active proprietary traders to subject them to... [sec] rules as dealers" and look into crafting "a rule eliminating an exception from ... [financial industry regulatory authority] membership requirements for dealers that trade in off - exchange venue" ; and prepare recommendations for the sec "to improve firms' risk management of trading algorithms and to enhance regulatory oversight over their use. .

the sec chair also stated that the agency needed to explore whether "low - latency tools … tend to advantage certain types of proprietary trading strategies that may detract from the interests of investors. .

at present , the cftc appears to be deliberating whether additional regulatory intervention has merit and , if so , what form that intervention might take .

cftc officials have reportedly said the agency is responding to concerns brought to it about certain potentially abusive hft practices and investigating whether these practices meet the definition of market manipulation under the federal securities laws that the cftc enforces .

this report provides an overview of equities hft and its potential economic and regulatory implications .

it examines ( 1 ) recent developments regarding probes and investigations of hft , ( 2 ) what equities hft is , ( 3 ) the nature of the general equities hft landscape , ( 4 ) how equities hft works and who conducts it , ( 5 ) equity hft's perceived benefits and disadvantages , ( 6 ) the flash crash of 2010 and the alleged role of hft , ( 7 ) sec programmatic and regulation - related initiatives to potentially monitor hft and address its potentially negative market impact , ( 8 ) european union hft regulatory developments , ; and ( 9 ) various domestic hft regulatory ideas under discussion .

this report principally focuses on equities hft .

however , because the performance of many sec - regulated equity products is interconnected with those of various cftc - regulated derivative products , the report also provides a brief overview of hft in cftc - regulated derivatives and key hft - related regulatory developments at the cftc .

an additional area of focus with respect to hft involves concerns that hft may play a contributing role in extreme market movements .

such concerns intensified after the flash crash of 2010 and have continued with observations of ongoing mini - flash crashes .

as indicated earlier , in addition to equities markets hft takes place in certain derivatives markets , such as in the futures markets , which are regulated by the cftc .

such trading has attracted attention somewhat later than equities hft but has subsequently grown to become a large portion of market volume .

by 2012 , the tabb group , a financial market consulting firm , reportedly estimated that hft comprised over 60% of all futures volume in 2012 on u.s. futures exchanges .

a 2013 cftc concept release on automated trading reported that by 2012 , about 92% of exchange - trading futures volume in the united states were executed electronically .

by 2010 , automated trading systems ( ats ) trading accounted for over 50% of trading volume in a number of significant futures exchange products , the cftc reported .

by various accounts , the proportion of trades on the futures exchanges attributable to hft has grown briskly during the last few years .

as in the equities markets , proponents of hft in the futures markets have argued that the rise of hft has tended to increase market liquidity and narrow bid - ask spreads , thereby reducing transaction costs .

similar concerns have been raised in futures markets about fairness in trading and market stability more generally .

for instance , do hedge funds and large investment banks , which can afford the latest technology , have an advantage over small investors in futures as well as equities markets ? .

do institutions that serve small investors , such as mutual funds or pension funds , pay more ( or receive less ) for futures contracts as well as stocks because hft traders may interpose themselves between ultimate buyers and sellers ? .

such concerns have percolated in the press and among market participants and regulators .

regulators at the cftc have expressed concerns over the possible use of hft to flood a market with wash trades , which are bids and offers launched essentially by the same market participant to create the impression of greater market activity even though the participant incurs no actual market risk .

the commodity exchange act prohibits wash trades .

according to media reports , the cftc is investigating whether hft at times floods markets with such wash trades to influence prices or trading volumes for short periods of time so certain hft traders could profit .

another issue in the futures markets , as in the equities markets , is the impact of hft on market stability .

in this context , an aforementioned joint study by the sec and cftc attributed the 2010 market disruption known as the flash crash to a single mutual fund's trading algorithm , which continued to sell after all buying interest was exhausted .

more recently , on august 1 , 2012 , hft firm knight capital group inc. lost about $440 million in less than an hour , and its stock plunged 73% , after a computer malfunction bombarded the stock market with errant orders .

the incident further underscored concerns over the potential impacts on market stability of any hft technical trading problems .

the cftc oversees trading , including hft , on futures exchanges such as the chicago mercantile exchange ( cme ) and intercontinental exchange ( ice ) .

the sec oversees hft for the securities market .

in addition to reportedly investigating potential wash trades related to hft , the cftc regularly holds meetings of its technical advisory council ( tac ) .

in february 2012 , the tac created a subcommittee on automated and high frequency trading that includes cftc and industry participants and examines various hft trading practices .

on may 16 , 2013 , the cftc issued an interpretive guidance on disruptive trading practices , which touches on issues that may involve hft .

section 747 of the dodd - frank act ( p.l .

111-203 ) amended the commodity exchange act ( cea ) to prohibit disruptive trading practices in futures , options , or swaps trading .

among other changes , section 747 amended cea section 4c ( a ) ( 5 ) to outlaw spoofing — bidding or offering with the intent to cancel the bid or offer before executing a trade .

one study of hft by the swedish financial regulatory authority in 2012 found that spoofing was associated with hft , at least in the experiences of traders , and that market participants believed it was being used to manipulate the prices for some financial instruments .

in its may 2013 guidance , the cftc prohibited spoofing on any futures exchange or swap execution facility as long as the canceling of the bids and offers before trade execution was intentional rather than the result of reckless , negligent , or accidental behavior .

on july 22 , 2013 , the cftc announced its first enforcement order and settlement for spoofing under the dodd - frank act's section 747 prohibition of disruptive trading practices when it fined panther energy trading llc of red bank , new jersey , and michael j. coscia of rumson , new jersey , $1.4 million for engaging in the disruptive practice of spoofing by utilizing a computer algorithm designed to illegally place and quickly cancel bids and offers in futures contracts .

the cftc guidance also prohibits a person from buying a derivatives contract on an exchange or swap execution facility "at a price that is higher than the lowest available price offered for such contract or selling a contract ... at a price that is lower than the highest available price bid. .

this practice is termed violating bids and offers , and the cftc required no intentional behavior to constitute a violation .

a recent major cftc action regarding what it refers to as automated trading systems ( ats ) — of which hft is a subset — was its september 12 , 2013 , "concept release on risk controls and system safeguards for automated trading environments. .

broadly , the release asks whether existing risk controls in automated trading environments are sufficient to match current trading technologies and market risks .

it does not prescribe any new rules but instead solicits feedback on 124 questions it poses regarding potential new regulatory approaches to ats and hft .

in explaining the broader thinking behind the concept release , the cftc observed , u.s. derivatives markets have experienced a fundamental transition from human - centered trading venues to highly automated and interconnected trading environments .

the operational centers of modern markets now reside in a combination of automated trading systems … and electronic trading platforms that can execute repetitive tasks at speeds orders of magnitude greater than any human equivalent .

traditional risk controls and safeguards that relied on human judgment and speeds , and which were appropriate to manual and / or floor - based trading environments , must be reevaluated in light of new market structures… .

[m]arket participants must ensure that regulatory standards and internal controls are calibrated to match both current and foreseeable market technologies and risks .

the release goes on to solicit public feedback .

the 124 questions the cftc posed in the release are divided into four broad categories described below: pre - trade risk controls .

these refer to policies by a firm or a cftc - registered entity such as a swap dealer ( sd ) , major swap participant ( msp ) , futures exchange , or swap execution facility ( sef ) that seek to protect against the submission of a large volume of orders , trade executions , or positions over a short period of time .

specific pre - trade proposed solutions could include the following: ( 1 ) execution throttles that would impose maximum message or execution rates and associated alerts aimed at helping identify rogue algorithms and preventing entities from placing orders faster than risk systems ; ( 2 ) greater volatility awareness by implementing alerts for price changes over a set period of time aimed at helping identify rogue algorithms and providing alerts when human intervention is required ; ( 3 ) self - trade and self - matching , which refers to controls aimed at preventing wash trades and other potentially illicit trades ; ( 4 ) price collars , which could impose certain allowable trading price ranges aimed at preventing erroneous order executions , particularly during thinly traded market regimes ; ( 5 ) a maximum order size regime , which refers to protocols designed to curb large trades of certain sizes to prevent problematic trading abnormalities such as so - called fat finger ( or , human ) errors ; and ( 6 ) trading pauses , which would entail the imposition of temporary time - outs for trading platforms when market conditions were deemed problematic .

post - trade risk controls .

the cftc concept release also notes that post - trade risk controls , when used together with pre - trade controls , could yield benefits in reducing unexpected negative feedback loops or malfunctioning pre - trade risk controls .

it asks for comments on a number of specific types of such post - trade controls .

system safeguards .

the release broadly describes such safeguards as intended to address a number of potential operational , market abuse , and transmission risks , including those that might protect against potential abuses or disruptions unique to electronic trading .

potential new system safeguards could include the following: ( 1 ) controls related to order placement , which refers to order cancellation protocols such as "auto - cancel on disconnect" and "kill switches" that would cancel working orders under certain problematic market conditions ; ( 2 ) design , testing , and supervision of ats refers to regulatory protocols that would require firms operating ats to undergo standardized testing and be subject to minimum standards ; and ( 3 ) self - certifications and notifications , in which firms operating ats and clearinghouses would be required to certify their adherence to cftc requirements and notify others when "risk events" occur .

other protections .

the cftc also requested comments on a range of other potentially significant changes , such as the type and quality of data that ats or hft market participants , if required to register with the cftc , would possibly provide to the commission .

in comment letters on the proposal , the mercatus center , a think tank , expressed criticism of the cftc's release , commenting that the self - interest of derivative market participants to help ensure stable markets should generally be sufficient motivation for them to adopt a range of effective risk - control protocols .

mercatus also expressed the concern that "if risk control and system testing methods are standardized by regulatory intervention , they essentially become fixed and modifications will generally require either new regulations or exemptions. .

other commenters engaged in hft had more technical concerns with the cftc release .

for instance , the proprietary trading firm citadel commented that if any mandatory minimum "resting periods" for order executions were imposed , that would harm market liquidity by exposing liquidity providers to greater risks and leading to wider bid - ask spreads .

the chicago federal reserve bank challenged the belief in the voluntary adoption of risk controls as a solution .

in comments to the cftc , it observed , "[m]any industry and regulatory groups have devised best practices for hft .

nevertheless , many firms do not fully implement these best practices because they are not required to do so .

we believe it would be beneficial for the commission [cftc] to work with the industry to define best practices for hft and to communicate penalties for non - compliance with those best practices. .

in congressional testimony on may 13 , 2014 , a cftc official noted that the agency had received 43 public comments to the concept release and that commenters had widely divergent opinions regarding the need to regulate hft more closely .

for instance , commenters disagreed on the need for the cftc to create a regulatory definition of hft , with just over half of the parties who commented opposed to a definition and the remainder in favor .

at the same hearing , mit academic and former cftc chief economist andrei kirilenko noted that the hft industry is highly concentrated and dominated by a small number of fast , opaque firms ( often not registered with federal regulators ) that earned high and persistent returns .

he advocated that the cftc create a broad new category of "automated brokers and traders," which would include all active proprietary traders .

these traders would be required to register with the cftc and maintain records and an audit trail that regulators could examine in case of a mini - flash crash or technological malfunction , he proposed .

kirilenko also urged regulators to examine the root causes of the high level of concentration in the hft industry to determine whether such concentration was in fact benign and why market forces were not eroding it .

he suggested that automated exchanges be required to publish data on system latencies — in other words , how long of a delay exists before market information reaches participants .

such reporting should specifically include the latency for messages for submitted , canceled , modified , and executed orders .

