article iii , section i , of the constitution provides , in part , that the "judicial power of the united states , shall be vested in one supreme court , and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish. .

it further provides that justices on the supreme court and judges on lower courts established by congress under article iii have what effectively has come to mean life tenure , holding office "during good behaviour. .

along with the supreme court , the courts that constitute the article iii courts in the federal system are the u.s. circuit courts of appeals , the u.s. district courts , and the u.s. court of international trade .

this report concerns nominations made by president obama and other recent presidents to the u.s. circuit courts of appeals and the u.s. district courts .

outside the report's scope are the occasional nominations that these presidents made to the supreme court and the u.s. court of international trade .

in recent congresses , there has been ongoing interest in the process by which u.s. circuit and district court judges are nominated by the president and approved by the senate .

during senate debates over judicial nominations , differing perspectives have been expressed about the relative degree of success of a president's nominees in gaining senate confirmation , compared with the nominees of other recent presidents .

additionally , senate debate often has concerned the pace by which the senate has considered or approved a president's judicial nominees .

of related concern to congress has been the percentage of vacant judgeships in the federal judiciary and the effect of delays in the processing of judicial nominations on filling vacancies .

in light of continued senate interest in the judicial selection and confirmation process , this report seeks to inform congress by ( 1 ) comparing the number and percentage of judicial nominees confirmed during the first five and a half years of the obama presidency with the number and percentage of nominees confirmed during the same period of time during the g.w .

bush and clinton presidencies ; ( 2 ) comparing the pace of judicial confirmations during the obama presidency as well as during the g.w .

bush and clinton presidencies ; and ( 3 ) providing statistics related to vacancies existing at the beginning of each president's second term and on june 30 of each president's sixth year in office .

the period of time for each presidency analyzed in the report is from january 20 of a president's first year in office to june 30 of his sixth year in office .

so , for example , the statistics reported below for president obama reflect the period from january 20 , 2009 , to june 30 , 2014 .

this includes the period following the senate's reinterpretation , on november 21 , 2013 , of the application of senate rule xxii to floor consideration of some presidential nominations ( including nominations to u.s. circuit and district court judgeships ) .

specifically , for nominations other than to the supreme court , the new precedent lowered the vote threshold by which cloture can be invoked — from three - fifths of the senate to a simple majority of those voting , thereby enabling a supportive majority to reach an 'up - or - down' vote on confirming a nomination .

the statistics reported below for the obama presidency include all nominations and confirmations that occurred on or before june 30 , 2014 .

please note that the purpose of this midyear report is to provide an overview and analysis of the number and percentage of u.s. circuit and district court nominees confirmed as of june 30 of president obama's sixth year in office ( and how such statistics compare to the number and percentage of nominees confirmed during the g.w .

bush and clinton presidencies ) , while also providing information related to the pace of senate approval of judicial nominees as well as judicial vacancies .

consequently , this report does not include other statistics focused on specific stages of the appointment process , such as the length of time it has taken president obama and his predecessors to nominate individuals to vacant circuit and district court judgeships , or how long it takes nominees to advance through the senate confirmation process ( eg , the length of time from nomination to committee hearing or from committee report to final senate action ) .

such statistics are analyzed in a longer end - of - year report that tracks the progress of a particular president's judicial nominees in receiving senate confirmation .

this section of the report compares , for presidents obama , g.w .

bush , and clinton , the total number of u.s. circuit and district court nominees submitted to the senate from january 20 of a president's first year in office to june 30 of his sixth year in office , as well as the number and percentage of circuit and district court nominees whose nominations were confirmed by the senate during this same period .

while presidents sometimes nominate particular individuals to a court more than once , table 1 counts such nominees only once .

in other words , the analysis below does not account for multiple nominations of the same individual to the same court .

different institutional and political factors are responsible for variation across presidencies in the number and percentage of u.s. circuit and district court nominees confirmed by the senate .

additionally , a judicial nomination may fail to receive senate confirmation because ( 1 ) the full senate votes against the nomination ; ( 2 ) the president withdraws the nomination , either because the senate judiciary committee ( i ) has voted against reporting it favorably , ( ii ) had made clear its intention not to act on the nomination , ( iii ) because the nomination , even if reported , is likely to face substantial opposition on the senate floor , or ( iv ) the nominee himself or herself has requested that the nomination be withdrawn ; or ( 3 ) the senate , without confirming or rejecting the nomination , returns the nomination to the president under rule xxxi , paragraph 6 of the standing rules of the senate after it has adjourned or been in recess for more than 30 days , and the president does not subsequently resubmit the nomination .

this report does not analyze or take a position on the number or percentage of a president's judicial nominees that would be appropriate for the senate to confirm .

this section of the report compares the pace of senate confirmation of u.s. circuit and district court nominees as of june 30 of each president's sixth year in office .

specifically , the figures below report the number of circuit and district court nominees confirmed , on average , per six - month period during each president's ( 1 ) first term ; ( 2 ) second term , up to june 30 of his sixth year ; and ( 3 ) first and second term combined , up to june 30 of his sixth year .

a six - month period is used to calculate the pace of confirmation of judicial nominees because it is a long enough period of time to generate a statistic greater than one for u.s. circuit court nominations ( which the senate approves less frequently than district court nominations ) , but is also a short enough period of time to provide information related to how many judicial nominations have been confirmed by the senate during a period of time that is less than a full calendar year .

the pace of confirmation of lower federal court nominees during any given year or presidential term might be affected by whether the senate is also processing one or more nominations to the supreme court .

of the presidents included in the analysis , both of president obama's appointees ( sonia sotomayor and elena kagan ) were confirmed during the first half of his first term ( as were president clinton's two nominees — ruth bader ginsberg and stephen breyer ) , while both of president g.w .

bush's appointees ( john g. roberts , jr. and samuel a. alito , jr. ) were confirmed during the first half of his second term .

other factors that might influence the pace of confirmation of judicial nominees include how quickly the president submits nominations to the senate ; how quickly nominations are processed by the judiciary committee and sent to the full senate for consideration ; the length of time nominations remain pending on the executive calendar prior to final senate action ; the number of days the senate is in session and available to act on nominations ; and whether the senate is focused on other matters , such as legislation or executive branch nominations .

additionally , during president obama's second term , both ( 1 ) the adoption of a new standing order for the 113 th congress ( reducing post - cloture consideration of district court nominations from a maximum of 30 hours to 2 hours ) , as well as ( 2 ) the senate's reinterpretation of the application of senate rule xxii ( lowering the vote threshold by which cloture can be invoked on some presidential nominations , including those to u.s. circuit and district court judgeships , from three - fifths of the senate to a simple majority of those voting ) may have affected the pace by which the full senate has approved judicial nominations , particularly during president obama's sixth year in office .

this report does not analyze or take a position on the pace by which it would be appropriate for the senate to confirm a president's judicial nominees .

the percentage of vacant circuit and district court judgeships varies over the course of a presidency and is affected , in part , by the pace at which a president selects nominees for vacancies as well as the speed by which the senate considers a president's nominees .

the number of vacancies that exists during a presidency might also affect the statistics discussed in the two preceding sections ( i.e. , how many nominations are approved by the senate during any given period of time , as well as the pace by which the senate confirms a president's nominees ) .

table 2 compares , for presidents obama , g.w .

bush , and clinton , ( 1 ) the percentage of u.s. circuit and district court judgeships vacant on january 1 of a president's fifth year in office ; ( 2 ) the percentage of such judgeships vacant on june 30 of a president's sixth year in office ; and ( 3 ) the change in the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships from january 1 of a president's fifth year to june 30 of his sixth year .

note that a negative value in the "change" column means that the vacancy rate declined as a result of fewer judgeships being vacant on june 30 of a president's sixth year in office than on january 1 of his fifth year .

 table 2 reveals that the percentage of circuit court judgeships that were vacant at the beginning of a president's fifth year in office was greatest during the clinton presidency ( 12.8% ) .

as of june 30 of a president's sixth year in office , the percentage of circuit court vacancies was also greatest during the clinton presidency ( 10.6% ) .

for presidents clinton and obama , there was a smaller percentage of vacant judgeships on june 30 of each president's sixth year in office than on january 1 of his fifth year in office .

the percentage of vacant judgeships declined the most for president obama , falling 3.3 percentage points from 8.9% to 5.6% .

the percentage of circuit court judgeships that are vacant is , as of june 30 , 2014 , at its lowest point since august 2008 .

the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships increased from january 1 of president g.w .

bush's fifth year in office to june 30 of his sixth year ( 8.4% and 8.9% , respectively ) .

as with circuit court vacancies , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships on january 1 of a president's fifth year was greatest during the clinton presidency ( 10.0% ) .

the percentage of vacant district court judgeships on january 1 of president g.w .

bush's and obama's fifth years in office was 3.1% and 8.8% , respectively .

from the beginning of a president's fifth year to june 30 of his sixth year , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships declined during both the clinton and obama presidencies ( - 2.1% and - 1.5% , respectively ) .

in contrast , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships increased from the beginning of the fifth year to june 30 of the sixth year of the g.w .

bush presidency ( +1.2% ) .

the g.w .

bush presidency is the only one of the three for which the percentage of both vacant circuit and district court judgeships increased ( albeit slightly for circuit judgeships ) from january 1 of his fifth year in office to june 30 of his sixth year .

although the senate has , as of june 30 , 2014 , confirmed 78 district court nominees during president obama's second term ( compared to 32 and 53 district court nominees confirmed , respectively , as of june 30 , during the second terms of presidents g.w .

bush and clinton ) , the district court vacancy rate has declined by less than two percentage points from january 1 of president obama's fifth year in office to june 30 of this sixth year .

this is due , in part , to the number of relatively new district court vacancies occurring since january 1 , 2014 .

of the 49 district court judgeships that were vacant as of june 30 , 2014 , 16 ( 32.7% ) became vacant after january 1 of this year .

