new sources of crude oil from the bakken region of north dakota , the eagle ford and permian basins in texas , and western canada have induced new routes for shipping crude oil to u.s. and canadian refineries .

while pipelines have traditionally been the preferred method of moving crude overland , especially to or from landlocked locations , they either are not available or have insufficient capacity to move all the crude from these new sources of production .

although much of this oil is now moving to refineries by rail , waterborne transportation is playing an increasing role in moving crude oil within north america .

the quantity of oil moving by barge on the mississippi river and its tributaries increased ten - fold from 2009 to 2013 , and tanker shipments between the gulf coast and atlantic canada have grown at an even faster rate ( figure 1 ) .

there are no current data on the amount of domestic crude oil moving by barge or tanker to refineries along the gulf coast , but it is believed to have increased significantly since 2012 .

two aspects of the oil industry critically influence shipping patterns: ( 1 ) not all crude oil is the same and ( 2 ) each refinery is currently equipped to refine a certain blend of crude oils .

refineries in the northeast are predominantly configured to handle crudes from the bakken , eagle ford , and permian regions , but cannot efficiently refine oil sands crude from western canada .

there is greater variety in the capabilities of refineries on the gulf and west coasts .

reconfiguring a refinery to handle a different type of crude is possible but may be costly .

the feasibility of doing so depends on the relative costs of various types of crude , the projected availability of the various crude oils , and the price spread between crude oil and refined petroleum products such as gasoline and diesel fuel .

the sudden shift toward domestic sourcing of crude oil raises issues regarding the safety and efficiency of the maritime component of this new supply chain .

these fall into two main categories .

one concerns the coast guard's role in preventing oil spills by regulating the safety of vessels and the training and working conditions of crews .

the other has to do with the impact of the jones act , a 1920 law that restricts domestic waterborne transport to vessels built in the united states and crewed by u.s. citizens , which may now be affecting u.s. producers' decisions about how to ship crude oil and whether to send it to refineries in the united states or in canada .

the vast majority of u.s. refineries are located along the coast ( including the great lakes ) or an inland waterway .

most coastal refineries traditionally have been supplied by imported crude , and some lack pipeline connections and may not be equipped or have the space to receive crude by rail .

for this reason , large amounts of oil are being moved out of production areas by truck or rail , but are being transferred to barges or tanker ships for the last leg of the trip to a refinery .

crude oil produced at eagle ford , tx , is conveniently located for waterborne transport due to its proximity to the coast .

some of it moves through the port of corpus christi , where outbound crude oil shipments nearly trebled from 2012 to 2013 .

the nearby port of victoria , tx , has also experienced a dramatic increase in crude oil barge traffic .

it appears that most of the texas crude moving by vessel goes to coastal refineries in texas and louisiana or to the louisiana offshore oil port ( loop ) , an offshore ship - to - pipeline transfer facility .

a comparatively small amount of eagle ford crude oil moves by water to refineries in proximity to new york harbor and the delaware river , but much larger quantities seem to be going to refiners in canada's atlantic provinces .

while much of the oil coming from the bakken region moves to refineries by rail , there are now several well - established intermodal routes involving water transport .

these include: rail to barge at st. louis and hayti , mo , and osceola , ar , on the mississippi river , to gulf refineries ; rail to barge at hennepin , il , on the illinois waterway , to gulf refineries ; rail to vessel at albany , ny , on the hudson river , to east coast refineries ; rail to yorktown , va , for coastal transport to east coast refineries ; rail to vessel at anacortes and vancouver , wa , for coastal transport to west coast refineries .

pipeline to barge transfer is occurring at cushing , ok , from where barges move the oil down the arkansas and mississippi rivers to gulf coast refineries .

new waterborne services moving crude oil from the bakken or texas generally do so with smaller vessels than the trans - oceanic tankers used to carry alaskan and imported oil .

the fleet can be divided into two broad categories: "brownwater" vessels operating on inland and near - shore waters and "bluewater" vessels operating in the open ocean .

a river barge can hold 10,000 to 30,000 barrels of oil .

two to three river barges are typically tied together in a single tow , and thus a river tow of tank barges could carry 20,000 to 90,000 barrels .

in addition to inland rivers , this type of barge configuration is used on the intracoastal waterway ( an inland canal ) along the coasts of texas and louisiana .

river barges have speeds of about 4 to 5 miles per hour ( mph ) .

a coastal tank barge designed for open seas ( an articulated tug - barge , or atb ) can hold 50,000 to 185,000 barrels .

however , newer atbs can carry 240,000 to 340,000 barrels , a capacity comparable to that of coastal tankers .

seagoing barges have speeds of about 10 knots ( 12 mph ) .

in contrast to coastal tank barges , a river barge can be used in "drop and swap" operation — that is , the tugboat can drop a loaded barge at a facility where it can be used for storing product while the tugboat is free to make other barge movements — so that the relatively expensive self - propelled portion of the vessel is not tied up while unloading , as a tank ship would be .

the tugs designed for atbs sail poorly without the barge , so they seldom perform drop and swap operations .

a coastal tank ship can hold 300,000 to 650,000 barrels .

the coastal tankers that are being deployed to move texas crude carry 330,000 barrels and are referred to as "handysize" or "medium range" tankers .

coastal tankers have speeds of about 12-15 knots .

for comparison , tankers moving alaska oil to the west coast carry between 800,000 and 1.3 million barrels of oil and fall into the "aframax" or "suezmax" size categories .

very large or ultra - large crude carriers ( vlccs and ulccs ) that carry imported oil from overseas hold 2 to 3 million barrels .

a crude oil pipeline moves between 400,000 and 800,000 barrels per day , enough to service the largest u.s. refineries .

the unit trains that move bakken and texas crude oil can carry 70,000 to 80,000 barrels .

table 1 summarizes conveyances for moving domestic crude oil .

as table 1 indicates , the jones act - eligible fleet of crude oil tankers consists of 11 ships , all employed in moving alaska crude oil to the u.s. west coast or to a refinery in alaska .

of the 86 seagoing barges , 42 can carry more than 130,000 barrels .

while a tanker's capacity is better matched to the daily consumption rates of a single refinery than the capacity of a unit train or most barges , the limited fleet of jones act - eligible tankers has required some refineries with direct ocean access to ship domestic oil by barge or train or to continue to rely on foreign sources .

jones act - qualified atbs and product tankers are also used to lighter ocean - going crude oil tankers .

although it is technically feasible to do so , tank vessels do not readily alternate between carrying dirty oil ( crude oil , residual fuel oil , asphalt ) and refined ( clean ) petroleum products because the tanks would have to be extensively washed after carrying dirty product , a time - consuming and costly process .

however , due to the recent increase in domestic crude oil production , particularly at eagle ford , some tonnage has shifted from the "clean" products trade to the crude oil trade .

tankers that used to carry refined product from the gulf coast to florida ( via the port of tampa ) are now carrying crude oil because they can earn higher returns .

barges are replacing them to move refined products to florida , a development that has been blamed for higher gasoline prices in florida .

the decline of oil imports from overseas may free up some of the lightering fleet for the domestic crude trade .

if west coast refineries source more crude from the bakken or canada rather than alaska , this could also free up jones act tankers .

one such tanker is believed to have been redeployed to move crude oil from the gulf of mexico to the west coast via the panama canal .

however , there is a limit to how many clean product tankers will switch to carrying crude oil .

the crude oil boom has also led to a boom in u.s. refinery output , so there is also strong demand for clean product tankers .

the large increase in domestic waterborne shipment of crude oil and refined products comes at a time when the coast guard is reevaluating its regulations and industry oversight .

several new regulations are pending .

the jones act requires that vessels transporting cargo between two u.s. points be built in the united states , crewed by u.s. citizens , and at least 75% owned by u.s. citizens .

the law was enacted in 1920 ( merchant marine act of 1920 , §27 , p.l .

66-261 ) .

one of the motivations for the u.s. - build requirement was to facilitate the disposal of cargo ships constructed during world war i by the u.s .

shipping board , a government agency set up in 1916 to purchase , construct , and operate merchant ships during the war .

the jones act authorized the sale of these vessels to the private sector .

the jones act stated an explicit national policy of supporting a u.s. merchant marine and a u.s. shipbuilding industry in the interest of national defense .

that policy remains in the law today: it is necessary for the national defense and the development of the domestic and foreign commerce of the united states that the united states have a merchant marine ( 1 ) sufficient to carry the waterborne domestic commerce and a substantial part of the waterborne export and import foreign commerce of the united states and to provide shipping service essential for maintaining the flow of waterborne domestic and foreign commerce at all times ; ( 2 ) capable of serving as a naval and military auxiliary in time of war or national emergency ; ( 3 ) owned and operated as vessels of the united states by citizens of the united states ; ( 4 ) composed of the best - equipped , safest , and most suitable types of vessels constructed in the united states and manned with a trained and efficient citizen personnel ; and ( 5 ) supplemented by efficient facilities for building and repairing vessels .

because of the restrictions on shipbuilding and crewing , jones act ships tend to be more costly to build and operate than vessels used by foreign - flag ocean carriers , which can order vessels from whichever shipyards offer the lowest bids and typically hire most of their crew members from countries where seafarers' wages are much lower than in the united states .

over the past decade , one tank ship and about 125 tank barges have been built in the united states each year , on average .

limited capacity exists in u.s. shipyards to build tankers .

as of february 2014 , there were 11 petroleum tankers on order for delivery before 2016 and three atbs on order .

two of these tankers are definitely being built for crude oil , and are planned to replace two alaska tankers ready for scrapping .

the intended use of the other nine ships has not been announced ; they could carry either crude or refined products .

if they are intended to carry refined products , the shipyard will install coatings on tank walls and more specialized pumping equipment than needed on crude oil tankers , so that the ship can carry a variety of refined products without cross - contamination .

the tanker ships are being built by the general dynamics nassco shipyard in san diego and the aker philadelphia shipyard .

one industry analysis estimates that nassco has the capability of building four large vessels per year and that aker has the capability of building three , and that these two yards are essentially booked through at least 2016 .

recent atbs have been built by shipyards in mississippi , washington , oregon , and pennsylvania .

congress is debating whether to allow crude oil produced in the continental united states to be exported to other countries , in addition to canada .

domestic producers of natural gas are seeking federal export permits .

current law would not require that such exports be carried in u.s. - flagged ships .

many u.s. - based petroleum producers and refiners control foreign - flag tankers , some of which deliver imported crude oil to the united states or export refined petroleum products from u.s. refineries .

u.s. merchant mariners are seeking additional u.s. - flag voyages because the government - impelled cargos ( military and food - aid cargos ) they rely on are in decline .

during markup of the coast guard and maritime transportation act of 2014 ( h.r .

4005 ) an amendment to require that lng exports move in u.s. - crewed and eventually in u.s. - built tankers was withdrawn in favor of a government accountability office study of maritime employment related to this requirement .

also unsuccessful were two amendments to a house - passed energy bill ( h.r .

6 , passed on june 25 , 2014 ) which sought to require that lng exports be carried in u.s. - flag tankers and require that federal regulators give priority to export terminal projects that would use u.s. - flag vessels .

amendments to the energy and water appropriations act of 2015 ( h.r .

4923 ) would have tied federal approval of lng export terminals to the use of u.s. - flag tankers , but they were defeated on points of order .

whether the nation's energy trade should be carried in u.s. - flag tankers is a long - standing debate in congress .

in 2006 , when the united states was still expected to be an importer rather than an exporter of lng , congress specified that federal regulators give "top priority" to the processing of licenses for offshore lng import terminals if they would be supplied by u.s. - flag tankers , so as to promote the security of the united states .

lng shippers contended that tying u.s. trade routes to certain flag vessels would hinder the ability to supply lng under short - term contracts , which was how lng was increasingly traded as the global market matured .

security was the rationale put forth by proponents of requiring u.s. imported oil to be carried in u.s. - flag tankers in the 1970s .

in 1974 , the energy transportation security act ( etsa , h.r .

8193 , 93 rd congress ) would have required that 30% of imported oil be carried in u.s. - flag and u.s. - built tankers .

the bill was pocket - vetoed by president ford .

in the 94 th congress ( 1975 ) , congress created the strategic petroleum reserve in response to the supply crisis in imported oil ( p.l .

94-163 ) .

since the oil for the reserve is purchased by the federal government , half the oil shipped by vessel must be transported by u.s. - flag tankers pursuant to the cargo preference act of 1954 .

in the 95th congress ( 1977 ) , the etsa was reintroduced ( h.r .

1037 , s. 61 ) with modifications .

a version requiring that 9.5% of u.s. imported oil be carried in u.s. - flag tankers passed the house by voice vote , but was then defeated in a recorded vote of 257 to 165 .

in the house floor debate , supporters of the bill primarily cited national security and the importance of boosting the domestic shipbuilding base .

while opponents cited costs to consumers and potential retaliation from trading partners , much of their argument reflected a common cause report on political campaign contributions by the u.s. - flag industry , which had been released just days before .

that neither the department of defense nor department of state had testified in support of a national security rationale for the bill was also noted in the floor debate .

the senate never took up the measure .

at a 2014 industry symposium organized by marad to solicit ideas for addressing the decline in u.s. - flag cargoes , several participants advocated requiring a certain amount of lng exports be carried in u.s. - flag or u.s. - built ships .

much of the discussion concerned additional statutory or regulatory requirements for staying the decline in cargoes .

there was little or no discussion , given the inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded , of efficiencies that could lower the price of u.s. - flag shipping .

the one commercial shipper making a presentation at the symposium stated , "today u.s. flag is seen as a group of carriers that we have to use .

i think that going forward , to be successful , you have to be seen as a group of carriers that we want to use. .

several bills now pending in congress address matters related to waterborne transportation of oil , including many of the safety and commercial issues raised in this report: the coast guard and maritime transportation act of 2014 ( h.r .

4005 , passed by the house april 1 , 2014 ) directs the u.s. department of transportation to submit a national maritime strategy that identifies federal regulations that reduce the competitiveness of u.s. - flag vessels in international trade , submit recommendations to make u.s. - flag vessels more competitive and enhance u.s. shipbuilding capability , and identify strategies to increase the use of u.s. - flag vessels to carry imports and exports and domestic commerce .

the coast guard is directed to arrange with the national academy of sciences an assessment of laws that impact the ability of u.s. - flag vessels to compete in international trade , while gao is directed to study how u.s. maritime employment would be affected by a requirement that lng exports move in u.s. - flag vessels .

s. 2444 , the coast guard authorization act for fiscal years 2015 and 2016 , would require the coast guard to report marine casualties to state or tribal governments within 24 hours , publish on a publicly accessible website its incident action plans in response to an oil spill , and modify oil spill contingency plans to include advance planning for closing and reopening of fishing grounds .

h.r .

2838 , sponsored by resident commissioner pierluisi , would exempt liquefied natural gas and propane tankers serving puerto rico from the jones act .

s. 1483 , sponsored by senator cantwell , establishes a federal oil spill research committee and requires updates to vessel oil spill response plans .

the national defense authorization act for fy2015 ( h.r .

4435 ) , as passed by the house on may 22 , 2014 , declares the sense of congress ( §3503 ) that "the united states coastwise trade laws [the jones act] promote a strong domestic trade maritime industry , which supports the national security and economic vitality of the united states and the efficient operation of the united states transportation system. .

