in the past several years , and in the past year in particular , the number of unaccompanied alien children ( uac ) seeking to enter the united states along the u.s. - mexico border has surged to unusually high levels .

this surge is driven overwhelmingly by migration from el salvador , guatemala , and honduras .

congress has expressed increasing concerns over this situation because of its implications for border security and u.s. immigration policy .

because the surge has occurred recently , and because few sources of data exist to accurately measure the characteristics and motives of these unaccompanied children , immigration observers have advanced a range of explanations for the surge .

the report is not intended to be an exhaustive review of all factors that potentially underlie the recent surge in unaccompanied children .

rather , it discusses major possible contributing factors that have been widely cited in published reports .

it also emphasizes factors that may account for the recent surge in unaccompanied children , but not long - standing causes , such as wage and earnings differentials between other countries and the united states .

the report distinguishes what are often referred to as "push" and "pull" factors associated with the recent surge .

push factors in this case refer to forces that originate in migrant origin countries which encourage children to emigrate to other countries .

pull factors refer to elements that originate in the united states and encourage children to migrate specifically to this country .

the analytic dichotomy between push and pull factors often blurs in actual circumstances .

for example , family reunification may occur after a parent from an origin country secures employment in the united states .

yet , having an employed parent in the united states may easily make a child in an origin country more susceptible to extortion or kidnapping by criminal gangs , which in turn , may motivate the child to migrate to the united states .

hence , having an employed parent in the united states ostensibly acts as a "pull" factor while the threat of violence acts as a "push" factor , but in this example , the latter would not occur without the former .

migration to another country stems not only from macro - level circumstances such as violence and economic hardship but also personal circumstances and characteristics , such as marital status and risk tolerance .

most children have multiple motives , and how those motives influence their decisions to migrate depend on a range of factors that cannot be measured easily .

this report begins by describing the recent surge in unaccompanied child apprehensions .

it discusses several factors widely associated with out - migration from el salvador , guatemala , and honduras , three countries accounting for much of the recent surge of unaccompanied child migrants .

these factors include economic conditions and poverty , crime and violence , and conditions related to the migration transit zone between central america and the united states .

the report then discusses three broad factors that may be attracting migrants to the united states: economic and educational opportunity , family reunification , and u.s. immigration policies .

it concludes with caveats on the attribution of causes to this situation .

unaccompanied alien children ( uac ) are defined in statute as aliens under age 18 , who lack lawful immigration status in the united states , and who are without a parent or legal guardian in the united states or lack a parent or legal guardian in the united states who is available to provide care and physical custody .

they typically arrive at u.s. ports of entry or are apprehended along the southwestern border with mexico .

less frequently they are apprehended in the interior and determined to be a juvenile and unaccompanied .

most of these children are aged 14 or older .

the number of unaccompanied children has increased in the past six years and has surged in this current year .

in fy2008 , the number apprehended by u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) totaled 8,041 .

in the first 8½ months of fy2014 , apprehensions climbed to 52,000 ( figure 1 ) .

nationals of guatemala , honduras , el salvador , and mexico , have accounted for almost all unaccompanied alien children apprehended at the mexico - u.s. border during this period .

in the past three years , apprehensions of mexican unaccompanied children , which rose substantially in fy2009 , have since varied between 12,000 and 17,000 .

in contrast , apprehensions of unaccompanied children from guatemala , honduras , and el salvador have increased considerably during this period .

in fy2009 , mexicans accounted for 82% of the 19,668 unaccompanied child apprehensions , while the central american countries accounted for 17% .

by the first eight months of fy2014 , the proportions had almost reversed , with mexican apprehensions comprising only 23% of the 52,000 uac apprehensions , and uac from the three central american countries comprising 75% of the total .

the total increase in apprehensions in the past three years stems mainly from large increases in the number of unaccompanied children from the three central american countries .

the similarity of the trends characterizing apprehensions of unaccompanied alien children from el salvador , guatemala , and honduras , and their stark divergence from those characterizing unaccompanied mexican children suggests that factors specific to central america's "northern triangle" underlies the sudden surge in total unaccompanied child apprehensions .

what follows is a discussion of possible causes originating in the countries themselves ( "push factors" ) and other possible causes originating in the united states ( "pull factors" ) .

central america is a region encompassing seven countries of the isthmus between mexico and south america: belize , costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , nicaragua , and panama ( figure 2 ) .

the overwhelming majority of the unaccompanied child migrants apprehended in mexico or at the u.s. - mexico border have come from guatemala , honduras , and el salvador , which are often referred to as the "northern triangle" countries of central america .

high violent crime rates , poor economic conditions fueled by relatively low economic growth rates , relatively high poverty rates , and the presence of transnational gangs appear to be some of the main distinguishing factors between these three northern triangle countries and other countries in the region .

unaccompanied child migrants' motives for emigrating appear to be multifaceted .

in 2013 , the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) conducted interviews with a representative group of about 400 unaccompanied minors from el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and mexico , all of whom had arrived in the united states since fy2012 .

most of the unaccompanied minors provided multiple reasons for leaving their countries .

many left to reunite with family or pursue opportunities in the united states .

of those interviewed , 21% mentioned joining a family member , 51% mentioned economic opportunity , and 19% mentioned education .

violence also played a large role in their decisions to emigrate .

nearly half of the children ( 48% ) said they had experienced serious harm or had been threatened by organized criminal groups or state actors , and more than 20% had been subject to domestic abuse .

as recently as 2006 , only 13% of unaccompanied child migrants from central america interviewed by unhcr presented any indication they were fleeing societal violence or domestic abuse .

endemic poverty also appears to play a role in the emigration of unaccompanied minors , as 16% of those interviewed mentioned economic deprivation as a motive .

there is some variation depending on country of origin , with salvadorans being more likely to cite societal violence and guatemalans being more likely to cite economic deprivation as motives for emigration ( see table 1 ) .

other studies involving interviews with unaccompanied children yield similar results .

conditions of migration facing unaccompanied children likely play a considerable role in determining whether they emigrate to the united states .

while the persistence of economic stagnation , poverty , and criminal violence may explain why flows of unaccompanied minors have increased , the journey through central america and mexico to the united states has become more costly and dangerous .

unauthorized migrants from central america , often lacking legal protection in mexico because of their immigration status , have reportedly become increasingly vulnerable to human trafficking , kidnapping , and other abuses .

corrupt mexican officials have been found to be complicit in activities such as robbery and abuse of authority .

while mexico has stepped up immigration enforcement in some areas ( see below ) , enforcement along train routes frequently used by central american child migrants continues to be lacking .

as u.s. border security has tightened , more unauthorized central american migrants have reportedly turned to smugglers ( coyotes ) , who in turn must pay money to transnational criminal organizations ( tcos ) such as los zetas , to lead them through mexico and across the u.s. - mexico border .

the administration has estimated that 75-80% of unaccompanied child migrants are now traveling with smugglers .

some smugglers have reportedly sold migrants into situations of forced labor or prostitution ( forms of human trafficking ) in order to recover their costs ; other smugglers' failure to pay los zetas has reportedly resulted in massacres of groups of migrants .

mass grave sites where migrants have been executed by tcos have been recovered in recent years .

the mexican government appears to be attempting to balance enforcement and humanitarian concerns in its migration policies .

implementation of its new laws and policies has been criticized both by those who favor more enforcement and those who favor more migrants' rights .

in addition to stepping up efforts against human trafficking and passing new laws to stiffen penalties for alien smuggling ( 2010 ) and human trafficking ( 2012 ) , mexico enacted a comprehensive migration reform law in 2011 and secondary legislation to implement that law in 2012 .

previously , mexico's immigration law , the general population act ( gpa ) of 1974 , limited legal immigration and restricted the rights of foreigners in mexico , with unauthorized migrants subject to criminal penalties .

in 2008 , the mexican congress reformed the gpa to decriminalize simple migration offenses , making unauthorized migrants subject to fines and deportation , but no longer subject to imprisonment .

in may 2011 , it passed a broader reform of the gpa .

contrary to some media reports , mexico's 2011 law did not create a transit visa for migrants crossing through mexico , as civil society groups had been advocating .

mexico still requires visas for central americans entering its territory ( aside from those from guatemala on temporary work permits or those possessing a valid u.s. visa ) .

according to many migration experts , implementation of mexico's 2011 migration law has been uneven .

while some purges of corrupt staff within the national migration institute ( inm ) in the interior ministry have occurred in the past year , implementation of the migration law has been hindered by the government's failure to more fully overhaul inm .

some experts maintain that mexico lacks the funding and institutions to address traditional migration flows , much less the increasing numbers of u.s. - bound unaccompanied children that its agents are detaining .

mexico has only two shelters for migrant children and no foster care system in which to place those who might be granted asylum .

despite provisions to improve migrants' rights included in the 2011 migration law , the mexican government also continues to remove large numbers of central american adult migrants , arrest smugglers of those migrants , and return unaccompanied child migrants to central america .

according to inm , mexico detained 86,929 foreigners in 2013 , 80,079 of whom were removed ( 79,416 people were removed in 2012 ) .

of those who were removed , some 97.4% originated in the northern triangle countries of central america .

in the first four months of 2014 , mexico removed some 24,000 people from the northern triangle countries , 9% more than during that period in 2013 .

child protection officers from inm accompanied 8,577 children to their countries of origin in 2013 and 6,330 from january through may 2014 ; 99% of those children originated in northern triangle countries .

with u.s. support , the mexican government in 2013 started implementing a southern border security plan that has involved the establishment of 12 naval bases on the country's rivers and three security cordons that stretch more than 100 miles north of the mexico - guatemala and mexico - belize borders .

forces that potentially attract unaccompanied children to the united states may be more subjective than forces that cause them to leave their home countries .

unlike the prevalence of actual violence or deprivation associated with daily economic hardship , for instance , the perception of economic opportunity or the chance to obtain legal authorization to live in the united states may often conflict with what is legally and actually possible .

several reports suggest that migrant smugglers prey on potential migrants' desperation by misleading them with false information about such possibilities .

immigration observers have made numerous , sometimes conflicting assertions of the importance of one or another pull factor , relying on a range of empirical evidence .

despite considerable public attention , the precise combination of motives driving unaccompanied children to migrate to the united states remains unclear .

the discussion below considers three widely cited motivations: economic and educational opportunity , family reunification , and recent u.s. immigration policies .

this report has conceptualized possible factors contributing to the recent and sizable increase in unaccompanied children into "push" and "pull" forces .

the former comprise conventional and long - standing forces such as endemic poverty and lack of economic opportunity , as well as recent causes , such as the rise of gangs and drug trafficking organizations that have destabilized el salvador , guatemala , and honduras and severely limited these countries' ability to protect their youth .

the latter include more subjective factors , such as aspirations for employment and education , the desire to reunite with family members , and perceptions related to u.s. immigration policies .

with information relatively scarce , and circumstances changing rapidly , it becomes challenging to accurately measure or gauge which factors are the most important drivers of the current surge .

for example , surveys by organizations with distinct goals may sometimes yield findings that place substantially more emphasis on one factor over another .

absent full scale representative information , it may be difficult to draw conclusions about the magnitude of any single factor or its relative strength over another .

as noted above , the division between push and pull factors blurs as multiple factors affect individuals making personal decisions to migrate .

