the agriculture appropriations bill — formally known as the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act — provides funding for: all of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) except the forest service , which is funded in the interior appropriations bill , the food and drug administration ( fda ) in the department of health and human services , and in the house , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) .

in the senate , the financial services bill contains cftc appropriations .

in even - numbered fiscal years , cftc appears in the enacted agriculture appropriation .

jurisdiction is with the house and senate committees on appropriations , and each subcommittee on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies .

the bill includes both mandatory and discretionary spending , although most appropriations decision - making concerns the latter .

figure 1 illustrates the distribution of agriculture appropriations spending among major divisions and agencies in the enacted fy2015 appropriation .

the federal budget process treats discretionary and mandatory spending differently .

discretionary spending is controlled by annual appropriations acts and consumes most of the attention during the appropriations process .

the annual budget resolution process sets spending limits for discretionary appropriations .

agency operations ( salaries and expenses ) and many grant programs are discretionary .

mandatory spending — though carried in the appropriation and usually advanced unchanged — is controlled by budget enforcement rules ( eg , paygo ) during the authorization process .

spending for eligibility and benefit formulas in so - called entitlement programs are set in laws such as the farm bill and child nutrition act .

in fy2015 , discretionary appropriations totaled 14% ( $20.6 billion ) of the agriculture appropriations bill ( p.l .

113-235 ) .

mandatory spending carried in the bill comprised $126.5 billion , about 86% of the $147.1 billion total .

within the discretionary total , the largest discretionary spending items are for the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) , agricultural research , fda , rural development , foreign food aid and trade , farm assistance program salaries and loans , food safety inspection , conservation , and animal and plant health programs ( figure 1 ) .

the main mandatory spending items are the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , and other food and nutrition act programs ) , child nutrition ( school lunch and related programs ) , crop insurance , and farm commodity and conservation programs paid through usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

snap is referred to as an "appropriated entitlement," and requires an annual appropriation .

the nutrition program amounts are based on projected spending needs .

in contrast , the commodity credit corporation operates on a line of credit ; the annual appropriation provides funding to reimburse the treasury for using the line of credit .

the fy2015 agriculture and related agencies appropriation was enacted as division a of the fy2015 consolidated appropriations act , p.l .

113-235 — an omnibus appropriation that included 11 of the 12 appropriations subcommittee bills .

the omnibus bill was filed on december 11 , 2014 , passed in each chamber , and signed by the president on december 16 , 2014 .

table 1 summarizes actions on fy2015 agriculture appropriations — and each annual appropriation since fy1995 — for the subcommittees , full committees , house and senate chambers , and presidential enactment .

figure 2 is a visual timeline of the dates in table 1 .

because congress had not completed any of the fy2015 appropriations bills by the beginning of the fiscal year , fy2015 began under a 10-week continuing resolution ( p.l .

113-164 ) that lasted until december 11 , 2014 .

the continuing resolution ( cr ) generally extended funding under fy2014 levels and conditions , with a small across - the - board reduction ( 0.0554% ) .

two additional crs were enacted to carry funding for several more days during final legislative action , through december 13 and december 17 ( p.l .

113-202 and p.l .

113-203 , respectively ) .

about 95% of the total appropriation for the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) is funded through the agriculture appropriations bill .

the department was created in 1862 and carries out widely varied responsibilities through about 30 separate internal agencies and offices staffed by nearly 100,000 employees .

funding for about two - thirds of those employees is provided in the agriculture appropriation .

the remaining one - third of the employees , about 33,000 staff years , are in the forest service , funded by the interior and related agencies appropriations bill .

this report is organized in the order that the agencies are listed in the agriculture appropriations bill ( except for the portion of fda appropriations for food safety , which is discussed in a comprehensive section on food safety ) .

see table 2 and tables in some of the following sections for more details on the amounts for specific agencies .

in addition to the usda agencies mentioned above , the agriculture appropriations subcommittees have jurisdiction over appropriations for two related agencies: the food and drug administration ( fda ) of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) — in the house agriculture appropriations subcommittee only .

the enacted fy2015 agriculture appropriation contains a total of about $1.2 billion in net offsets that effectively reduce the cost of appropriations in the rest of the bill .

these reductions occur in title vii ( general provisions ) and in separate cbo scorekeeping adjustments .

reductions are made by limitations on mandatory farm bill programs ( about - $785 million , table 13 ) , recessions from other appropriated accounts ( - $17 million , table 14 ) , and other scorekeeping adjustments that are usually not detailed in the bills ( - $514 million , table 16 ) .

some additional spending is authorized in the general provisions ( $123 million in fy2015 , including $116 million emergency spending , table 15 ) .

limitations and rescissions are used to score budgetary savings that help meet the discretionary budget allocation .

by offsetting spending elsewhere in the bill , they help provide relatively more to ( or help avoid deeper cuts to ) regular discretionary accounts than might otherwise occur .

the general provisions title also contains many important policy - related provisions that affect how the executive branch carries out the appropriation and authorizing laws .

some of these policy - related provisions are discussed earlier in this report under the relevant agency heading .

for more than a decade , appropriators have placed limits on mandatory spending authorized in statutes such as the farm bill ( table 13 ) .

these limits are also known as chimps , "changes in mandatory program spending. .

mandatory programs usually are not part of the appropriations process since formulas and eligibility rules are set in multi - year authorizing laws ( such as the 2014 farm bill ) .

funding usually is assumed to be available based on the statute and without appropriations action .

when appropriators limit mandatory spending , they do not change the authorizing law .

rather , limits on mandatory programs come from appropriations language such as: "none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this or any other act shall be used to pay the salaries and expenses of personnel to carry out section [ ... ] of public law [ ... ] in excess of $[ .. .

]. .

limits usually appear in title vii , general provisions , of the agriculture appropriations bill .

historically , expenditure allocations often originate from the appropriations committees .

the division over who should fund certain agriculture programs — appropriators or authorizers — has roots dating to the 1930s .

variable outlays for the farm commodity programs were difficult to budget and resembled entitlements .

mandatory funding — the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) — was created to remove the unpredictable funding issue from the appropriations process .

the dynamic changed after the 1996 farm bill when mandatory funds were used for programs that usually were discretionary .

appropriators had not funded some programs as much as authorizers had desired , and authorizing committees wrote farm bills using the mandatory funding at their discretion .

tension arose over who should fund certain activities .

some question whether the ccc should be used for programs that are not variable .

the programs affected by chimps typically include conservation , rural development , bioenergy , and some smaller nutrition assistance programs .

chimps have not affected the farm commodity programs or the primary nutrition assistance programs ( such as snap ) .

the enacted fy2015 appropriation contains $785 million in chimps , similar to the level in each of the chamber - reported bills .

this chimp amount is smaller than the chimp levels that were enacted since fy2011 ( table 13 ) .

for more background on chimps , see crs in focus if10041 , reductions to mandatory agricultural conservation programs in appropriations law , and crs report r41245 , reductions in mandatory agriculture program spending .

rescissions are a method of permanently cancelling the availability of funds that were provided by a previous appropriations law , and in doing so achieving or scoring budgetary savings .

as an offset , rescissions can allow more spending in an appropriations bill .

but by cancelling an authorization , a rescission can prevent an unobligated budget authority from being reallocated or repurposed by future appropriations .

often rescissions relate to the unobligated balances of funds still available for a specific purpose that were appropriated a year or more ago ( eg , buildings and facilities funding that remains available until expended for specific projects , or disaster response funds for losses due to a specifically named hurricane ) .

for fy2015 , the enacted appropriation rescinds $17 million from three accounts , $4 million more than requested and each chamber's bill ( table 14 ) .

these rescissions are small by comparison to recent years .

this is especially the case compared to fy2011 , when rescissions were unusually large ( - $372 million ) and helped achieve that year's relatively large spending reduction .

the general provisions title may contain appropriations for activities that are not part of regular agency appropriations .

these sometimes include supplemental or disaster appropriations , and may be offset in scorekeeping adjustments by emergency spending designations .

table 15 shows that the enacted fy2015appropriation contains emergency funding for conservation ( $91 million ) and ebola ( $25 million ) .

some of the conservation funding was in the senate - reported bill but not in the house - reported bill ( see the heading " disaster assistance " earlier in this report ) .

scorekeeping adjustments are a final part of the accounting of the appropriations bill that is not necessarily shown in the tables published by the appropriations committees .

these adjustments are critical , however , for the bill to reach the desired total amount that complies with the 302 ( b ) spending limit for the subcommittee .

some of these amounts are not necessarily specified by provisions in the bill but are related to program operations , such as direct and guaranteed loan programs .

cbo calculates and reports these scorekeeping adjustments in unpublished tables .

for fy2015 , the other scorekeeping adjustments in the enacted appropriation total - $514 million ( table 16 ) .

the scorekeeping amounts in the house and senate bills were the same as enacted , except for the provision of the disaster designation .

also noteworthy , the regular fy2015 scorekeeping adjustments are about $200 million greater than in fy2014 and prior years due to an increase in the magnitude of "negative subsidies" in several usda loan programs .

these negative subsidies effectively reflect "income" to the government when loan program operations cost less than appropriated though the collection of fees or better - than - expected loan repayment .

these negative subsidies have become larger in recent years , and are helping to offset more of the appropriation .

historical trends this appendix offers historical perspective on trends in agricultural appropriations , including mandatory vs. discretionary spending , nutrition spending compared to the rest of the bill , inflation - adjusted amounts , and comparisons to entire federal budget , economy , and population .

discretionary agriculture appropriations peaked in fy2010 , although mandatory nutrition spending has continued to rise .

see figure a - 1 for the mandatory and discretionary breakdown ; table a - 1 contains the nominal data , and table a - 2 contains the inflation - adjusted data .

table a - 3 shows the compounded annualized percentage changes over various time periods .

over the past 10 years ( since fy2005 ) , total agriculture appropriations grew at a compounded annual rate of +5.6% ( +3.7% on an inflation - adjusted annual basis ) .

the mandatory spending portion of this total shows a +6.4% annual increase over the past 10 years ( +4.4% on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

the discretionary portion has an annual increase of +2.2% over 10 years ( +0.3% annually on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

in fy2015 , 14% of the total agriculture appropriation is discretionary spending , down from 28% of the total appropriation in fy1998 .

another way to divide the total agriculture appropriation is domestic nutrition compared to everything else ( figure a - 2 ) .

domestic nutrition appropriations include primarily the child nutrition programs ( school lunch and related programs ) , the special supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) — both of which are mandatory — and the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) , which is discretionary .

the "rest of the bill" includes other usda programs ( except the forest service ) , fda and cftc .

total domestic nutrition program spending rose at a 7.7% compounded annual rate over 10 years ( +5.8% annually on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

spending on the rest of the bill ( non - nutrition ) increased at +1.3% annually over 10 years ( - 0.5% per year on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

in fy2015 , 75% of the total agriculture appropriation was for domestic nutrition , up from 62% in 2005 and 46% in fy2001 .

most of domestic nutrition is mandatory spending , primarily in snap and the child nutrition programs .

the mandatory nutrition spending portion rose at a +8.2% annual rate over 10 years ( +6.2% annually inflation - adjusted basis ) .

mandatory spending within the rest of the rest of the bill increased at a +0.9% annual rate over 10 years ( - 0.9% on an inflation - adjusted annual basis ) .

appropriators arguably have the most control over discretionary appropriations .

within the discretionary subtotal of figure a - 1 , a similar domestic nutrition vs. rest of the bill comparison can be made as was done for the total appropriation ( see figure a - 3 ) .

as stated before , total discretionary agriculture appropriations grew at +2.2% per year over the past 10 years ( +0.3% annually on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

over a shorter period , the annual change is - 2.2% per year over the past five years , or - 3.8% per year on an inflation - adjusted basis .

the domestic nutrition portion of this discretionary subtotal ( primarily wic , commodity assistance programs , and nutrition programs administration ) shows a +2.5% annual increase over 10 years ( +0.6% per year if adjusted for inflation ) .

over a five - year period , the annual change is - 1.5% per year ( - 3.1% per year if adjusted for inflation ) .

the discretionary portion for rest of the bill has risen at +2.0% per year for 10 years ( +0.1% per year on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

over the five - year period , the annual change is - 2.6% per year ( - 4.2% per year on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

comparisons to the federal budget , gdp , and population relative to the entire federal budget , the agriculture bill's share has declined from over 4% of the total federal budget in fy1995 and fy2000 , to 2.7% in fy2009 , before rising again to 4% in recent years ( figure a - 4 , table a - 4 ) .

within that total , the share for nutrition programs had declined from 2.6% in fy1995 to 1.8% in fy2008 , but the recent recession has caused that share to rise to about 3% .

the share for the rest of the bill has declined from 2.2% in fy2000 to about 1.0% recently .

those shares of the federal budget also can be subdivided into mandatory and discretionary spending ( figure a - 5 ) .

the mandatory share for nutrition is presently about 2.7% ( generally rising , but recently ameliorating ) , while the discretionary share for nutrition is fairly steady 0.2% .

the mandatory share for the rest of the bill ( primarily crop insurance , commodity program subsidies , and conservation ) is about 0.6% , while the discretionary share for the rest of the bill is about 0.4% ( generally declining ) .

the 0.6% share of the federal budget above for mandatory spending on crop insurance , farm commodity subsidies , and conservation is a good proxy for farm bill spending on agricultural ( non - nutrition ) programs ( figure a - 5 ) .

it has been variable and generally declining since 2000 ( consistent with farm commodity spending ) , though since 2009 steadier to slightly rising ( consistent with steady to declining farm commodity spending but increasing crop insurance and mandatory conservation spending ) .

as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , agriculture appropriations had been fairly steady at under 0.75% of gdp from fy1997-fy2009 , but have risen to about 0.8% of gdp since fy2010 due to increases in nutrition program demand ( figure a - 6 , table a - 4 ) .

nutrition programs have been rising as a percentage of gdp since fy2000 ( 0.32% in fy2001 to 0.61% in fy2015 ) , while non - nutrition agricultural programs have declined ( 0.40% in fy2000 to 0.21% in fy2015 ) .

on a per capita basis , inflation - adjusted total agriculture appropriations have risen slightly over the past 10 to 15 years from about $250 per capita in 1998 ( fy2015 dollars ) to about $460 per capita in fy2015 ( figure a - 7 ) .

nutrition programs have risen more steadily on a per capita basis from about $157 per capita in fy2001 to nearly $343 per capita in fy2015 .

non - nutrition "other" agricultural programs have been more steady or declining , falling from $195 per capita in fy2000 to about $116 per capita in fy2015 .

budget sequestration sequestration is a process of automatic , largely across - the - board reductions that permanently cancel mandatory and / or discretionary budget authority when spending would exceed statutory budget goals .

the current requirement for sequestration is in the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) .

table b - 1 shows the rates of sequestration and the amounts of budget authority cancelled from accounts in the agriculture appropriations bill .

although the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-67 ) raised spending limits in the bca to avoid sequestration of discretionary accounts in fy2014 and fy2015 , it did not prevent or reduce sequestration on mandatory accounts .

in fact , to pay for avoiding sequestration in the near term , it extended by two years ( until fy2023 ) the duration for sequestration on mandatory programs .

some farm bill mandatory programs are exempt from sequestration .

the nutrition programs and the conservation reserve program are exempt , and some prior legal obligations in crop insurance and the farm commodity programs may be exempt as determined by omb .

since enactment of the bca , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has ordered budget sequestration in fy2013 on non - exempt , non - defense discretionary accounts ( table b - 2 ) and on mandatory accounts in fy2013-fy2015 ( table b - 3 ) .

