part c ( infants and toddlers with disabilities ) of the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea , p.l .

108-446 ) authorizes a formula grant program for infants and toddlers with disabilities ( ages birth through two ) and their families .

a general purpose of these grants is to aid states in developing and implementing "a statewide , comprehensive , coordinated , multidisciplinary , interagency system that provides early intervention services for infants and toddlers with disabilities and their families. .

in 2016 , approximately 373,000 infants and toddlers received early intervention services under part c of the idea .

originally enacted in 1975 as the education for all handicapped children act , p.l .

94-142 , the idea is the main federal law that provides for the education of children and youth with disabilities from birth through age 21 .

when first enacted , the idea focused on ensuring that elementary and secondary school - aged children with disabilities would be provided a free and appropriate public education ( fape ) .

at that time , congress found that more than half of all children with disabilities were not receiving appropriate educational services and that 1 million children with disabilities were excluded entirely from the public school system .

further , congress found that many public school children were prevented from having successful educational experiences because their disabilities were undiagnosed .

additional factors that precipitated the enactment of p.l .

94-142 included ( 1 ) judicial decisions that found constitutional requirements existed for the education of children with disabilities , ( 2 ) the inability of states and localities to fund education for children with disabilities , and ( 3 ) the potential long - term benefits of educating children with disabilities .

the idea is primarily thought of as the nation's special education law , and part b , which focuses on providing special education and related services to children with disabilities between the ages of 3 and 21 years old , is the largest part of the idea both in terms of populations served and funding level .

however , the idea covers more than special education .

the idea consists of four parts .

part a contains the general provisions , including the purposes of the act and definitions .

the aforementioned largest part , part b , contains provisions relating to the education of school aged children ( the grants - to - states program ) and the state grants program for preschool children with disabilities ( section 619 ) .

part c , the focus of this report , authorizes state grants for programs serving infants and toddlers with disabilities .

finally , part d contains the requirements for various national activities designed to improve the education of children with disabilities .

appendix a provides a more detailed summary of each of the four parts .

since 1975 , the idea has been the subject of numerous reauthorizations to extend services and rights for children with disabilities .

the most recent reauthorization was p.l .

108-446 in 2004 .

the idea's 1986 reauthorization added a new part related to infants and toddlers with disabilities .

known originally as part h but later changed to part c , this addition extended idea programs to infants and toddlers with disabilities from birth to their third birthdays , when children become eligible for services under part b of the idea .

in 1986 , congress recognized "an urgent and substantial need" to enhance the development of infants and toddlers with disabilities and to minimize their potential for developmental delay ; reduce the educational costs to our society , including our nation's schools , by minimizing the need for special education and related services after infants and toddlers with disabilities reach school age ; minimize the likelihood of institutionalization of individuals with disabilities and maximize the potential for their independent living in society ; and enhance the capacity of families to meet the special needs of their infants and toddlers with disabilities .

with the exception of two additions , the congressional findings are virtually unchanged in the current authorization of the idea .

congress now recognizes "the significant brain development that occurs during a child's first 3 years of life," as a reason part c of the idea is needed , and specifies part c's intent to "enhance the capacity of state and local agencies and service providers to identify , evaluate , and meet the needs of all children , particularly minority , low - income , inner city , and rural children , and infants and toddlers in foster care. .

all states and eligible territories are currently participating in the part c program .

in order to participate in the part c , grants to infants and families program , each state must meet the requirements contained in the current idea statute and regulations , which include but are not limited to assuring that every eligible child and family will have early intervention available to them ; designating a lead agency to administer and supervise the part c program and appointing an interagency coordinating council ( icc ) that includes parents of infants and toddlers with disabilities , early intervention service providers , and employees of relevant state agencies to advise and assist the lead agency ; and specifying the policies and procedures that will be implemented to ensure the required components of the comprehensive statewide early intervention system are enacted .

early intervention ( ei ) is designed to ensure that all infants and toddlers with diagnosed disabilities or developmental delays are identified and evaluated and have an individualized plan developed to meet their and their families' unique needs .

this section of the report addresses ( 1 ) criteria infants and toddlers must meet to receive services under part c of the idea , ( 2 ) how young children are identified and evaluated for early intervention services , and ( 3 ) the procedures for developing an individualized plan to provide services .

procedural safeguards are provisions protecting the rights of parents of infants and toddlers with disabilities and the infants and toddlers themselves regarding appropriate early intervention services .

the various types of procedural safeguards include parental rights to inspect and review educational records ; receive timely administrative resolution of complaints ; maintain confidentiality of personally identifiable information ; receive prior written notice in their native language when the lead agency or an early intervention services provider proposes to initiate or change , or refuses to initiate or change , the identification , evaluation , or placement of their infant or toddler , or the provision of early intervention services to their infant or toddler ; receive a procedural safeguards notice , which is a comprehensive written explanation of the idea's legal rights and protections for infants and toddlers with disabilities and their parents ; resolve disputes through a mediation process ; determine whether they , their infant or toddler , or other family members will accept or decline any early intervention services without jeopardizing other early intervention services ; and continue receiving appropriate early intervention services for their infant or toddler , during the pendency of any proceeding or action involving a complaint filed on their family's behalf .

the idea provides federal funding for early intervention programs for infants and toddlers with disabilities and developmental delays and imposes certain conditions for the receipt of federal funds .

this section addresses ( 1 ) the structure and funding of the idea ; ( 2 ) state formula allocations and expenditure requirements ; and ( 3 ) the responsibilities of lead agencies , early intervention service providers , and parents regarding paying for early intervention services .

the idea consists of four parts .

part a contains general provisions , including the purposes of the act and definitions that apply to the entire act .

part b contains provisions relating to the education of school aged children ( the grants - to - states program ) and state grants program for preschool children with disabilities ( section 619 ) .

part c , the focus of this report , authorizes state grants for programs serving infants and toddlers with disabilities .

finally , part d contains the requirements for various national activities designed to improve the education of children with disabilities .

table 2 shows the structure and funding of the idea .

appendix a provides a more detailed summary of each of the four parts .

while funding for part b , assistance for education of all children with disabilities , is permanently authorized , the 2004 reauthorization of the idea authorized funding for part c , infants and toddlers with disabilities , and part d , national activities , through fy2010 .

these authorities were automatically extended for an additional fiscal year by the general education provisions act ( gepa ) .

funding for part c continues to be authorized through annual appropriations .

in fy2017 , $458.6 million was appropriated for part c , representing 3.5% of total idea funding .

appendix b provides the amounts appropriated for part c each year since the 2004 reauthorization and appendix c displays funding levels for part c in both actual and constant dollar amounts from the program's first year of funding in fy1987 through fy2017 .

annual funding for each state for part c programs is based upon each state's relative share of the general population birth through two .

the idea is administered by the office of special education programs ( osep ) in the office of special education and rehabilitative services ( osers ) in the department of education ( ed ) .

of the funds appropriated for part c of the idea , the secretary may reserve no more than 1% of the appropriation for the outlying areas , and must reserve 1.25% of the appropriation for tribes , tribal organizations , and consortia of those groups for the provision of early intervention services on reservations .

the remaining part c funds are allocated to the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico according to the ratio of infants and toddlers in each state to the number of infants and toddlers in all states .

the minimum allotment for each state is either $500,000 or one - half of 1% of the total part c funds allotted to the states , whichever is greater .

if the appropriation for part c is reduced to a level insufficient to pay the full amounts that all states are eligible to receive in a given year , the secretary must ratably reduce the states' payments , meaning the reduction will be proportionately reflected in the allotment for each state .

part c does not require states to create new early intervention systems for children with disabilities under three years of age ; instead , it requires the coordination of existing early intervention services into one accessible system .

states use idea funds to coordinate these services through state interagency agreements , contracts , and cooperative arrangements .

therefore , part c grants finance primarily administrative functions , and do not directly provide services .

the idea state expenditure requirements are aimed at increasing overall early intervention spending , rather than substituting federal funds for early intervention spending at the state and local levels .

supplement , not supplant ( sns ) requirements generally prohibit a state or lead agency from using idea grants to provide services , purchase equipment , and so forth , that state , local , or other federal funds currently provide or purchase or , in the absence of the idea funds , that those other funds would have provided or would have purchased .

both states and lead agencies must use idea funds to supplement state , local , and other federal funds and not to supplant them .

depending on the state's policies , parents of infants and toddlers with disabilities may have to pay for certain early intervention services .

parents may be charged a sliding - scale fee for some services , based on what they earn .

however , early intervention services cannot be denied to a child simply because his or her family is not able to pay for services , and part c of the idea requires the following services to be provided at no cost to families: child find services ; evaluations and assessments ; the development and review of the ifsp ; and service coordination .

a description of the state's payment system must be made available in writing and given to the parents of participating children at the beginning of the early intervention process .

some early intervention services may be covered by parents' health insurance , by medicaid , or by the indian health service .

the part c system may ask parents for their permission to access their public or private insurance in order to pay for their child's early intervention services .

in most cases , the early intervention system may not use a family's health care insurance ( private or public ) without their express , written consent .

if the family denies consent , the early intervention system may not limit or refuse to provide services for them or their child .

appendix a .

structure of the idea part a — general provisions part a includes congressional findings pertinent to the act , the purposes of the act , and definitions .

these definitions include , among others , definitions of child with a disability , specific learning disability , free appropriate public education , core academic subjects , highly qualified , individualized education program , local educational agency , related services , special education , supplementary aids and services , transition services , and excess costs .

part b — assistance for education of all children with disabilities part b authorizes federal funding for the education of children with disabilities and requires , as a condition for the receipt of such funds , the provision of a free appropriate public education ( fape ) to children with disabilities between the ages of 3 and 21 .

provisions in part b require that school districts must identify , locate , and evaluate all children with disabilities , regardless of the severity of their disability , to determine which children are eligible for special education and related services .

further , they require that each child receiving services has an individualized education program ( iep ) , created by an iep team , delineating the specific special education and related services to be provided to meet his or her needs .

the statute also contains procedural safeguards , which are provisions to protect the rights of parents and children with disabilities to ensure the provision of fape .

section 619 of idea part b authorizes grants to states for preschool programs serving children with disabilities ages three to five .

since part b grants to states are used to serve children with disabilities as young as three years of age ( as well as school - age children ) , section 619 is not so much a separate program as it is supplementary funding for services to this age group .

in general , the provisions , requirements , and guarantees under the grants to states program that apply to school - age children with disabilities also apply to children in this age group .

as a result , section 619 is a relatively brief section of the law and deals primarily with the state and substate funding formulas for the grants and state - level activities .

part c — infants and toddlers with disabilities the general purpose of part c is to aid each state in creating and maintaining "a statewide , comprehensive , coordinated , multidisciplinary , interagency system that provides early intervention services for infants and toddlers with disabilities and their families. .

the provisions in part c require that services focus on children from birth through age two who are experiencing or have a high probability of experiencing "developmental delay" ( as defined by the state ) with respect to physical , mental , or other capacities , and on their families .

services are detailed for each child and his or her family in an individualized family service plan ( ifsp ) .

services are to be provided , to the maximum extent feasible , in "natural environments," including the home , with other infants and toddlers who are not disabled .

under the provisions of part c , states are required to identify a state lead agency , which might be the state educational agency ( sea ) but could be other state agencies , to coordinate the program .

part d — national activities to improve education of children with disabilities part d authorizes competitive grants to improve the education of children with disabilities in three areas: ( 1 ) state personnel development ( subpart 1 ) ; ( 2 ) personnel preparation , technical assistance , model demonstration projects , and dissemination of information ( subpart 2 ) ; and ( 3 ) support to improve results for children ( subpart 3 ) .

under subpart 1 , state personnel development grants are authorized .

these grants assist seas "in reforming and improving their systems for personnel preparation and professional development in early intervention , educational , and transitions services. .

under subpart 2 , a competitive grants program is authorized through which grants are made to entities such as seas , leas , institutions of higher education ( ihes ) , and nonprofit organizations for personnel development to help ensure that there are adequate numbers of personnel with skills and knowledge needed to help children with disabilities succeed , for technical assistance and dissemination of material based on knowledge gained through research and practice , and for studies and evaluations .

under subpart 3 , a competitive grants program is authorized through which grants are made to nonprofit organizations for parent training and information centers , which provide parents of children with disabilities with needed training and information to work with professionals in meeting the early intervention and special education needs of their children .

also , under subpart 3 , competitive grants are authorized for entities such as seas , leas , ihes , and nonprofit organizations to support research , development , and other activities that promote the use of technology in providing special education and early intervention services .

appendix b .

idea , part c appropriations appendix c. the first 30 years of part c funding appendix d. commonly used acronym .

