on june 18 , 2014 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) published in the federal register a proposed rulemaking under section 111 ( d ) of the clean air act .

the proposal would establish carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emission guidelines for states to use when developing plans that address co 2 emissions from existing fossil fuel - fired electric generating units .

for more background on the statutory authority , history , and legal and administrative processes involving this rulemaking , see crs report r43572 , epa's proposed greenhouse gas regulations for existing power plants: frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

the proposed rule establishes state - specific co 2 emission rate goals , measured in pounds of co 2 emissions per megawatt - hour ( mwh ) of electricity generation .

this metric is generally described as carbon intensity , which is a ratio of co 2 emissions per a unit of output , which is electric power ( mwh ) in this context .

epa based its intensity goals on each state's current portfolio of electricity generation and various assumptions involving opportunities for states to decrease their carbon intensity , including: coal - fired power plant efficiency improvements ; natural gas combined cycle displacement of more carbon - intensive sources , particularly coal ; increased use of low - carbon sources , namely renewable energies like wind and solar , and continued use of existing nuclear power generation ; and energy efficiency improvements .

the proposal sets a final goal for each state for 2030 and an interim goal to be achieved "on average" between 2020 and 2029 .

epa estimates that if the states achieve their individual emission rate goals in 2030 , the co 2 emissions from the electric power sector in the united states would be reduced by 30% compared to 2005 levels .

however , the state emission rate goals are based on a baseline year of 2012 , not 2005 .

this report discusses the methodology epa used to establish the state - specific co 2 emission rate goals .

the first section explains the process by which epa created state - specific 2012 emission rate baselines .

the emission rate equation epa used to calculate the state baselines is provided at the end of this section .

the second section discusses the four categories of emission reduction opportunities , described as "building blocks" by epa , that the agency used to determine the interim and 2030 emission rate goals for each state .

the emission rate equation that incorporates each building block is provided at the end of this section .

in addition , table 6 at the end of this section lists the state - specific 2012 emission rate baselines , the final emission rate goals , and the incremental effects of applying each of epa's building blocks to the 2012 baselines .

epa's first step in establishing the state - specific co 2 emission rate goals involved setting state - specific baselines .

the baseline is the starting point , from which future goals are measured .

the baseline year selection is an important issue for some states , because some states already have regulations or policies that would directly ( eg , emissions cap ) or indirectly ( eg , renewable portfolio standards ) reduce co 2 emissions .

some of these state requirements were in place well before 2012 .

epa chose to use state - specific data from 2012 to establish the rate - based baselines , stating: epa chose the historic data approach as it reflected actual historic performance at the state level .

epa chose the year 2012 as it represented the most recent year for which complete data were available at the time of the analysis .... epa also considered the possibility of using average fossil generation and emission rate values over a baseline period ( eg , 2009 – 2012 ) , but determined that there would be little variation in results compared to a 2012 base year data set due to the rate - based nature of the goal .

in its proposed rule , epa identified four categories of co 2 emission reduction strategies that states could employ to reduce the states' overall co 2 emission rates .

epa proposed that the combination of these four strategies — described as "building blocks" — represents the "best system of emission reduction ... adequately demonstrated," a key determination pursuant to caa section 111 ( d ) .

using the state - specific 2012 baseline data as its starting point , epa applied the four building blocks to establish co 2 emission rate goals for each state .

building blocks 1 and 2 directly affect the co 2 emission rate at affected egus by factoring in efficiency improvements at egus and opportunities to switch from high - to low - carbon power generation .

in contrast , blocks 3 and 4 involve so - called "outside the fence" opportunities that do not directly apply to electricity generation at affected egus .

these blocks decrease the states' overall co 2 emission rates by ( 1 ) increasing the use of low - or zero - carbon electricity generation and ( 2 ) reducing consumer demand for electricity through energy efficiency improvements .

the equation for the 2030 emission rate goals , which includes the application of all four building blocks , is provided at the end of this section .

compared to the 2012 baseline emission rate equation , building blocks 3 and 4 add more elements to the equation's denominator .

in its proposal , epa explained: a goal expressed as an unadjusted output - weighted - average emission rate would fail to account for mass emission reductions from reductions in the total quantity of fossil fuel - fired generation associated with state plan measures that increase low - or zero - carbon generating capacity [eg , renewable portfolio standards] or demand - side energy efficiency .

accordingly , under the proposed goals , the emission rate computation includes an adjustment designed to reflect those mass emission reductions... .

mathematically , this adjustment has the effect of spreading the measured co 2 emissions from the state's affected egus over a larger quantity of energy output , thus resulting in an adjusted mission rate lower than the unadjusted emission rate .

the following discussion describes each of these building blocks and their relative contributions to the state - specific emission rate goals .

as table 6 indicates , the building blocks affect each state's emission rate baseline in different ways , depending on each state's specific electricity generation circumstances .

table 6 presents an incremental analysis of the impacts of applying the building blocks in a stepwise fashion ( or all at once ) , ultimately reaching the 2030 emission rate goal .

as another measure of a state - by - state comparison , crs used epa's emission rate methodology to calculate the impacts of each building block in isolation .

the results are listed in table 7 .

these calculations illustrate the relative impacts of the four building blocks for each state .

for example in idaho , building blocks 1 , 2 , and 3 ( nuclear ) have no impact on the 2012 emission rate , because idaho has no coal - fired egus , no room to improve its ngcc utilization , and no nuclear generation .

therefore , the only impacts to its 2012 baseline rate are due to the renewable component of building block 3 and ee improvements from building block 4 .

as table 7 indicates , on average , building block 1 has the smallest impact ( 4% ) , decreasing state emission rate goals ( compared to 2012 baselines ) by a range of 0% to 6% .

the emission rates in states ( eg , rhode island , maine , and idaho ) without coal - fired , steam egus are unaffected by this block ; states that employ coal - fired units to generate a significant percentage of their electricity ( eg , kentucky , west virginia , and wyoming ) see a greater impact to their emission rates .

building block 2 , on average , generates the largest ( tied with block 4 below ) incremental impact ( 13% ) , ranging from a 0% to 38% change ( compared to baseline ) .

the largest changes are seen in states that have both coal - fired egus and under - utilized ngcc plants .

the smallest impacts are in states without any ngcc and states that already have relatively high ngcc utilization rates .

although the nuclear component of building block 3 only affects three states , its impacts are considerable in those states .

the re component of building block 3 , on average , reduces emission rate baselines by 9% ( 10% if the negative values are omitted ) .

the impacts from the re block application range from 2% to 33% .

multiple factors explain this range of impacts .

for example , this block has a considerable effect in washington ( 33% ) , because it increases the state's re generation by 116% and re accounts for a substantial percentage of the state's total generation ( not counting hydroelectric power ) : 30% in 2012 and 65% in 2030 .

although kentucky's re generation increases by 415% between 2012 and 2030 ( from 0.4% to 2% ) , the re block has a relatively small impact , because re continues to account for a small percentage of the state's total generation .

building block 4 has the largest impact ( tied with block 2 ) on emission rate baselines , reducing them , on average , by 13% , but the range of impacts is between 4% and 37% .

this range is a result of several factors , including ( 1 ) the contribution of in - state electricity generation that comes from hydroelectric power or nuclear power ; and ( 2 ) whether the state is a net importer or net exporter of electricity .

although the isolated building block application ( in table 7 ) provides a comparison of the relative magnitude of potential effects in each state , states have the flexibility to combine the building blocks ( and / or other potential activities ) to meet their emission rate targets .

epa's building blocks were meant to establish the emission rate goals , not predict a particular outcome in a state's electricity generation profile .

