the last new refinery to open in the united states finished construction in 1976 .

that record is about to fall with the construction of a small refinery scheduled to open late this year in north dakota .

since the mid - 1980s , though , some 150 or more refineries closed .

however , the refineries that remained open expanded their operational capacity to keep up with the increasing demand for refined petroleum products .

current u.s. refining capacity ( roughly 18 million barrels per day ) appears to satisfy if not exceed demand as the increasing export of refined petroleum products would seem to suggest .

the refining industry even shows signs of expanding to take advantage of less expensive u.s. crude oil and export more products .

the perception remains , nevertheless , that the united states needs new refineries but economic and regulatory barriers stand in the way of their construction .

thus far , the industry has managed to negotiate regulatory hurdles in expanding refinery capacity , an option preferred over new construction and driven by the economy of scale .

in general , new entrants into refining may find steep competition with existing operators .

however , for some "teapot" refineries , the door is wide open , and the cost of admission is comparatively little when processing light - sweet crude oil or condensate , whether in the mid - continent or elsewhere .

some may argue that there may be only a short window of opportunity to get in and then get out .

a change in crude oil prices could quickly disadvantage them .

small refineries do face many of the same economic , market , and environmental factors that affect large refineries , but they may also benefit from exemptions in complying with certain federal regulations .

further , some federal policies have had the effect of displacing petroleum products in the market place , and introduced refineries to direct challenges , such as the renewable fuel standard .

we begin this report with a brief discussion on the state of refining in the unites states , paying particular attention to regulatory criteria that define refining ( as this has taken on new significance ) , the threshold between small and large refineries , and potential opportunities for small businesses .

in the discussion on " economic challenges " , we examine the pace of refinery construction and capacity expansion , and the profitability of operating refineries .

current economic challenges for the industry also include competition from ethanol and biodiesel producers , many of which are considered small businesses ; the potential displacement of refined petroleum products by these alternative fuels , as mandated by the renewable fuel standard ; and the erosion in demand for refined petroleum products , due to both consumer and government - mandated trends toward increased automotive fuel efficiency .

like any other industrial facility , refineries are subject to certain environmental laws that regulate their construction and operation .

in the discussion on environmental permitting and regulatory requirements , we summarize some of the major environmental requirements associated with refinery construction and operations , few of which are unique to refineries compared to any industrial operation with similar potential emissions .

this discussion focuses on air emissions control requirements , often regarded as the most significant challenge in permitting the expansion of existing refineries or constructions of new refineries .

by crs's recent count , some 115 refineries / refinery complexes process roughly 18 million barrels per day ( mb / d ) of crude oil in the united states .

all have atmospheric distillation in common , which involves heating crude oil in a furnace then condensing it in an atmospheric distillation tower ( or crude unit ) — the tall , narrow columns that give a refinery its distinctive skyline ( see figure 1 ) .

refineries vary in complexity , and can include , for the purposes of this report , stabilizers , condensate splitters , simple topping plants and hydroskimmers to more complex cracking and ultimately coking plants .

coking has become an increasingly important capability of the u.s. refining industry with nearly three - quarters of the fuel - producing refineries having some capacity to convert heavy crude oils into refined products .

beginning in the late 1970s , u.s refineries began facing a dwindling supply of light - sweet crude oils favored for making motor fuels .

many refineries began switching to increasingly available heavy - sour crude oils , and began adding "cracking" and "coking" processes to convert petroleum "resid" into high value motor fuels .

the resid that remained after atmospheric distillation found earlier use as low value "ship's bunker fuel" and as boiler fuel in electric power plants .

cracking and coking processing upgrades came at considerable investment costs .

coking dates back to the late 1920s , but became the defining characteristic of the u.s. refinery during the 1980s and 1990s .

u.s. refineries have the capacity to convert some 2.5 mb / d of petroleum resid into higher value motor fuels .

in other words , refineries increased motor fuel production without having to increase nameplate capacity by adding cracking and coking units .

several midwest refineries have recently added coking / conversion capacity to take advantage of the increasing supply of heavier crude oils from canada's oil sands projects .

the increasingly available light sweet crude oils produced from unconventional shale resources , like north dakota's bakken formation and the texas eagle ford formation , are changing u.s. refining prospects and have revitalized some refinery operations that formerly depended on imported light crude oil .

some have raised questions and concerns about the role of condensates in the market .

the domestic market for condensate is somewhat limited , however , and "lease" condensate ( a term applied to outer continental shelf production ) is subject to current export restrictions .

from the small business perspective , several legislated provisions define small refineries , but inconsistently .

according to the u.s. small business administration ( sba ) , only refiners that employ fewer than 1,500 employees and produce less than 125,000 barrels per calendar day may qualify for a federal small business contract .

by crs count , 27 refineries make up 50% of u.s. refining capacity .

almost half of the u.s. refineries ( some 50 or more ) produce less than 125,000 b / d , but in total they make up only 21% of total refining capacity ( roughly 18+ mb / d ) .

both title xv ( ethanol and motor fuels ) of the energy policy act 2005 and title ii ( energy security through increased production of biofuels ) of the energy independence and security act of 2007 defined a small refinery as having less than 75,000 b / d in average aggregate daily crude oil throughput .

epa regulations temporarily exempted small refineries and small volume refineries , which have a capacity below 155,000 b / d , from complying with the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) through 2010 .

the clean air act regulations set 65,000 b / d as the small business threshold for complying with vapor recovery provisions .

finally , the north american industry classification codes ( naicc ) identifies the construction costs for small oil and gas structures at below $33.5 million .

however , the smallest refinery currently under construction , a 20,000 b / d refinery in north dakota , reportedly will cost $350 million .

smaller oilfield equipment used to treat crude oil before it reaches a refinery ( eg , oil and gas separators , splitters , and stabilizers ) may line up close to naicc costs given the mobile and temporary application of the equipment .

for example , a "skid - mounted" 2,500 b / d crude oil condensate stabilizer operating in the texas eagle ford shale play cost roughly $400,000 ( exclusive of tanks , pipelines , and pumps ) in 2012 .

a permanent 60,000 b / d condensate stabilizer plant might cost upwards of $80 million .

small business opportunities in refining may strongly depend on a number of factors , including regional demand for refined products , available crude oil supplies , regional price differences , and unique state environmental regulations , among others .

in addition , some fuels are easier to produce than others are .

the unique "boutique" fuel requirements for some regions can affect the decisions of individual companies to produce , distribute , and market them .

while evaluating opportunities would exceed the scope of this report , some key factors have emerged as of late .

the frequency that refinery - ownership changes hands suggests that buying an existing refinery offers the most straightforward opportunity to expand capacity quickly .

this has been the case for refineries serving regional markets as well as those operating in the major refining centers of the gulf coast and the west coast .

the availability of light sweet crude oil in the mid - continent region ( north dakota , colorado ) presents some opportunities for constructing a small topping or hydroskimming refinery .

a greater opportunity may lie in installing condensate splitter and stabilizer plants to handle the excess condensate production in north dakota now being flared , or in texas .

hess corp. has applied an even simpler "heater treater" to strip out the light - end hydrocarbons by heating oil to between 80 and 120°f for the oil production from the north dakota bakken formation .

as many as 20 other refining projects ( with a total capacity of more than 900,000 b / d ) are proposed or are in various stages of development .

these projects range from splitting and stabilization plants for processing crude oil condensate to "teapot" or mini - refineries .

it is uncertain how many projects may actually be completed .

oil companies can meet increasing / decreasing demand for petroleum products , such as gasoline , in three basic ways .

they can build or idle refineries , expand or reduce capacity or capacity utilization rates of existing refineries , or they might choose to export or import petroleum products .

these three alternatives allow the industry considerable flexibility in meeting changing short - term demand requirements while still allowing for the implementation of their long - term strategy .

within this framework , any individual refining company can either buy or sell a refinery to change its market position ; however , this alternative is not available to the industry as a whole .

in general , the industry will choose how to meet demand requirements based on which strategy is the most profitable .

no new complex refineries have been constructed in the united states since the grayville , la , facility that opened in 1977 .

over 150 refineries have closed since 1982 , representing some 1.6 mb / d in lost refining capacity .

however , capacity expansion in existing refineries countered the loss , bringing it up to the current 18+ mb / d capacity — a 23% increase since the mid - 1980s .

between january 2013 and january 2014 , refining capacity increased by another 101,000 b / d , the result of investments at existing refineries .

since 2008 , the united states has moved from being a net importer of 1.36 mb / d of petroleum products to being a net exporter of 1.39 mb / d in 2013 .

this shift from net importer to net exporter in less than five years suggests that the united states does not suffer from a shortage of refining capacity .

while domestic demand was met , capacity existed to supply foreign markets .

these data suggest that the refining industry has chosen to reduce the number of refineries , increase the capacity of existing refineries , and use foreign markets to meet domestic demands for various petroleum products when it is high and to optimize capacity utilization rates when domestic demand is reduced .

two key vehicle and fuel regulatory standards — the coordinated corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) / green house gas ( ghg ) vehicle emission standards and the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) — have likely affected the refining industry by reducing the consumption of petroleum fuels .

compliance with the rfs may also increase the costs for some refiners , as well as present other challenges .

as with any industrial facility involving potential air emissions , water use , and waste generation , certain environmental permitting and regulatory requirements apply to the construction and operation of refineries .

the specific requirements , and the degree of difficulty or ease in meeting them , will depend not only on the nature of the project , but perhaps more importantly on the location of the project .

congress included in the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact 2005 ) a provisions on "refinery revitalization" intended to improve permitting coordination between epa and various federal and state agencies .

in general , state or local agencies handle environmental permitting and other regulatory operations , in part because epa has delegated authority to them for many federal environmental programs .

accordingly , state and local agencies largely implement permitting , inspections , monitoring , and enforcement , and , in some cases , standards setting .

in addition , many states have enacted statutes and promulgated certain requirements independent of epa to address specific issues within their states .

while air pollution permitting and standards are typically the biggest regulatory challenge for new refineries , the specific location and situation of a proposed new refinery may pose other regulatory challenges ( eg , cooling water supply may be limited , particularly in arid areas ) .

this report focuses on air pollution permitting and standards for new and modified refineries , as well as some additional considerations such as the requirements on the fuels produced by the refineries .

the united states is experiencing an energy renaissance in producing light crude oil and natural gas .

unforeseen just a few years ago , these new resources present some challenges as well as new opportunities to u.s refiners .

rather than u.s. refiners having to chase import suppliers , as has been the past case , some u.s. producers now find foreign brokers chasing them .

the refining industry has largely chosen to reduce the number of refineries , increase the capacity of existing refineries rather than construct new ones , and utilize foreign markets to meet domestic demands for various petroleum products when demand is high and to optimize capacity utilization rates when domestic demand is reduced .

given the significant expansions of refineries in the industry consolidations during the past decades , there appears to be little general evidence that such growth in refinery capacity has been impeded significantly by state and federal environmental permitting requirements .

complex refineries that locked into imported heavy crude oils to run through their cracking and coking plants are taking the new light crudes and adapting their refining economics to run them .

the shift could spell more competition for smaller refineries that had depended on light crudes and that returned to profitability with the crudes' increased availability .

the possibility of bypassing conventional refining altogether and exporting light crude ( condensate ) directly is a newly emerging development .

the latter case presents possible opportunities for small businesses to enter the petroleum supply sector upstream of refining .

in light of the restrictions on exporting u.s. - produced crude oil and condensate , congress may consider whether the definition of a refinery includes similar processes that produce product streams based on their physical properties .

congress may also wish to assess whether small business enterprises face unique challenges to entering refining , or unique opportunities now that the united states has become a net exporter of refined petroleum products .

for further reading on refining , we suggest the following crs reports: crs report r41478 , the u.s. oil refining industry: background in changing markets and fuel policies , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report r43263 , petroleum coke: industry and environmental issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43390 , u.s. rail transportation of crude oil: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

for further reading on cafe , rfs , and fuel standards , we suggest the following crs reports: crs report r42721 , automobile and truck fuel economy ( cafe ) and greenhouse gas standards , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r43497 , tier 3 motor vehicle emission and fuel standards , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40155 , renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) : overview and issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

