federal employees in the executive branch of government are regulated in their acceptance of "gifts" and things of value from outside , private sources under provisions of federal law as well as under detailed standards of conduct regulations promulgated for the entire executive branch of the federal government by the office of government ethics ( oge ) .

the regulations on gifts may be relevant to the receipt of anything of value from an outside , private source , regardless of whether there is any connection to or bearing upon one's official duties or responsibilities .

federal laws have long prohibited corrupt payments to or corrupt receipt of things of value by federal officials , such as "bribes" from favor - seekers in the private sector .

government - wide regulations and limitations on mere "gifts" to federal officials from private domestic sources — where there is not necessarily any bargain ( reciprocity ) , compensation , or favor explicitly sought , understood , or agreed to , or particular official act contemplated — are , however , of a more recent vintage .

the current statutory restriction in federal law on the receipt or solicitation of "gifts" by federal officials was enacted as part of the ethics reform act of 1989 .

this statute , which underlies the gift regulations in the executive branch , in many respects merely codified similar gifts standards that had been promulgated by executive order and applicable to executive branch employees since at least 1965 .

the current law , codified at 5 u.s.c .

section 7353 ( a ) , prohibits any federal officer or employee from soliciting or receiving a gift of any amount from a prohibited source , that is , from someone who is seeking action from , is doing business with , or is regulated by one's agency , or whose interests may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of one's official duties .

the statute , at 5 u.s.c .

section 7353 ( b ) , then expressly authorizes the designated supervisory ethics offices in the government to make exceptions to this general restriction , and to issue regulations setting out circumstances under which gifts may be accepted .

the regulations of the oge , the supervisory ethics agency for the executive branch , set out the detailed guidelines and standards for officials in the executive branch of government .

in addition to the oge regulations , it is possible that each agency , in consultation with and on the approval of the oge , may promulgate additional and individualized ethics provisions needed for their own agency .

the term "gift" is defined broadly in the regulations to cover most items , benefits , services , or favors that have a monetary value .

the definition expressly includes "any gratuity , favor , discount , entertainment , hospitality , loan , forbearance , or other item having monetary value. .

although the definition includes "services as well as gifts of training , transportation , local travel , lodgings and meals," the regulations list a number of items that are not included in the definition of a "gift" ( and which are discussed later in this report under "exemptions" ) .

as a general matter , a "gift" is usually distinguished from something of value that is received as "compensation" ; that is , compensation would be a payment of a fee , salary , or wage for some service rendered , while a gift is given without any such consideration in return .

although the gift regulations apply only to federal employees themselves , there are circumstances in which gifts to others may be imputed to the federal employee .

such an "indirect" gift to a federal employee covered by the prohibitions may occur when a gift is given with the employee's "knowledge and acquiescence to his parent , sibling , spouse , child , or dependent relative because of that person's relationship to the employee," or when given to another person or organization on the basis of a designation or recommendation of the federal employee .

although specific rules and prohibitions exist for executive branch employees , the president and vice president are generally exempt under the oge regulations from the statutory gift restrictions and the regulations on domestic gifts .

under these regulations , the president and vice president may accept gifts from the public , as long as such gifts are not solicited or coerced , nor accepted in return for an official act .

the exception in the oge regulations states: because of the considerations relating to the conduct of their offices , including those of protocol or etiquette , the president and the vice president may accept any gift on his own behalf or on behalf of any family member , provided that such acceptance does not violate §2635.202 ( c ) ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) , 18 u.s.c .

§201 ( b ) or 201 ( c ) ( 3 ) , or the constitution of the united states .

in promulgating its rules and exceptions , the oge had noted , "the ceremonial and other public duties of the president and vice president make it impractical to subject them to standards that require an analysis of every gift offered. .

the united states constitution prohibits the acceptance by any officer or employee of the united states ( anyone "holding any office of profit or trust" ) of "any present , emolument , office or title , of any kind whatever , from any king , prince , or foreign state" without the "consent of the congress. .

congressional consent for the acceptance of a foreign gift or decoration had often in the past taken the form of a private bill , or even a public law , which specifically authorized such acceptance for an individual or a group of individuals .

in 1966 , however , congress granted in the "foreign gifts and decorations act" a general statutory consent to the acceptance of certain gifts of minimal value , the conditional acceptance of certain other tangible gifts on behalf of the united states , and decorations from foreign governments in certain circumstances .

amendments to the foreign gifts and decorations act provisions were enacted in 1977 in the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal year 1978 , which clarified certain exceptions to the prohibition and added others .

expressly included within the statutory prohibition ( and the statutory consent of congress ) regarding the acceptance of gifts from foreign governments by a federal employee , is the "spouse" and the "dependent children" of a federal employee .

the statute directs each employing agency to promulgate rules regarding the limitations and restrictions on the receipt of foreign gifts .

the current statutory provision on foreign gifts and decorations generally: 1 .

prohibits an employee from requesting or encouraging the tender of a gift from a foreign government .

5 u.s.c .

section 7342 ( b ) ( 1 ) .

2 .

prohibits the receipt of a gift from a foreign government or an official foreign source except when authorized by the law .

5 u.s.c .

section 7342 ( b ) ( 2 ) .

3 .

authorizes the receipt of a foreign gift by a federal employee when the gift is of "minimal value" tendered as a "souvenir or mark of courtesy" ( "minimal value" is an amount adjusted every three years and , as of may 2014 , is $375 or less ( 41 c.f.r .

§102- 42.10 ) ) .

5 u.s.c .

section 7342 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( a ) .

the gift is of more than minimal value when it is in the nature of an educational scholarship or medical treatment .

5 u.s.c .

section 7342 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( b ) .

the gift is of more than minimal value , when the refusal of the gift would cause offense or embarrassment or would otherwise adversely affect the foreign relations of the united states , provided that if the gift is a tangible gift it is turned over to and becomes the property of the united states .

5 u.s.c .

section 7342 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( i ) .

the gift involves travel or expenses for travel ( such as transportation , food , and lodging ) "taking place entirely outside of the united states" if such acceptance is appropriate , consistent with the interests of the united states , and permitted by the employing agency .

5 u.s.c .

section 7342 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( ii ) .

the gift involves expenses for programs expressly authorized by congress , such as under the mutual education and cultural exchange act .

5 u.s.c .

section 7342 ( k ) .

the restrictions and regulations discussed above are upon the receipt of things of value given as "gifts," that is , generally , when things of value are given from a private source to a federal official with the requisite "donative intent," or colloquially , without "strings attached. .

when , however , things of value are given , offered , or transferred to a federal official , and the transaction is connected in some way to an official act of the government officer or employee , then such offer and / or acceptance of a thing of value may implicate potential violations of federal criminal law .

in addition to the statutory "gifts" provision and regulations , federal officers and employees continue to be subject to the restrictions of the federal bribery law at 18 u.s.c .

§201 ( b ) , which prohibits the receipt of anything of value "in return for" being influenced in the performance of an official duty .

within this federal bribery statute is the so - called "illegal gratuities" clause , at 18 u.s.c .

§201 ( c ) , prohibiting the receipt of anything of value "for or because of" an official act .

the bribery provision has been interpreted to require a so - called quid pro quo , that is , a corrupt agreement or "bargain" to do some official act ( or refrain from doing some official act ) in return for the thing of value ; the "illegal gratuity" provision , however , merely requires that the thing of value be given for or "because of" an official act and could have been given merely as a "thank you," even for an act already completed that would have been done by the public official without the thing of value being offered .

additionally , federal employees may not use their official positions ( "under color of official right" ) to "extort" something of value for themselves , and may not receive things of value in circumstances that implicate "honest services" fraud within the prohibitions of the wire fraud and mail fraud laws .

concerning the receipt of things of value , federal officers or employees may not receive something of value as private "compensation" for representational services rendered to persons before federal agencies , and may not receive from a private source any salary supplementation for their official duties performed on behalf of the united states government .

federal law also prohibits federal employees from giving gifts to supervisors or superiors in the federal service , and prohibits such superiors in the federal service from accepting gifts from those in the federal service receiving less pay than themselves .

this provision of law was amended in 1989 to expressly allow the supervising ethics office to provide exceptions for gifts between federal officials and employees on certain special occasions , such as marriage or retirement .

procurement officials are under other , but similar , restrictive gift rules concerning gifts and things of value from contractors and competing firms .

these provisions are codified at 41 u.s.c .

section 423 ( b ) , in what have been called the "procurement integrity" provisions .

in addition to restrictions and prohibitions on the receipt of gifts , there may be requirements for public financial disclosure for certain high level federal officials regarding , among other items , gifts over particular amounts that have been received by those officials and their immediate family , which must be reported in the annual financial disclosure statements required each may 15 under the provisions of the ethics in government act of 1978 .

there are also in place requirements for confidential disclosure reports to be filed with an employee's agency by some lower level federal officers and employees .

generally , the confidential reporting requirements apply to rank and file employees who are compensated below the threshold rate of pay for public disclosures ( gs - 15 or below , or less than 120% of the basic rate of pay for a gs - 15 ) , and who are determined by the employee's agency to perform duties or exercise responsibilities in regard to government contracting or procurement , government grants , government subsidies or licensing , government auditing , or other governmental duties that may particularly require the employee to avoid financial conflicts of interest .

items to be disclosed in confidential reports also include gifts and reimbursements over certain amounts received from private sources .

the current aggregate threshold amount for disclosure of gifts in both public and confidential reports is $375 .

