in an increasingly interconnected world , public health concerns and crises have domestic and international implications .

in 2015 , a salmonella outbreak associated with cucumbers imported from mexico affected 907 people in 40 states , causing 6 deaths ; while an october 2012 outbreak of fungal meningitis caused by steroid injections prepared at a massachusetts compounding pharmacy resulted in over 60 deaths .

in another incident , counterfeit heparin imported from china in 2008 resulted in at least 80 deaths in the united states , and contaminated products in at least 10 other countries' drug supplies .

beyond preventing public health crises , congress has a strong interest in ensuring that products consumed by americans work as intended and are truthfully labeled .

the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act of 1938 ( fd&c act or the act ) promotes national public health by preventing fraudulent activity with respect to food , drugs , and an array of other public health products .

the fd&c act and its implementing regulations contain standards to protect and promote public health , including requirements for prescription drug approval and food safety .

providing an overview of the act's enforcement , this report discusses the act's civil and criminal provisions and enforcement mechanisms .

the fd&c act regulates most foods , food additives , color additives , dietary supplements , prescription and non - prescription drugs , medical devices , cosmetics , and tobacco products for safety .

congress enacted the fd&c act in 1938 , acting pursuant to its constitutional authority to regulate interstate commerce .

the act's primary purpose is to "safeguard" and "protect" consumers from "dangerous products" affecting public health and safety by regulating covered articles from the "moment of their introduction into interstate commerce all the way to the moment of their delivery to the ultimate consumer. .

the fd&c act is enforced through a variety of measures such as formal and informal administrative actions , criminal and civil penalties , injunctions , recalls , and / or seizures of fd&c act - covered goods .

though the fd&c act has been "substantially amended since 1938," the act "still retains its basic structure. .

the "heart of the enforcement provisions of the" fd&c act is section 301 , which enumerates specific prohibited acts .

the fd&c act prohibitions have been described as "a catalogue of definitions elaborating two basic concepts: 'adulteration' and 'misbranding.' .

section 301 generally makes it illegal to distribute directly or indirectly a covered product in interstate commerce that is "adulterated" or "misbranded. .

the fd&c act "ascrib[es] the labels 'adulterated' or 'misbranded' to products whose composition , production or labeling fails" to meet the act's substantive requirements .

for example , the fd&c act deems a "food" adulterated if it has been held under "insanitary conditions," and a "drug" misbranded if its label does not contain the "name and place of business of the manufacturer , packer , or distributor. .

the language of the fd&c act is "purposefully broad," providing the executive branch significant discretion over implementing rules and guidelines .

table 1 notes fd&c act sections that identify when a particular product can be deemed "adulterated" or "misbranded. .

this section answers several basic and overarching questions about the act's enforcement .

enforcement actions for fd&c act violations can be civil or criminal in nature .

absent doj involvement , fda has several administrative tools for enforcing the act , including warning and untitled letters , import alerts , recalls , debarments , and civil money penalties .

fda's other civil enforcement actions , including injunctions and seizures , require doj assistance .

in addition to civil enforcement mechanisms , the fd&c act also subjects individuals to criminal penalties , including fines and imprisonment , for violating certain provisions of the act .

criminal prosecutions under the fd&c act are rare , with one commentator finding that "only a miniscule fraction of 1 per cent of the [fda's] inspections will result in criminal prosecution," and "extremely technical infractions" of the act are very unlikely to result in criminal punishment .

according to fda's enforcement manual , the agency usually affords individuals and firms an opportunity to comply voluntarily prior to initiating a criminal prosecution , as long as "a violative situation does not present a danger to health or does not constitute intentional , gross or flagrant violations. .

although criminal prosecutions are rare under the act , the threat of criminal penalties may create incentives to comply .

whereas economic penalties resulting from the civil enforcement tools "might ... be seen as merely an extra cost of business" for an entity regulated under the fd&c act , criminal penalties potentially threaten the liberty of individuals such as the "factory manager , the corporate chief executive , or the researcher. .

fda's office of criminal investigations ( oci ) is the primary entity that investigates suspected criminal violations of the fd&c act and related laws .

if oci finds prosecution to be appropriate , fda may give the alleged violator notice and an opportunity to present his "views ... with regard to such contemplated proceeding" pursuant to section 305 .

although the supreme court has held that hearings are not required , fda generally provides hearings absent a regulatory bar .

if prosecution is appropriate , oci makes a recommendation to doj , which has authority to prosecute fd&c act violations .

doj , including the local u.s. attorney's office , then reviews fda's recommendation and , if warranted , institutes criminal proceedings against the alleged violator .

while doj has discretion to reject fda's recommendation , doj will typically "adhere to the recommendations of the fda" and "act , as closely as possible , in partnership with attorneys from the fda. .

under the fd&c act , criminal convictions generally require proof of three elements .

first , the government must prove that the article , which the statutory violation concerns , is either a "food," "drug," "device," "tobacco," or "cosmetic. .

second , the article at issue generally must be "adulterated" or "misbranded. .

third , the article at issue must have been introduced into interstate commerce .

importantly , contrary to the typical requirement of american criminal law , fd&c act criminal provisions do not include a mens rea or "guilty mind" requirement .

instead , the standard for criminal liability under the fd&c act is strict liability , such that a defendant can be held criminally liable without proof of knowledge of the event or intention to perform the act that results in a violation .

two supreme court cases established this principle .

in united states v. dotterweich , justice frankfurter , writing for a five - member majority , explained that the fd&c act "dispenses with the conventional requirement for criminal conduct awareness of some wrongdoing " and that criminal accountability extends to all who have "a responsible share in the furtherance of the transaction which the statute outlaws. .

the court reasoned that the strict liability standard was necessary because "[i]n the interest of the larger good [the act placed] the burden of acting at hazard upon a person otherwise innocent but standing in responsible relation to a public danger. .

over thirty years later , in united states v. park , the supreme court reaffirmed dotterweich .

in articulating what is known as the "responsible corporate officer" or " park " doctrine , the court held that a showing of criminal liability under the fd&c act did not require an "awareness of some wrongdoing" by the defendant , but instead merely required the defendant to be in a "position in [a] corporation" in which he had "responsibility and authority either to prevent in the first instance , or promptly to correct , the violation complained of , and that he failed to do so. .

in so holding , the court noted that while the strict liability standard imposed by the fd&c act is "beyond question demanding" the standard is "no more stringent" than what should be expected of "those who voluntarily assume positions of authority in business enterprises whose services and products affect the health and well - being of the public that supports them. .

while the lack of a mens rea element in fd&c act criminal cases could theoretically allow fda and doj to "bring a criminal action ... in virtually every serious case" of an fd&c act violation , two defenses may diminish the potential reach of the act's criminal sanctions .

first , an individual accused of an fd&c act crime could raise the affirmative defense of "impossibility. .

the "impossibility defense" is available to a corporate officer who can introduce evidence that "he exercised extraordinary care , but was nevertheless unable to prevent violations of [the fd&c act]. .

upon such a showing , the burden of proof then shifts to the government to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the officer was not actually powerless to prevent or correct the violation .

second , under the "guaranty clause" contained in section 303 ( c ) of the fd&c act , a person who in "good faith" merely receives and later delivers an illegal article cannot be subjected to criminal penalties under the act .

likewise , a person who introduced a misbranded or adulterated product into commerce is also exempt under section 303 ( c ) if that person received the article in "good faith" and has obtained a written guaranty that the product does not violate the act .

under the guaranty clause , pharmacists who , in good faith , distributed misbranded or adulterated drugs from a drug manufacturer or distributor have escaped criminal liability .

under section 303 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the fd&c act , criminal violations of the act are generally treated as misdemeanors , meaning they are punishable by a fine or imprisonment of a year or less .

nonetheless , fd&c act violations may constitute a felony if the violation is a second offense or is done with the "intent to defraud or mislead. .

for a defendant to act with an "intent to defraud or mislead" under the act , the defendant must "design[] his conduct to avoid the regulatory scrutiny of the fda," meaning that , for a defendant to incur a felony conviction under the act , he must have intended to defraud or mislead not only the product's ultimate consumers but also state and federal government enforcement agencies .

section 303 ( a ) establishes default criminal penalties for individuals who commit misdemeanors or felonies under the fd&c act .

the act provides for a $1,000 fine , imprisonment of up to one year , or both for simple violations of the act .

the act further provides for fines of up to $10,000 , imprisonment for up to three years , or both for subsequent convictions or convictions demonstrating intent to defraud or mislead .

however , under the sentencing reform act of 1984 , as amended by the criminal fines improvement act of 1987 , all criminal fines in the united states code , including fd&c act fines , are subject to modification to achieve certain uniform levels .

consequently , for fd&c act misdemeanors not resulting in death , the current maximum fine for an individual is $100,000 , while for fd&c act misdemeanors resulting in death or for fd&c act felonies , the current maximum fine for an individual is $250,000 .

likewise , for fd&c act misdemeanors , the current maximum fine for an organization is $200,000 while , for fd&c act misdemeanors resulting in death or for fd&c act felonies , the current maximum fine for an organization is $500,000 .

pursuant to the u.s .

sentencing guidelines , defendants convicted of violating the act receive a base offense level of six , resulting in a guideline recommendation of a final sentence of zero to eighteen months in prison , depending on the defendant's criminal history .

if the defendant had previously violated the act or if the offense involved fraud , the sentence could increase considerably .

the sentencing guidelines also provide that an "upward departure" "may be warranted" if the offense "created a substantial risk of bodily injury or death ; or bodily injury , death , extreme psychological injury , property damage , or monetary loss resulted from the offense. .

