this report is one of two companion reports prepared by pennsylvania state university , with contributions from seth blumsack and thomas murphy .

their work was performed under contract to crs , and was part of a multiyear crs project to examine various aspects of u.s. energy policy .

[author name scrubbed] , assistant director of the resources , science , and industry division , served as crs project coordinator .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in energy policy , served as crs reviewer and editor of this report .

the second report is crs report r43635 , shale energy technology assessment: current and emerging water practices .

this report will not be updated .

this report was funded , in part , by a grant from the joyce foundation .

with shale gas resources in north america and around the world continuing to be identified , evaluated , and developed , there is an increased expectation by many in academia , government , and industry that there is now resource abundance .

the united states has led this trend , and the overall u.s. natural gas supply likely will expand in the near term and beyond .

the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) , in the annual energy outlook 2014 projections , reflects this advancing pace in natural gas production .

the united states is facing increasing industrial and power demands for natural gas , as well as possibly becoming a net liquefied natural gas ( lng ) exporter and overall gas exporting country by 2016 and 2018 , respectively .

at the same time , figure 1 illustrates how prices for the commodity are continuing to trend near historical lows .

current expectations are for those levels to continue in the near and mid - terms .

while low prices are generally good news for consumers in the industrial , power generation , commercial , and residential sectors , they do cause a number of closely related technical and market impacts worth further research and analysis .

recent changes in thermal coal use in the united states , illustrated in figure 2 , impacted by switching from coal to natural gas , are substantial and will likely continue to trend downward due to overall market influences of natural gas prices relative to coal , along with current and pending federal and state policy .

coal - to - gas switching for u.s. power generation doubled in 2012 from the same period in 2011 , with gas use for power generation doubling from 3 billion cubic feet per day to 6 billion cubic feet per day .

although coal export to asian and european electric power generation operators has risen , there has still been a net negative impact on the mining sector in several regions of the united states .

rail capacity that was used to move coal to market is now underutilized .

on the other hand , some of the rail capacity is now being redeployed to move crude oil from shale deposits in the upper western united states to eastern refineries where demand for domestic west texas intermediate ( wti ) priced crude has increased relative to higher - cost brent priced imports from other global locations .

pipeline capacity to accomplish the same goal has regulatory , right - of - way , and financial challenges , and is viewed by some as insufficiently responsive to the rapid increase in development .

it is possible that rail will one day move natural gas as well .

the addition of a large number of u.s. and international oil and natural gas companies entering shale gas developments during the last six years , with larger capital budgets and longer investment horizons , has advanced both private and public research on natural gas extraction technologies .

the presence of these companies also may increase the likelihood of other countries' developing shale formations .

field service companies are also integral in both these respects .

government agencies have traditionally conducted or funded related energy research and currently are pursuing multiagency initiatives , although federal budgetary constraints may limit the extent of these activities going forward .

a historical shift is taking place in how fossil energy is being sourced and utilized when compared to energy development and consumption patterns of the past four decades .

conventional thinking is that north america will now make very significant gains in the goal of achieving energy independence due to both reduced energy use through efficiencies , i.e .

increases in the corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) standards , among other things , and rapidly increasing supply .

the technologies and techniques being applied to develop new sources of natural gas from shale are advancing quickly as the science is evolving and the overall size of the resource is better understood .

as an example , early estimates of the marcellus shale resource in the appalachian basin proved somewhat conservative , and have been revised upward by the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) from the original 2 trillion cubic feet to the current projection of 84 trillion cubic feet of undiscovered technically recoverable gas .

figure 3 illustrates recent shale - gas resources estimates .

some third - party firms and academics now indicate that this shale alone could yield upwards of four times the most recent previous estimates , based on a better understanding of the geology , much of which is now based on actual drilling and the resultant data coming from those wells .

in the case of pennsylvania , more than 6,000 wells had been drilled into the marcellus as of november 2012 , and in 2012 , pennsylvania produced more than 2 trillion cubic feet of natural gas ( see figure 4 ) .

similar data from west virginia's shale wells to date indicate a similar trend .

in that multistate region , gas volumes are increasing even as the number of drilling rigs operating shows a slowly decreasing year - by - year trend .

figure 5 shows that a majority of the natural gas produced in the united states comes from a small group of states , led by texas .

however , it is important to note that pennsylvania's rise into the top four producing states is a relatively recent occurrence .

prior to 2011 , pennsylvania was producing less than 1 trillion cubic feet per year , and before then it produced less than 0.2 trillion cubic on average since the 1980s .

pennsylvania's rise in production is significant for overall u.s. supplies , but more importantly because of its proximity to the largest u.s. markets for natural gas , the northeast .

as the marketplace better realizes the share that shale gas production is able to add to the total volume of u.s. production , and anticipates the potential drilling successes of energy companies developing this resource , short - and mid - term prices are being held to the lower end of the historical range .

this affects companies' selection of regions and locations to drill as they seek the lowest - cost wells to develop .

figure 8 illustrates the variation in break - even prices required in different shale - gas regions .

break - even prices are a function of both geography and the composition of produced hydrocarbons ( associated natural gas liquids generally reduce the break - even price by around 50% , compared to dry gas deposits , since those liquids have a high market value aside from the saleable gas ) .

likewise , break - even prices can potentially influence the number of wells companies choose to drill in a low commodity price environment , compelling them to promote greater use of natural gas ( i.e. , new transportation fueling options , increased onshore production of polyethylene , redevelopment of u.s. - based nitrogen fertilizer production , etc .

 ) , and prodding them to seek higher - priced markets in which to sell their final product .

additionally , the time for a well to pay back its cost is an important factor in development .

shale wells , which usually have a higher probability of success of finding natural gas than traditional wells in traditional formations , have a short payback time , usually within two years but sometimes within months , depending upon production rates , market prices , and other factors .

with a growing awareness of both the size of the natural gas resource likely to be sourced from shale and the rate at which it is being produced , interest in domestic use is increasing in all sectors .

the use of gas - fired residential heating in both new construction and retrofitted homes near existing gas distribution lines is at near record pace in some regions , particularly in the northeastern united states , where fuel oil has the largest use nationwide .

 ( see figure 10 . ) .

increases are also occurring in densely populated areas such as new york city , through a project to collectively save more than $250 million annually , and largely reduce the use of certain heavy fuel oils for heating high - rise apartments in many sections of the city .

new york city has been phasing out certain heavy fuel oils since 2011 because of health effects from emissions .

beyond the economic value of the transition from fuel oil to gas , there are environmental impacts in the form of reduced air emissions .

as illustrated in figure 11 , a comparison of prices for natural gas and fuel oil for domestic home use shows a marked divergence .

utility companies are increasing construction of new distribution lines for all types of customers due to the predicted favorable pricing of natural gas in the mid term based on increased supply .

this includes the extension of existing lines , which can cost up to $1 million per mile in some populated locations .

there is also a continued modernization of existing lines due to ongoing replacement of the aging distribution infrastructure , greater regulatory scrutiny , and the demand for increased volumes of gas .

additionally , the locations of shale gas deposits tend to differ from traditional natural gas production areas , causing infrastructure to be reconfigured .

awareness is growing at the state and local government levels that areas not served by natural gas are becoming disadvantaged when competing for new industry to locate in their jurisdictions .

this is leading to new efforts to assess the cost and feasibility of new distribution infrastructure in many regions of the united states as a means of enhancing economic development .

demand for gas trunk lines installed to a new gas - consuming industry site has the spin - off effect of making it advantageous to develop additional distribution to areas in between .

due to the geographical range of many shale plays in the united states , some existing energy - intensive industries are seeking to source shale gas directly under the footprint of their own facilities or directly from nearby producers in an effort to eliminate gas transmission costs .

natural gas development and production from shale formations is relatively new , but has transformed the world of energy .

many observers , including u.s. government officials , have only recently recognized the tremendous resource size and the benefits that may accrue from developing these resources , as well as the potential risks .

industry has improved its efficiency in extracting these resources , contributing to the sense that the world has moved from resource scarcity to resource abundance in hydrocarbons .

the change in u.s. natural gas supplies has raised the prospect of energy independence and possibly the united states becoming an exporter .

this reversal of fortune of supply has sparked the interest of many other countries to emulate the u.s. success .

however , no other country has been able to achieve the same level of transformation as has the united states .

this is primarily because of the industry structure in the united states and mineral rights laws and regulations .

