social security's minimum benefit provision , the special minimum primary insurance amount ( pia ) , is an alternative benefit formula that increases benefits paid to workers who had low earnings for many years and to their dependents and survivors .

unlike the standard social security benefit formula , which is based on a worker's average lifetime earnings , the special minimum pia is based on the number of years a person has worked .

beneficiaries receive the higher of the two amounts .

because of the way regular social security benefits and the special minimum pia are computed , the number of recipients who qualify for the special minimum pia has been decreasing .

in 2017 , about 39,347 ( or about 0.6% ) of the 62 million social security recipients qualified for the minimum benefit .

this report explains how the special minimum pia functions under current law and provides some historical background on minimum benefit provisions in the social security act .

it then presents arguments for and against expanding the special minimum pia , discusses elements to be considered in proposals for change , and describes some specific options for increasing benefits paid to people with low earnings or low income .

to be eligible for a social security retired - worker benefit , a worker generally needs 40 earnings credits ( also called quarters of coverage ) .

a worker may earn up to four earnings credits per calendar year .

in 2018 , a worker earns one credit for each $1,320 of covered earnings ( i.e. , earnings subject to social security payroll taxes ) , up to a maximum of four credits for covered earnings of $5,280 or more .

the primary insurance amoun t ( pia ) is the benefit a worker would receive if the worker elects to begin receiving retirement benefits at the worker's full retirement age ( fra , sometimes called the normal retirement age ) .

the pia is based on a summary measure of the worker's lifetime earnings , called the average indexed monthly earnings ( aime ) .

to compute a worker's aime , the worker's earnings are converted into current - dollar terms by indexing each year of earnings to historical wage growth , and the sum of the highest 35 years of indexed earnings are divided by 35 to determine career - average annual earnings .

this amount is then divided by 12 , to get a monthly amount .

if a worker has fewer than 35 years of covered earnings ( because of time out of the labor force for family caregiving , spells of unemployment , or other reasons ) , years of no earnings are entered as zeros .

next , the standard social security benefit formula is applied to the worker's aime to get the pia .

two dollar thresholds , known as bend points , are used to divide the worker's aime into three segments ; in 2018 , the two bend points are $895 and $5,397 .

three conversion factors — 90% , 32% , and 15% — are applied to the three different segments of the worker's aime to compute the basic monthly benefit ; 90% is applied to the $0-$895 segment , 32% to the $895-$5,397 segment , and 15% to the over - $5,397 segment .

because the lower conversion factors apply to higher earnings segment , the benefit formula is progressive .

that is , it replaces a higher percentage of the pre - retirement earnings of workers with low career - average earnings than for workers with high career - average earnings .

social security also provides auxiliary benefits to eligible family members of a retired , disabled , or deceased worker .

benefits payable to family members are equal to a specified percentage of the worker's pia .

for example , a spouse's benefit is equal to 50% of the worker's pia and a widow ( er ) 's benefit is equal to 100% of the deceased worker's pia .

unlike the regular benefit , which is based on lifetime earnings , the special minimum pia benefit is based on the number of years spent in covered employment .

beneficiaries receive the higher of the two amounts .

because the standard pia uses wage indexing and the special minimum pia is indexed to prices , which tend to increase at a slower rate than wages , regular benefits are almost always greater than the special minimum benefit .

thus , the impact of the special minimum pia has diminished ; the number of beneficiaries affected by the special minimum pia and size of the additional benefit from the special minimum pia have both declined .

the number of families with benefit entitlements receiving the special minimum pia has been decreasing since 1988 .

after 1999 , the provision has benefited only newly entitled beneficiaries whose regular benefit is subject to the wep ( see figure 2 ) .

the difference between the regular pia and the special minimum pia for a low earner with 30 years of coverage has declined , with an estimated difference of $4 for a worker becoming eligible in 2010 ( see figure 3 ) .

the social security administration projects that the provision will have no effect on people turning 62 years old in 2019 or later .

the estimates of the impact the special minimum pia has on monthly benefits show that in june 2013 , the special minimum pia increased average benefits of those affected by the provision by an average of $46 per month ( see table 2 ) .

that is , the monthly benefit due to the special minimum pia was , on average , $46 larger than the standard benefit those beneficiaries were entitled to .

only about 35,000 of the 54 million social security beneficiaries received a higher monthly benefit from the special minimum pia in june 2013 , though there were about 58,419 people who were technically receiving the special minimum pia in the same year .

the discrepancy is because many of these beneficiaries were dually entitled workers whose total benefits were not affected by the provision .

dually entitled beneficiaries get benefits based on their own work record or their spouse's , whichever is larger ; thus , even though the special minimum pia might increase the benefit based on the beneficiary's own work record , if their spousal benefit is even higher , they receive the spousal benefit and the special minimum pia does not affect their monthly benefit amount .

as table 2 shows , almost 73% of the affected beneficiaries were workers and about 19% were widow ( er ) s. spouses and child beneficiaries accounted for the remainder .

most retired workers who qualify for the special minimum pia are women .

there are two major considerations in proposals for a minimum benefit .

first , who should receive the minimum benefit , and second , how much should they receive ? .

although there have been numerous proposals for minimum benefits , most fall into three categories: 1. a benefit based on the number of years of work , similar to the current special minimum pia , 2. an enhancement of benefits via a percentage increase in the regular benefit , or 3. an increase to benefits by a fixed - dollar amount .

ssa's office of the chief actuary , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , and ssa's office of retirement policy have all published detailed analyses of the effects of various minimum benefit options .

instead of implementing a minimum benefit , low - wage workers could be assisted through other approaches , including changes to the standard benefit formula , other changes to the social security benefit rules , or a separate program .

the standard social security benefit could be made more progressive .

such a change could be designed to redistribute benefits to people with lower lifetime earnings in a way similar to the way that a standard , wage - indexed minimum benefit would .

some proposals would address poverty among long - term , low - wage workers and their dependents by targeting benefit increases to single or divorced women or to people who live into advanced old age .

for example , the length - of - marriage requirement for divorced women could be lowered from 10 years to 5 or 7 years .

caregiver credits or "drop - out" years could be entered into the social security benefit formula for workers who take career breaks to care for a child or other relative .

another proposal would increase the social security survivor's benefit to 75% of the couple's combined benefit ; some versions of this proposal would offset costs by lowering the spousal benefit received while both members of the couple are alive .

proposals to increase benefits for aged women are generally motivated by equity and adequacy considerations rather than financing considerations and may add to system costs .

a goal of increasing federal support for poor aged and disabled people could be implemented outside of social security .

for example , increases in federal ssi spending would help many of the same beneficiaries affected by a minimum social security benefit , but people with little or no work history would also benefit .

a new program could also be established .

for example , the senior income guarantee ( sig ) would provide benefits at 75% of the poverty threshold for people at or above the full retirement age who have 10 years in covered work and 40 years of residence in the united states and lesser benefits for those with shorter work histories or fewer years of residence .

benefit and eligibility standards would be less strict than for ssi ; for example , asset tests would be more generous .

