state and federal governments have long regulated safety practices at chemical facilities because of the potential harm that a large , sudden release of hazardous chemicals could cause to nearby people .

even before the terrorist attacks of 2001 , congressional policy makers expressed concern about the security vulnerabilities of these facilities , which historically engaged in security activities on a voluntary basis .

after the 2001 attacks and the decision by several states to begin regulating security at chemical facilities , congress again considered requiring federal security regulations to mitigate risks .

in 2006 , the 109 th congress passed legislation providing the department of homeland security ( dhs ) with statutory authority to regulate chemical facilities for security purposes .

the statute explicitly identified some dhs authorities and left other aspects to the discretion of the secretary of homeland security .

the secretary exercised that discretion when implementing this authority through regulations called the chemical facility anti - terrorism standards ( cfats ) .

the statute contains a "sunset provision" that causes the statutory authority to expire .

subsequent congresses have extended the termination date of this authority to october 4 , 2014 .

advocacy groups , industry stakeholders , and policy makers have called for congress to reauthorize this authority , though they disagree about the preferred approach .

members of congress have introduced bills taking several different approaches to the issue of reauthorization in the current and previous congresses .

congress may extend the existing authority , revise the existing authority to resolve potentially contentious issues , or allow the authority to lapse .

in the 113 th congress , members have introduced several proposals in the house and the senate that would extend the statutory termination date , modify the underlying statutory authority , or both .

the house of representatives passed h.r .

4007 , the chemical facility anti - terrorism standards program authorization and accountability act of 2014 , on july 8 , 2014 .

the house committee on homeland security had amended the bill as forwarded by its subcommittee on cybersecurity , infrastructure protection , and security technologies and reported it to the house of representatives with a favorable recommendation , as amended .

this report compares h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , to the existing statutory authority .

it provides a brief overview of h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house ; identifies select differences for comparison ; analyzes each section of h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , in the context of the existing statutory authority ; and discusses several policy issues raised by the obama administration in the context of chemical facility security legislation .

h.r .

4007 has both similarities and differences with the existing statute .

h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , incorporates much of the language in the existing statutory authority .

consequently , its authorities would generally encompass the existing authorities , and its implementation by dhs may retain a similar regulatory structure .

indeed , the bill expressly would allow dhs to use existing cfats regulations to implement its provisions .

in contrast with the existing statute , h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , would amend the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 , as amended ) .

it would create a new title , title xxi , called chemical facility anti - terrorism standards .

another key difference between h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , and the existing statute is the absence of a statutory termination date .

the statutory authority would be permanent , though h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , explicitly authorizes appropriations for three years .

h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , contains additional legislative language that would add to the secretary's responsibilities .

for example , h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , would require certain outreach to chemical facilities , assistance to regulated small chemical facilities , and reporting by dhs and the government accountability office ( gao ) on program performance .

finally , h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , would modify the discretion of the secretary of homeland security in various areas .

the secretary's existing discretion to establish criteria for risk - based performance standards would be maintained .

h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , would limit the secretary's discretion when it expressly requires dhs to accept alternative security programs with respect to site security plans , mandate specific approaches with respect to personnel surety , and restrict the secretary's ability to require covered chemical facilities to submit information to dhs about personnel at the facility .

finally , h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , would expand the discretion of the secretary by no longer limiting application of the statutory authority to high - risk facilities .

some experts might argue that modifying the secretary's discretion might lead to a less efficient regulatory program .

other experts might argue that the secretary's discretion might need further modification in order to reflect congressional intent .

table 1 below highlights selected differences between h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , and p.l .

109-295 , section 550 , as amended .

for a fuller comparison of legislative text , see table a - 1 in the appendix .

this section of the report discusses each section of h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , and provides policy analysis regarding selected provisions in the context of the existing statutory authority and cfats regulation .

for a direct comparison of the bill language and the existing statutory authority , see table a - 1 .

h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , contains three sections .

executive branch agencies have raised several issues with regard to chemical facility security in testimony or in official reports .

h.r .

4007 , as passed the house , addresses some of these issues directly .

this section does not attempt to discuss these issues in the broader policy context , but instead compares them with action taken in the context of h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house .

for more information on these issues , including discussion of various policy alternatives , see crs report r42918 , chemical facility security: issues and options for the 113 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

previous debate on chemical facility security has included whether to mandate the adoption or consideration of changes in chemical processes to reduce the potential consequences following a successful attack on a chemical facility .

suggestions for such changes have included reducing the amount of chemical stored onsite and changing the chemicals used .

in previous congressional debate , these approaches have been referred to as inherently safer technologies or methods to reduce the consequences of a terrorist attack .

in 2010 , the obama administration expressed its position on the use of inherently safer technologies to enhance security at high - risk chemical facilities in some circumstances .

it established a series of principles directing its policy: the administration supports consistency of inherently safer technology approaches for facilities regardless of sector .

the administration believes that all high - risk chemical facilities , tiers 1-4 , should assess [inherently safer technology] methods and report the assessment in the facilities' site security plans .

further , the appropriate regulatory entity should have the authority to require facilities posing the highest degree of risk ( tiers 1 and 2 ) to implement inherently safer technology methods if such methods demonstrably enhance overall security , are determined to be feasible , and , in the case of water sector facilities , consider public health and environmental requirements .

the administration believes that the appropriate regulatory entity should review the inherently safer technology assessment contained in the site security plan for all tier 3 and tier 4 facilities .

the entity should be authorized to provide recommendations on implementing inherently safer technologies , but it would not have the authority to require facilities to implement the inherently safer technology methods .

the administration believes that flexibility and staggered implementation would be required in implementing this new inherently safer technology policy .

h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , maintains the existing statutory language that prohibits the secretary from disapproving a site security plan based on the presence or absence of a particular security measure .

the dhs has interpreted this statutory language as prohibiting it from requiring consideration or implementation of inherently safer technologies .

while the obama administration fy2015 budget request seeks an extension of the statutory authority until october 4 , 2015 , the obama administration has also supported enacting a longer or permanent statutory authority .

in response to executive order 13650 , improving chemical facility safety and security , the administration established a multi - agency chemical facility safety and security working group co - chaired by the department of homeland security , environmental protection agency , and department of labor .

in may 2014 , the working group issued a report to the president that called for congressional action to provide permanent statutory authorization for the cfats program .

h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , lacks a statutory termination date and would provide a permanent statutory authorization .

it also provides a three - year authorization of appropriations through fy2017 .

the report of the chemical facility safety and security working group established in response to executive order 13650 also called for congressional action to change the cfats enforcement process .

the report notes that the current statute requires a multi - step enforcement process before dhs can fine or shut down a facility for noncompliance .

it asserts that the ability to immediately issue orders to assess civil penalties or to close down a facility for violations , without having to first issue an order calling for correction of the violation , is an important ability that dhs lacks .

the report states , "congress should provide this streamlined enforcement authority so that , in circumstances in which a facility's noncompliance presents an immediate threat , dhs can act quickly to safeguard the facility and protect the public from potential acts of terrorism. .

h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , would retain the existing statute's general enforcement structure , which requires that the secretary provide the facility owner or operator with written notification , an opportunity for consultation , and issue an order to comply by a specific date before issuing an order for civil penalty or to cease operation .

since 2008 , dhs and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) have called for additional authorities to regulate water and wastewater treatment facilities: the department of homeland security and the environmental protection agency believe that there is an important gap in the framework for regulating the security of chemicals at water and wastewater treatment facilities in the united states .

the authority for regulating the chemical industry purposefully excludes from its coverage water and wastewater treatment facilities .

we need to work with the congress to close this gap in the chemical security authorities in order to secure chemicals of interest at these facilities and protect the communities they serve .

water and wastewater treatment facilities that are determined to be high - risk due to the presence of chemicals of interest should be regulated for security in a manner that is consistent with the cfats risk and performance - based framework while also recognizing the unique public health and environmental requirements and responsibilities of such facilities .

in 2010 , epa testified that the obama administration believes that epa should be the lead agency for chemical security for both drinking water and wastewater systems , with dhs supporting epa's efforts .

in contrast , the may 2014 report to the president by the chemical facility safety and security working group called for action from congress to remove the exemption for water and wastewater treatment facilities .

according to the report , dhs could then regulate security at these facilities in collaboration with the epa .

h.r .

4007 , as passed by the house , would exempt water and wastewater treatment facilities from the definition of covered chemical facility .

according to the house report accompanying h.r .

4007 , as passed the house: the committee did not alter these exemptions from sec .

550 .

first required by congress to do vulnerability assessments and emergency response plans in 2002 under the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act ( safe drinking water act sections 1433 – 1435 ) , drinking water facilities are covered under a mature regulatory scheme that is working well .

moreover , according to the dhs inspector general , the united states contains approximately 52,000 community water systems and 16,500 wastewater treatment facilities .

thus , although some have called for a removal of these exemptions , the committee believes that to expand the cfats mission to cover an additional 70,000 facilities — at precisely the time when the program is working to successfully manage its basic responsibilities — would be misguided .

therefore , dhs would not have authority to regulate public water systems , as defined by section 1401 of the safe drinking water act , and wastewater treatment works , as defined in section 212 of the federal water pollution control act , as covered chemical facilities .

