specialty crops , defined as "fruits and vegetables , tree nuts , dried fruits , and horticulture and nursery crops ( including floriculture ) ," comprise a major part of u.s. agriculture .

in 2012 , the value of farm - level specialty crop production totaled nearly $60 billion , representing about one - fourth of the value of u.s. crop production ( table 1 ) .

despite their relatively large share of crop receipts , specialty crops occupy only about 3% of u.s. harvested cropland acres .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) reports that retail sales of fresh and processed fruits and vegetables for at - home consumption total nearly $100 billion annually .

exports of u.s. specialty crops totaled about $14 billion in 2013 , or about 10% of total u.s. agricultural exports .

in 2012 , about 244,000 farming operations grew more than 350 types of fruit , vegetable , tree nut , flower , nursery , and other horticultural crops in addition to the major bulk commodity crops .

specialty crop production is focused in california , florida , washington , oregon , north dakota and michigan ; however , every state has some commercial specialty crop production within its borders .

usda data illustrate the nationwide distribution of areas producing vegetables ( figure 1 ) , fruits and tree nuts ( figure 2 ) , and floriculture crops ( figure 3 ) .

a majority of specialty crop producers are considered specialized , which means that they receive at least half of their gross value of production from the sale of vegetables , fruits , tree nuts or other horticultural crops .

these specialized farms rely mostly on specialty crop production for their farm income , even though they may be also engaged in other forms of agricultural production .

usda reports that about 50% of all vegetable growers and 80% of fruit and tree nut growers are considered specialized ; however , specialized farms account for 90-95% of the total value of u.s. specialty crop production .

conditions may vary considerably by major production region .

specialized fruit and vegetable farms are more concentrated in the western united states , including california , washington , and oregon .

some farms also participate in the major commodity support programs , but these tend to be more concentrated in the midwestern states .

for some specialty crop producers , obtaining organic certification to sell their products as "organic" represents a viable business strategy .

organic agriculture accounts for a small but growing share of the u.s. farming sector .

usda reports that farm sales from organic fruit and vegetable operations total more than $1 billion annually , or about 4% of all farm - level fruit and vegetable sales in the united states .

 ( organic production includes certified organic fruits , vegetables , and tree nuts , as well as meat and dairy foods , and organic commodity crops. ) .

support for u.s. specialty crops differs in important ways from the types of traditional farm bill support for u.s. commodity crops , such as corn , soybeans , grains and other farm commodities .

farm bill programs supporting commodity crop production have been in place since the 1930s , and were intended to address depression - era market conditions , address soil erosion and related production concerns associated with the dust bowl , and implement farmland conservation reforms .

in contrast , farm bill support for specialty crops is relatively recent .

during the past few farm bill debates , specialty crop producers argued that their sectors should occupy a larger role in farm bill policy discussions and that some of the benefits supporting major commodity producers should be extended to specialty crop and organic producers , in order to create "a broader , more equitable farm bill. .

several programs addressing specialty crops specifically were initially established in the specialty crops competitiveness act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-465 ) , which was enacted outside a farm bill year .

many of the programs in the 2004 act were further expanded and reauthorized in the 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) .

the 2008 farm bill was also the first to include a separate farm bill title dedicated to specialty crops and organic agriculture ( title x ) .

some programs had also been established in the 2002 farm bill ( farm security and rural investment act of 2002 , p.l .

107-171 ) , often as pilot initiatives that have since become established programs .

the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 , p.l .

113-79 ) reauthorized and expanded many of the existing farm bill provisions supporting farming operations in the specialty crop and certified organic sectors .

although programs specifically supporting specialty crops are now part of the omnibus farm bill , the scope of that support differs from that traditionally employed to support commodity crops .

specifically , individual specialty crop producers do not directly benefit from the same types of federal commodity price and income support programs that benefit producers of commodity crops .

specialty crops are ineligible for these types of direct benefits .

unlike programs supporting the production of specific commodity crops , farm bill programs tailored to support specialty crops provide benefits that accrue to all specialty crop producers and generally do not accrue to individual produce growers directly .

these types of programs include marketing and promotion programs , crop insurance and disaster assistance , plant pest and disease protections , trade assistance , and research and extension services , among other types of indirect support .

the industry also benefits from fruit and vegetable purchases under various food and nutrition programs .

in addition , specialty crop producers are also eligible for other types of usda support that is generally available to all u.s. crop and livestock producers .

despite the wide range of program support for specialty crops , federal program spending for specialty crops remains a small share of total farm bill spending and remains lower than spending for commodity crops , even when considering both mandatory and discretionary funding levels .

precise estimates of total mandatory and discretionary sources of funding are difficult to measure , given that support for specialty crops is spread across a wide range of usda programs and not within a price and income support program such as that available for most of the major commodity crops .

following the 2008 farm bill , an average of approximately $676 million annually ( fy2008-fy2012 ) in mandatory program funding was authorized to be spent on specialty crops and organic agriculture , mostly through government purchases of fruits and vegetables for domestic nutrition and feeding programs ( table 2 ) .

the 2014 farm bill reauthorized many of the existing farm bill provisions and also increased spending for some programs supporting specialty crops .

total mandatory spending for specialty crops and organic agriculture is expected to be higher and average $773 million annually ( fy2014-fy2018 ) .

the 2014 farm bill also authorized another roughly $302 million in average annual appropriations across certain programs .

see also table 2 .

although the 2014 farm bill provided for an increase above current funding levels , total mandatory spending for specialty crops and organic agriculture will still account for a small share of estimated total farm bill spending and will remain well below spending levels for commodity crops .

mandatory spending for the major commodity crops is expected to average about $4.7 billion per year under the 2014 farm bill ( fy2014-fy2018 ) , mostly through direct price and income support .

this does not reflect additional higher spending for crop insurance .

the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 , p.l .

113-79 ) reauthorized and expanded many of the existing farm bill provisions supporting the specialty crop and certified organic sectors , and also provided for additional program funding in some cases .

many provisions in title x ( "horticulture" ) fall into the categories of marketing and promotion ; organic certification ; data and information collection ; pest and disease control ; food safety and quality standards ; and local foods .

title x also includes provisions benefitting certified organic agriculture producers such as usda's national organic program , certification cost sharing , development of crop insurance mechanisms for organic producers , and various data initiatives .

however , farm bill provisions supporting specialty crops and organic agriculture are not limited to the horticulture title , but are contained within several other titles of the farm bill including the trade , nutrition , research , rural development , crop insurance titles , conservation , and the miscellaneous titles ( see text box on next page ) .

table 3 at the end of this report provides a summary and side - by - side of selected provisions supporting specialty crop and certified organic producers in the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) , comparing the final enacted provisions with the house - passed ( h.r .

3102 ) and senate - passed ( s. 954 ) bills and prior law and / or policy .

among the key programs supporting specialty crop producers in title x are usda's specialty crop block grant program and its plant pest and disease prevention programs ; data collection and market new s compilations ; and also expanded support for usda's farmer's market and local food promotion program and related data collection efforts ; among other programs .

some key programs in title x supporting certified organic producers are: continued support for usda's national organic program ( nop ) ; organic production and market data initiatives ( odi ) ; and the national organic certification cost share program ( noccsp ) .

the 2014 farm bill also gives usda authority to consider an application for a research and promotion order ( or "checkoff" program ) for the organic sector .

title x also included other provisions that provide for specific exemptions from certain regulatory requirements under some laws , such as the federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act ( fifra ) and the endangered species act ( esa ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that mandatory spending for specialty crops and organic agriculture under title x would increase $338 million over the next five years ( fy2014-fy2018 ) .

increased funding for several key programs benefitting specialty crop producers in title x include the specialty crop block grant program , plant pest and disease programs , and programs supporting farmers' markets and local foods , among other programs .

provisions supporting the specialty crop and certified organic sectors are also contained within other titles of the farm bill .

several farm bill titles also include provisions that expand opportunities for local food systems and also beginning farmers and ranchers , which oftentimes include both specialty crop and certified organic producers .

similar to that for specialty crops , provisions supporting certified organic production are not limited to the horticulture title , but are contained within several other titles of the farm bill .

a number of programs benefitting specialty crop and organic production are contained in the farm bill's research title ( title vii ) .

these include research programs such as the specialty crop research initiative ( scri ) , the organic agriculture research and extension initiative ( orei ) , and the organic transitions program ( org ) under the integrated research , education , and extension competitive grants program .

the title also provides for an office of pest management policy as well as a specialty crops subcommittee to implement an emergency citrus disease research and extension program , specialty crops committee .

the bill also provides for continued support of usda's pollinator protection efforts , as an area of "high - priority research and extension. .

perhaps most importantly in terms of overall annual spending , the nutrition title ( title iv ) provides support for the specialty crop industry through a series of programs that provide for fruit and vegetable purchases under usda's domestic nutrition assistance programs .

provisions supporting specialty crop producers within the farm bill's nutrition title ( title iv ) include the fresh fruit and vegetable ( snack ) program and related pilot programs regarding procurement of unprocessed and also canned , frozen or dried fruits and nuts ; section 32 purchases for fruits and vegetables under the nutrition title ; senior farmers' market nutrition program ; and other expanded or new programs associated with the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) or other domestic feeding programs .

the 2014 farm bill also created the food insecurity nutrition incentive program to establish projects that incentivize snap participants to buy fruits and vegetables .

in the bill's trade title ( title iii ) , two programs — technical assistance for specialty crops ( tasc ) and the market access program ( map ) — support specialty crop and certified organic producers , as well as other u.s. crop and livestock producers .

the value - added producer grant program , in the bill's rural development title ( title vi ) , also supports specialty crop and organic producers , among other u.s. crop and livestock producers .

in the miscellaneous title of the 2014 farm bill , the noninsured crop assistance program ( nap ) was reauthorized , and included a provision to cover producers with fruit crop losses in 2012 in counties declared a disaster due to freeze or frost .

also , as part of the farm bill's supplemental disaster assistance programs ( title i ) , two programs were reauthorized — the tree assistance program ( tap ) and the emergency assistance for livestock , honey bees , and farm - raised fish program ( elap ) , which might provide benefit to some specialty crop producers .

the farm bill also provides for usda to continue to look into crop insurance products that might better benefit u.s. specialty crop and certified organic producers , as part of the 2014 farm bill's crop insurance and disaster assistance programs ( title xi ) .

a range of programs in the farm bill's conservation title ( title ii ) also support specialty crop and certified organic producers , along with all u.s. crop and livestock producers , such as the environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) , the conservation stewardship program ( csp ) , and the conservation reserve program ( crp ) .

in particular , eqip provides support for organic producers seeking to transition to organic , as part of the eqip organic initiative .

for more detailed information on some of the programs listed here , see crs report r42771 , fruits , vegetables , and other specialty crops: selected farm bill and federal programs , and also crs report r43332 , snap and related nutrition provisions of the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

see also the section titled "provisions for specialty crop producers" in crs report r43494 , crop insurance provisions in the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

programs described in this report supporting specialty crops and organic agriculture are administered by various usda agencies , including the agricultural marketing service ( ams ) , animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) , food and nutrition service ( fns ) , risk management agency ( rma ) , farm service agency ( fsa ) , national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) , agricultural research service ( ars ) , natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) , foreign agricultural service ( fas ) , and rural development ( rd ) .

aside from usda , other federal agencies play a role in the specialty crop industry .

these include agencies that oversee food safety requirements for fruits , vegetables , and other specialty crops , such as the food and drug administration ( fda ) and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , and agencies that oversee global trade , such as the department of commerce and the u.s. international trade commission , among others .

these programs are generally not under the jurisdiction of the house and senate agriculture committees and so are not part of the periodic omnibus farm bill , and therefore not covered in this report .

for more information on these programs , see crs report r42771 , fruits , vegetables , and other specialty crops: selected farm bill and federal programs .

