this report provides summary and analysis of h.r .

3964 , the sacramento - san joaquin valley emergency water delivery act , as passed by the house of representatives on february 5 , 2014 .

it contains an update of information contained in a crs report on a bill in the 112 th congress ( crs report r42375 , h.r .

1837 — the sacramento - san joaquin valley water reliability act , by [author name scrubbed] ) .

it includes a brief summary overview of h.r .

3964 , followed by a more in - depth discussion of each title , including some of the key provisions within each section and analysis of some of these provisions .

h.r .

3964 , the sacramento - san joaquin valley emergency water delivery act , was introduced on january 29 , 2014 .

it passed the house on february 5 , 2014 .

h.r .

3964 is similar to h.r .

1837 ( introduced in the 112 th congress ) with some notable additions .

below is a summary of each title in h.r .

3964 .

each title addresses a different aspect of california water policy .

title i , central valley project water reliability .

overall , title i would make numerous changes to management and operation of the federal central valley project ( cvp ) , primarily by amending the central valley project improvement act ( cvpia ) .

among other things , it would alter cvpia in the following ways: broaden the purposes for which water previously dedicated to fish and wildlife can be used ( by removing the directive to modify cvp operations to protect fish and wildlife with dedicated fish flows and making this action optional ) ; add to the purposes a provision "to ensure" water dedicated to fish and wildlife purposes is replaced and provided to cvp contactors by the end of 2018 at the lowest "reasonably achievable" cost ; changing the definitions of fish covered by the act ; broaden purposes for which central valley project restoration fund ( cvprf ) monies can be used ; reduce revenues into the cvprf ; mandate that the cvp be operated under a1994 interim agreement , the bay - delta accord ; and mandate development and implementation of a plan to increase cvp water yield by october 1 , 2018 .

title ii , san joaquin river restoration .

title ii would direct the secretary to cease implementation of the san joaquin river restoration settlement agreement , which was agreed to in 2006 and authorized under the san joaquin river restoration settlement act ( sjrrs ) in 2010 .

it would declare that the new legislation satisfies all obligations of the secretary and others to keep in good condition any fish below friant dam , including obligations under the california fish and game code , the state public trust doctrine , and the federal esa .

it would also remove the salmon restoration requirement in the sjrrs that was authorized in p.l .

111-11 .

title iii , repayment contracts and acceleration of repayment of construction costs .

this title would direct the secretary of the interior , upon request from water contractors , to convert utility - type water service contracts to repayment contracts , and then allow accelerated repayment of those outstanding repayment obligations .

irrigation repayment obligations for the cvp for 2012 , the last year for which such data are readily available , total approximately $1.18 billion ; municipal & industrial ( m&i ) repayment obligations for 2012 , the last year for which such data are readily available , total approximately $121 million .

allowing this accelerated ( or early ) repayment would allow irrigators to be exempt from certain reclamation requirements sooner than under current repayment schedules .

title iv , bay - delta watershed water rights preservation and protection .

title iv would provide assurances of water rights protections for those with water rights senior to the cvp , including sacramento river valley settlement contractors .

it would also direct a new shortage policy for certain north - of - delta cvp water service contracts , which would aim to limit maximum reductions to these supplies .

title v , miscellaneous .

title v declares that the unique circumstances of coordinated operations of the cvp and california state water project ( swp ) "require assertion of federal supremacy to protect existing water rights throughout the system" and that as such shall not set precedent in any other state .

title v also declares that nothing in the act shall "affect in any way" the state of california proclamation of state emergency and associated executive order issued by the governor on january 14 , 2014 .

it would also adjust a wild and scenic river boundary , potentially allowing for increased storage at exchequer dam .

h.r .

3964 would make extensive changes to implementation of federal reclamation law under the central valley project improvement act , the contracting provisions under the 1939 reclamation project act , restoration efforts under the san joaquin river restoration settlement act , and state and federal relationships under section 8 of the reclamation act of 1902 .

the bill would also alter the way the state of california implements its own state laws with regard to operation of the cvp and swp and non - native fisheries .

h.r .

3964 is primarily aimed at addressing decreased water deliveries to california's cvp and swp contractors , particularly those south of the delta , since passage of the cvpia in 1992 .

the bill would allow water to be delivered to contractors that would likely become available due to changes in restrictions in environmental and other laws .

it would result in greater water deliveries by preempting federal and state law , including fish - and - wildlife protections and other cvp operational mandates , which are all tied to the coordinated operations of the cvp and swp .

it is unclear what impacts such changes would have on other water users in the state .

title iv of the bill attempts to provide protections for california's senior water right holders , particularly those in the sacramento valley watershed and in "area - of - origin" areas .

a key remaining unknown consequence is the significance of the bill's use of the fixed 1994 bay - delta accord as a basis rather than current ( and evolving ) in - delta water quality standards and biological opinions under the federal esa .

the current water quality standards impose water flow restrictions and appear to be a contributing factor to annual pumping restrictions in the delta , along with esa requirements .

the exact amount of water the bill would make available to certain users under various scenarios is unclear .

while much attention has been paid to the effects of federal and state environmental laws on reductions in water supplies south of the delta , the extent to which the bill would relieve current and ongoing water supply shortages , particularly in drought years , is uncertain .

limited increases in deliveries for water contractors may be garnered from a prohibition or alteration of some state and federal environmental restrictions ( including the state's public trust doctrine and other laws proposed under the bill .

however , the legislation does not appear to fundamentally change some of the other factors driving water shortages and delivery curtailments in the delta , including the fundamental tenet of state water rights during times of shortage .

indeed , under some drought scenarios junior water rights holders may face curtailed water deliveries ( i.e. , regardless of environmental restrictions ) , while senior water rights holders continue to receive water .

additionally , another significant factor in recent pumping restrictions in the delta is the state water quality control plan , which includes salinity and flow requirements under california state water resources control board decision 1641 ( also known as "d - 1641" ) .

this decision in some cases dictates the timing and quantity of water deliveries south of the delta .

it is unclear the extent to which water quality standards that would be required under the bay - delta accord would correlate with the current requirements under d - 1641 .

such correlation ( or lack thereof ) could have a potentially significant effect on the extent of water exports in a given year .

longer term consequences of the legislation may also be of interest to congress .

unlike some other proposals , h.r .

3964's provisions would be in effect beyond the current drought , and would continue in perpetuity absent future changes to the statute .

effects of the legislation on other ongoing plans , such as the bay delta conservation plan ( bdcp ) , are unknown but could be significant .

some have argued that if esa and state protections in the bay - delta are removed as proposed , there would be less need for the bdcp , a habitat conservation plan .

the precedent of legislation may be of interest , as well .

among other things , the waiver of esa and state laws in order to provide increased water deliveries for federal project contractors would be a significant departure from the previous deference to these laws .

h.r .

3964 goes to the heart of the water supply issue in california by proposing to prohibit "any" state or federal law ( including the public trust doctrine ) from reducing water supplies beyond those allowed in the bay - delta accord .

it would also declare federal supremacy over water management to "protect existing water rights throughout the system. .

however , some argue that the bill would undermine efforts to achieve the "co - equal" goals of "providing for a more reliable water supply for california and protecting , restoring , and enhancing the bay - delta ecosystem," which is the foundation of state and federal efforts in development of the bay delta conservation plan .

therefore the overall approach of the legislation , as well the extent to which it would alter the existing water management regime in california , may elicit ongoing debate .

