this report discusses certain federal financial incentive mechanisms for "clean coal" commercial projects ; namely , loan guarantees and tax incentives .

both loan guarantees and tax incentives have been available to the private sector for clean coal activities following enactment of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 , p.l .

109-58 ) .

at issue for congress is the extent to which the private sector has used these financial tools — and whether they are the right tools — to develop the technology needed for reducing carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions from fossil fuel power plants while continuing to use available domestic coal reserves for electricity generation .

coal represents a major energy resource for the united states .

coal - fired power plants provided approximately 37% of u.s. generated electricity ( about 1.5 billion megawatt - hours ) in 2012 , while consuming over 800 million tons of coal .

power plants that use coal are also a major source of greenhouse gas emissions in the united states .

coal - fired electricity generation emitted approximately 1.5 billion metric tons of co 2 in 2012 , approximately 28% of total u.s. co 2 emissions .

the fraction of u.s. electricity generated by coal - fired plants declined from 2008 to 2012 , as did the total coal consumption by coal - fired plants .

carbon dioxide emissions fell over the same period .

the use of coal for electricity generation complicates policy efforts to reduce u.s. greenhouse gas emissions .

congress has focused on two epa regulatory proposals released in 2013 and 2014 that would limit greenhouse gas emissions from new and existing coal - fired power plants , respectively .

some believe the epa efforts to regulate co 2 emissions from coal may affect both the short - and long - term future for coal - fired electricity generation in the united states .

in the past , others have linked the viability of the u.s. coal - fired electricity industry to its ability to capture and sequester co 2 emissions from coal - burning plants ( carbon capture and sequestration , or storage , referred to as ccs ) , and allowing the continued use of coal while mitigating its contribution to rising co 2 levels in the atmosphere .

mitigating co 2 emissions has become the primary focus of u.s. department of energy efforts within the clean coal research and development program ( now coal r&d ) within its office of fossil energy .

for example , the coal r&d program accounted for $392 million of the total $562 million within fossil energy r&d at doe in fy2014 , or approximately two - thirds of the total .

moreover , the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) provided $3.4 billion for ccs r&d efforts beginning in 2009 .

combined with recovery act funding , congress has appropriated approximately $6 billion for ccs r&d since 2008 at doe .

the appropriations , technology , and program activities are discussed in other crs reports .

for the purposes of this report , the term clean coal is used to describe activities supported by doe that would reduce greenhouse gas and other emissions from coal combustion , such as carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) .

doe notes that its clean coal r&d efforts are focused on developing and demonstrating advanced power generation and carbon capture , utilization , and storage technologies for existing facilities and new fossil - fueled power plants by increasing overall system efficiencies and reducing capital costs .

the term clean coal is used here for descriptive purposes only .

historically , loan guarantees have been used as a policy tool for many different purposes , including home ownership , university education , small business growth , international development , and others .

a loan guarantee might be defined as "a loan or security on which the federal government has removed or reduced a lender's risk by pledging to repay principal and interest in case of default by the borrower. .

the doe loan guarantee program for projects that reduce anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases was initially authorized in the epact05 .

clean coal investment tax credits were first authorized in epact05 .

these tax credits were authorized alongside new research spending and other financial incentives , such as the loan guarantees discussed above .

additional tax incentives for clean coal were provided in p.l .

110-343 , the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ) .

the following sections provide background on tax incentives for investments in clean coal technologies and carbon capture and sequestration .

many issues , not all financial , influence the future of clean coal in the united states .

these include the high - risk nature of large , complicated , technology - intensive and as - yet commercially unproven projects that capture and sequester large volumes of co 2 .

in addition to the technological challenges , issues such as liability , ownership , and long - term stewardship of the captured co 2 add risk and complexity to large clean coal projects .

congress may decide to view loan guarantees and tax incentives within the broader policy context that surrounds clean coal .

a question for congress to consider is why no loan guarantees have been issued for clean coal projects , despite several authorizations of appropriations and two solicitations .

the most recent solicitation was issued in late 2013 , and information is not publicly available about the number of proposals that may have been submitted pursuant to the most recent solicitation .

yet , only two section 1703 projects , both nuclear power - related , have received or are on the path to obtaining loan guarantees since enactment of epact05 nearly 10 years ago .

it could be argued that a major distinction that encouraged projects under section 1705 — renewable energy systems , electric power transmission systems , leading edge biofuel projects — was the decision by congress to provide appropriated funds to pay for some or all of the loan guarantee credit subsidy costs .

doe has not sought appropriations for section 1703 projects although , notably , doe deemed zero credit subsidy costs for both nuclear power related projects that are on track for the loan guarantees .

thus , a common characteristic among all projects that received loan guarantees or are on track to receive loan guarantees is the removal of any requirement by the loan guarantee recipient to self - pay the credit subsidy costs , either through congressional appropriations or within the current regulatory framework ( or through higher interest rates on the loan ) .

it is difficult to gauge the interest by industry in seeking guaranteed loans under section 1703 without knowing how many applications for clean coal projects were submitted in response to the solicitations .

similarly , it is difficult to determine whether projects were not awarded loan guarantees because they failed to meet criteria required under the program , or were disqualified for some other reason .

an additional challenge for these projects is the requirement to employ new technology while at the same time achieving commercial viability .

in addition , the epa proposals to regulate co 2 from new and existing coal - fired power plants have arguably introduced more uncertainty into the future of coal .

whether the 2013 and 2014 epa proposals will create demand for loan guarantees , or have the opposite effect , is not clear .

when it comes to tax incentives for clean coal and carbon capture and sequestration , there are several options for congress to consider .

one option is to maintain the status quo , which would essentially allow existing tax incentives to phase out .

since existing tax incentives have limited funds or are volume capped , these incentives will not be available for new investments or co 2 sequestration once available funds have been fully allocated .

a second option is for congress to authorize additional funding for investment tax credits under sections 48a and 48b .

however , several projects that were allocated credits under sections 48a or 48b have been cancelled , and given the lack of new or proposed projects , it is not clear that additional funds for sections 48a or 48b could be allocated in the near term .

given these developments , a question for congress is whether there is an appetite for these investment credits .

further , are the tax credits considered an effective tool to further develop eligible technologies for clean coal ? .

some technical changes also have been cited as potential improvements to existing tax benefits .

modifications to the section 45q credit have been proposed in the carbon capture and sequestration deployment act of 2014 ( s. 2287 ) .

specifically , s. 2287 would change the current structure of section 45q .

credits would be allocated to applicants , so that applicants could be assured tax credits would be available before co 2 is actually captured , with the goal of providing greater certainty to the industry .

s. 2287 would also allow credits to be transferred , at the discretion of the tax credit recipient that captured the co 2 , to the company storing the co 2 .

both of these proposals were included in a 2012 recommendation by the national enhanced oil recovery initiative .

regarding sections 48a and 48b investment credits , there are unresolved issues related to reallocations for forfeited credits and recertification for projects that have not met placed - in - service deadlines .

these issues may be addressed through treasury guidance .

other changes in energy tax policy could also affect the outlook for clean coal and ccs technologies .

for example , a tax on carbon emissions or regulations that otherwise increase the cost of carbon - intensive electricity production would make low - carbon coal options more competitive .

electricity produced at facilities equipped with ccs could also benefit from clean energy production and investment credits , such as those proposed by former senate finance committee chairman max baucus .

also at issue is whether tax incentives should be used to promote investment in clean coal , carbon capture and sequestration , or related technologies .

generally , an efficient tax system is one that is free from incentives , where markets dictate where investments are made .

there are , however , a number of exceptions to this general case .

tax incentives that result in investments that reduce pollution or emissions , for example , can improve the allocation of resources in the economy .

tax incentives that lead to investment in emerging technologies with spillover benefits can also improve the economy - wide allocation of resources .

there are concerns regarding the structure of the clean coal tax credits , particularly the investment tax credits , where recipients are selected for and credit amounts carved out for specified technologies .

another drawback to nearly any form of tax credits is the limited benefit provided to firms that do not pay taxes .

