the national defense strategy of the united states is evolving in response to changing global environments .

as congress responds to these changes , an important aspect is the responsibility for oversight and appropriations for an aging tactical airlift fleet .

the c - 130 has been the cornerstone of the u.s. tactical airlift fleet since the late 1950s .

military planners believe that c - 130 aircraft provide the united states an edge in achieving national goals .

they provide a capability to rapidly deliver forces making conventional deterrence more effective and expanding the ability to provide humanitarian assistance .

however , the fleet has aged with some current models being flown by aircrew younger than the aircraft they are flying .

as the fleet ages , management issues arise with reduced reliability , obsolescence and reduced parts availability , and changing aviation rules that impact availability of airspace due to obsolete avionics capabilities .

over the past 57 years , several models of the c - 130 were built and delivered to the u.s. air force , navy , marine corps and coast guard , with the c - 130j model being the most recent .

these aircraft are referred to as tactical airlifters because they can deliver passengers and cargo directly into remote or austere areas .

in contrast , strategic airlift delivers capability on a global scale and more routinely operate from large airports .

the fy2013 national defense authorization act provided guidance on recapitalizing a portion of the c - 130 fleet , but a significant number of aircraft may still need to be replaced , modernized or retired to maintain the desired capabilities .

recapitalizing refers to replacing older model aircraft with new production aircraft .

as congress shapes the tactical airlift fleet of the future , there may also be decisions regarding force structure or infrastructure that may impact c - 130 basing .

while these aircraft may be supporting the individual service's mission on a day to day basis , they are also routinely assigned to joint commands in support of ongoing operations .

warfighting and theater engagement is conducted by geographic combatant commands .

these combatant commands are often operationally assigned c - 130s to accomplish their mission .

based on this command relationship , there may be an air force c - 130 assigned to a base in arkansas temporarily stationed within one of the combatant command's area of responsibility ( aor ) executing operations in support of the defense strategy .

for example , when called upon during crisis such as the super typhoon haiyan that struck the philippines in november 2013 , tactical airlift played a critical role in delivering aid within the region .

as stated in the 2014 quadrennial defense review , the u.s. military must be prepared to protect the homeland , to deter and defeat attacks on the united states and to support civil authorities in mitigating the effects of potential attacks and natural disasters ; build security globally , in order to preserve regional stability , deter adversaries , support allies and partners , and cooperate with others to address common security challenges ; and project power and win decisively , to defeat aggression , disrupt and destroy terrorist networks , and provide humanitarian assistance and disaster relief .

to accomplish these goals , the u.s. military needs the ability to deploy rapidly and sustain capabilities to all regions of the world .

maintaining the correct mix of intra - and inter - theater airlift provides this capability .

in his most recent overarching guidance to the department of defense , president obama outlined several guiding principles of force and program development to ensure mission success: maintain a broad portfolio of military capabilities that , in the aggregate , offer versatility across the range of missions ; differentiate between those investments that should be made today and those that can be deferred ; maintain a ready and capable force , even as we reduce our overall capacity ; reduce the "cost of doing business ; " examine the mix of active component ( ac ) and reserve component ( rc ) elements best suited to the strategy ; and make every effort in adjusting u.s. strategy and attendant force size to maintain both an adequate industrial base and investment in science and technology .

in regards to maintaining a broad portfolio of capabilities , tactical airlift is often considered a critical element in offering versatility .

versatility in this context is how quickly and easily the military can transition between missions .

for example , a c - 130 could provide humanitarian support to a natural disaster area in the morning and swing to transporting military forces into a combat operation later that day .

how this resource is managed may shape how versatile future u.s. capabilities will be .

this report will examine some factors in deciding which c - 130 investments may be made today or deferred and in doing so which capabilities are at risk .

this report will also review , in light of current investments , the c - 130 acquisition strategy and review how this strategy may reduce overall procurement cost and its impact on the industrial base .

c - 130 procurement is accomplished under a total force construct with the u.s. air force as the lead command for all c - 130 procurement .

this construct attempts to streamline the overall process and induce cost savings .

additionally , the c - 130 fleet is particularly well suited to encourage analysis of the active duty / reserve component mix due to the large number of aircraft in the guard and reserve forces .

in concert with these guiding principles , this report will review the following congressional issues associated with managing an aging c - 130 fleet: how many c - 130s are needed to execute the defense strategy ? .

should the fleet continue to be recapitalized ? .

should the current fleet be modernized ? .

does the force structure support the future fleet ? .

and is the current active duty / reserve component mix correct ? .

the c - 130 hercules is a medium sized tactical transport aircraft providing multi - purpose theater support while assuming several diverse roles within the u.s. air force , navy , marine corps and coast guard .

missions include tactical and intra - theater airlift and airdrop support , arctic resupply , aerial refueling , special operations support , aeromedical evacuation , aerial spraying , firefighting duties for the u.s. forest service , and natural disaster and humanitarian relief missions .

the aircraft is very versatile with the ability to take off and land from unprepared surfaces during day or night in hostile environments and in all weather .

the aircraft is typically used to support operations within a certain theater , as opposed to the c - 5 or c - 17 aircraft that routinely fly cargo internationally .

the bulk of the u.s. government fleet comprises 667 aircraft .

there are a small number assigned to other agencies , such as the u.s. forest service , but this report will focus on the aircraft assigned to the usaf , usn , usmc and the uscg .

an important question for congress is to determine how many c - 130s are needed in the future to provide desired capability .

in determining the desired fleet size an analyst may move away from the discussion of actual aircraft numbers toward a broader question of how much capability is desired to accomplish the missions of the future .

a typical question might be how much cargo or how many people must be airlifted to support a specific scenario , like a major land battle , versus how many aircraft a commander may need to achieve the objective .

this analysis is typically accomplished by the services but normally returns to a discussion of numbers of aircraft since this can be assigned a monetary value .

for the purposes of this report , aircraft numbers will be used to indicate desired capability .

a significant issue in the current c - 130 fleet is age of the c - 130h models .

years of flight in austere environments , advancing technologies , and aircraft age are catching up to the fleet .

the fleet faces part obsolescence issues , fatigue on the aircraft structure , and changing aviation regulations that may impact access to certain areas of the world .

the average age of the c - 130h fleets in all the services is over 25 years .

the figure below shows the breakout in the air force .

as fleets age and aviation rules evolve , aircraft fleet managers are confronted with the choice to modify their current aircraft with new equipment ( modernize ) or replace the aircraft with new production models ( recapitalize ) .

each option has advantages and disadvantages ; a significant driver for both options is cost .

if the decision is made to recapitalize the older aircraft with new planes , cost becomes a major consideration .

the current fy2014-fy2018 multi - year procurement lists the cost for 79 c - 130j aircraft at $5.8b .

while this is a significant investment , new aircraft may produce cost savings over time .

the c - 130j can carry more cargo , fly greater distances , and incur fewer maintenance costs than the older c - 130h models which may create savings in the future .

in choosing modernization over recapitalization there are several issues to address .

most importantly , what components should be modernized ? .

the current fleet has significant structural issues and older c - 130hs will need to modify the center wing box structure to extend their service life at some point .

this modification costs approximately $7 million per aircraft .

there are also potential problems with the current avionics capability in the c - 130h .

within the next several years there are anticipated changes to the international and domestic flight rules with which current c - 130hs cannot comply due to outdated avionics .

if no upgrades are performed to the avionics and the rules do change there may be areas of the world , including airspace around busy u.s. airports , that may be inaccessible to c - 130h aircraft .

the upgrades to the avionics also come with a menu of options that start with minimal capability upgrades to significant overhauls of the current system .

the costs will likely rise as more significant upgrades are accomplished .

the overall decisions regarding the c - 130 fleet are complex with several variables .

one approach might be to forecast what the fleet of 2025 might look like and how this supports expected future requirements .

if current production rates are maintained , the fleet will have several older model aircraft in the inventory well into the future .

if older aircraft are not replaced with new aircraft before obsolescence issues impact capability , concurrent recapitalization and modernization may be the best option to support future requirements .

older model c - 130s currently make up a significant portion of the entire fleet and are the focus of modernization issues .

the age of the fleet has created parts and avionics obsolescence issues , along with structural fatigue , that may impact the overall capability of the aircraft in the future .

a key issue in any aircraft fleet is the structural service life of the airframe .

the structural service life relates the time after production during which the aircraft structural components exceed minimum acceptable safety standards when routinely maintained .

structural service life is impacted by several factors including corrosion , mission severity , and structural fatigue .

a major modification currently being accomplished on the c - 130 fleet to extend the service life is the replacement of the center wing box , a critical fatigue component of the c - 130 fleet due to the stresses of flying missions over such a long period of time .

the center wing box is attached to the fuselage and forms the center section of the wing .

two outer wing sections connect to the left and right ends of the center wing .

there have been problems historically with fatigue cracking of the center wing on special operations forces ( sof ) aircraft in the early 1990s and on the combat delivery fleet in 2000-2005 .

the fatigue cracking detected on combat delivery aircraft ultimately led to the implementation of strict service life limits that were implemented in 2005 .

the implementation of these limits led to the numerous aircraft being grounded or restricted in 2005 .

the center wing replacement modification replaces c - 130h center wings with either extended service life ( esl ) center wings or standard center wings .

the esl wing has been the production wing on c - 130js since 2009 .

to date , 128 center wings have been replaced on usaf aircraft .

fifty center wings were replaced with esl center wings on special mission aircraft from 1993-2000 , and 77 center wings have been modified on special mission and combat delivery aircraft since 2007 with 37 aircraft receiving esl center wings and 40 aircraft receiving standard center wings .

the fy2015 usaf budget requested funding from congress to continue the center wing replacement program .

the coast guard has identified six aircraft to undergo center wing box replacement .

the first was completed in august 2012 , in partnership with the air force .

the second is scheduled for november 14 , but once again the transfer of the 14 c - 27s may impact these modifications as the fleet numbers are changing .

the navy is currently estimating retirement of the h model aircraft in the navy prior to them needing center wing box replacements .

based on calculated equivalent baseline hours ( ebh ) derived from a usaf fatigue study , all center wing boxes on navy kc - 130t and c - 130t have at least 20 years of life remaining .

the approximate cost per airframe is $7 million and the work is done at robins air force base in georgia .

this cost may be a consideration when older aircraft that may be scheduled for retirement are maintained on active duty since they will need this modification .

current recapitalization efforts center on the c - 130j model .

the c - 130j is the newest model aircraft and the only version still in production .

although similar in appearance to earlier models , the j model has more powerful rolls - royce engines and advanced avionics ( including a heads - up display ) with a digital backbone versus the analog instrumentation on the older h models .

other notable differences , according to the air force , include improved reliability , maintainability , greater capacity , and the removal of two aircrew members ( navigator and engineer ) .

deliveries of the first aircraft began in 1999 .

since then , over 200 aircraft have been delivered to the u.s. government .

the illustration below gives a review of the increased capability the c - 130j provides over legacy models .

in the current debate over strategy , and in the context of current budget limitations , opportunities may emerge to analyze the current force structure and decide how much tactical airlift is required to achieve national goals .

while not suggesting a specific number , the mca - 18 analysis did determine that there is currently a surplus of capability in the c - 130 fleet .

this position was reiterated recently by the then commander of air mobility command , general paul selva .

"my position is that the fleet itself is affordable .

it's how we deploy the fleet and who operates it," he said .

while "there is disagreement on the total numbers , i think we'll land right about the 300 number," he said .

this would be a reduction of approximately 40 aircraft .

he also suggested adjustments to the air mobility command force structure .

his preference was to preserve the actual aircraft in the inventory and achieve savings by changing how they are operated including moving some to the guard and reserve .

a major consideration when adjusting the fleet size or mix is the resultant active , guard , and reserve mix .

the mca - 18 report cautions that any adjustments should be made with due consideration to that mix and with dwell rates in mind .

both divesting aircraft and transferring them between components involves both financial and political considerations but , from the perspective of implementing national strategy , perhaps the most important consideration is maintaining the proper capabilities mix to meet future requirements .

one important variable in determining future force structure is the rate of aircraft retirement .

the following chart illustrates the historic rate at which the air force has retired aging c - 130s .

in recent years the rate has declined in part due to congressional limits on force structure .

if the rate continues at a relatively low level , the air force may be challenged with continuing costs associated with maintaining the aging fleet .

lockheed martin aeronautics company has been the primary contractor for the c - 130 since the first production contract for two yc - 130a prototypes in september 1952 .

the assembly of all c - 130s takes place at air force plant #6 in marietta georgia on dobbins afb .

the following chart is a list of the contractor and government activities for the c - 130 program .

a potential issue with the c - 130 program is the long lead times associated with production .

some parts have two year lead times that create instability in both the main and subsidiarity production lines unless the output is forecasted accurately .

as illustrated below , there has been variation in the production of c - 130s throughout the years .

the multi - year procurement process has the potential to reduce the instability of annual c - 130 deliveries and provide lockheed martin with a predictable schedule .

with procurement schedules exceeding two years , they may also reduce the dms issues by providing suppliers with a stable build rate .

there are approximately 750 part numbers with lead times greater than 24 months and approximately 7,700 part numbers with lead times greater than 12 months as listed in the dod funding exhibit myp - 1 .

based partly on these extended lead times , lockheed is attempting to stabilize their production line at 24 aircraft per year .

this number includes u.s. and foreign aircraft deliveries .

the following charts illustrate lockheed's usg program status in regards to the number of aircraft order / delivered and the remaining backlog .

the c - 130 fleet has provided the u.s. government with a versatile and relevant capability to achieve national objectives for decades .

the issue for congress is how to provide oversight and appropriations for this aging fleet and maintain the desired capabilities into the future .

the following issues are provided for consideration .

as congress moves forward , the most significant debate may be centered on the c - 130 combat delivery fleet .

with a significant portion of this fleet in the reserve component there are considerable interests at state with adjusting force structure .

as budgets contract , adjustments will likely need to be made but the substance of these adjustments may incite considerable debate .

maintaining the appropriate operational mix in this environment is a challenge .

in regards to recapitalization and modernization , the fleet is aging and actions may need to be taken to maintain a fleet that will support future desired capabilities .

with the recently approved multi - year procurement , the framework for future recapitalization is in place , however , at current production levels the fleet may still need significant funding for modernization efforts to remain relevant in future environments .

modernization is an expensive process that should be approached with an informed opinion but also viewed in the context of future force structure requirements and the time it takes to achieve desired capabilities in the current procurement process .

appendix a .

legislative activity fy2014 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

113-66 ) title 1 - procurement subtitle d - air force programs sec .

132 .

multi - year procurement authority for c – 130j aircraft .

 ( a ) authority for multi - year procurement. - subject to section 2306b of title 10 , united states code , the secretary of the air force may enter into one or more multi - year contracts , beginning with the fiscal year 2014 program year , for the procurement of c - 130j aircraft for the department of the air force and the department of the navy .

 ( b ) condition for out - year contract payments. - a contract entered into under subsection ( a ) shall provide that any obligation of the united states to make a payment under the contract for a fiscal year after fiscal year 2014 is subject to the availability of appropriations for that purpose for such later fiscal year .

sec .

133 .

prohibition on cancellation or modification of avionics modernization program for c - 130 aircraft .

 ( a ) prohibition. - none of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2014 for the air force may be used to - ( 1 ) take any action to cancel or modify the avionics modernization program of record for c - 130 aircraft ; or ( 2 ) initiate an alternative communication , navigation , surveillance , and air traffic management program for c - 130 aircraft that is designed or intended to replace the avionics modernization program described in paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( b ) comptroller general report. - not later than april 1 , 2014 , the comptroller general of the united states shall submit to the congressional defense committees a sufficiency review of the cost - benefit analysis conducted under section 143 ( b ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( public law 112 – 239 ; 126 stat .

1662 ) , including any findings and recommendations relating to such review .

title x - general provisions subtitle i - other matters sec .

1098 .

transfer of aircraft to other departments for wildfire suppression and other purposes ; tactical airlift fleet of the air force .

 ( h ) tactical airlift fleet of the air force. - ( 1 ) consideration of upgrades of certain aircraft in recapitalization of fleet. - the secretary of the air force shall consider , as part of the recapitalization of the tactical airlift fleet of the air force , upgrades to c - 130h aircraft designed to help such aircraft meet the fuel efficiency goals of the department of the air force and retention of such aircraft , as so upgraded , in the tactical airlift fleet .

 ( 2 ) manner of upgrades. - the secretary shall ensure that upgrades to the c - 130h aircraft fleet are made in a manner that is proportional to the number of c - 130h aircraft in the force structure of the regular air force , the air force reserve , and the air national guard .

fy2013 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

112-81 ) title 1 - procurement subtitle d - air force programs sec .

141 .

reduction in number of aircraft required to be maintained in strategic airlift aircraft inventory .

 ( a ) reduction in inventory requirement. - section 8062 ( g ) ( 1 ) of title 10 , united states code , is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ''effective on the date that is 45 days after the date on which the report under section 141 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 is submitted to the congressional defense committees , the secretary shall maintain a total aircraft inventory of strategic airlift aircraft of not less than 275 aircraft.'' .

 ( b ) modification of certification requirement. - section 137 ( d ) ( 3 ) ( b ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 ( public law 111 – 84 ; 123 stat .

2221 ) is amended by striking ''316 strategic airlift aircraft'' and inserting ''275 strategic airlift aircraft'' .

 ( c ) mobility requirements and capabilities study 2018. - ( 1 ) in general. - the director of cost assessment and program evaluation and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , in coordination with the commander of the united h. r. 4310-29 states transportation command and the secretaries of the military departments , shall jointly conduct a study that assesses the end - to - end , full - spectrum mobility requirements for all aspects of the national military strategy derived from the national defense strategy that is a result of the 2012 defense strategic guidance published by the president in february 2012 and other planning documents of the department of defense .

 ( 2 ) matters included. - the study under paragraph ( 1 ) shall include the following: ( a ) a definition of what combinations of air mobility , sealift , surface movements , prepositioning , forward stationing , seabasing , engineering , and infrastructure requirements and capabilities provide low , moderate , significant and high levels of operational risk to meet the national military strategy .

 ( b ) a description and analysis of the assumptions made by the commander of the united states transportation command with respect to aircraft usage rates , aircraft mission availability rates , aircraft mission capability rates , aircrew ratios , aircrew production , and aircrew readiness rates .

 ( c ) an analysis of different combinations of air mobility , sealift , surface movements , prepositioning , forward stationing , seabasing , engineering , and infrastructure requirements and capabilities required to support theater and tactical deployment and distribution , including - ( i ) the identification , quantification , and description of the associated operational risk ( as defined by the military risk matrix in the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff instruction 3401.01e ) for each excursion as it relates to the combatant commander achieving strategic and operational objectives ; and ( ii ) any assumptions made with respect to the availability of commercial airlift and sealift capabilities and resources when applicable .

 ( d ) a consideration of metrics developed during the most recent operational availability assessment and joint forcible entry operations assessment .

 ( e ) an assessment of requirements and capabilities for major combat operations , lesser contingency operations as specified in the baseline security posture of the department of defense , homeland defense , defense support to civilian authorities , other strategic missions related to national missions , global strike , the strategic nuclear mission , and direct support and time - sensitive airlift missions of the military departments .

 ( f ) an examination , including a discussion of the sensitivity of any related conclusions and assumptions , of the variations regarding alternative modes ( land , air , and sea ) and sources ( military , civilian , and foreign ) of strategic and theater lift , and variations in forward basing , seabasing , prepositioning ( afloat and ashore ) , air - refueling capability , advanced logistics concepts , and destination theater austerity , based on the new global footprint and global presence initiatives .

 ( g ) an identification of mobility capability gaps , shortfalls , overlaps , or excesses , including - ( i ) an assessment of associated risks with respect to the ability to conduct operations ; and ( ii ) recommended mitigation strategies where possible .

 ( h ) an identification of mobility capability alternatives that mitigate the potential impacts on the logistic system , including - ( i ) a consideration of traditional , non - traditional , irregular , catastrophic , and disruptive challenges ; and ( ii ) a description of how derived mobility requirements and capabilities support the accepted balance of risk in addressing all five categories of such challenges .

 ( i ) the articulation of all key assumptions made in conducting the study with respect to - ( i ) risk ; ( ii ) programmed forces and infrastructure ; ( iii ) readiness , manning , and spares ; ( iv ) scenario guidance from defense planning scenarios and multi - service force deployments ; ( v ) concurrency of major operations ; ( vi ) integrated global presence and basing strategy ; ( vii ) host nation or third - country support ; ( viii ) use of weapons of mass destruction by an enemy ; and ( ix ) aircraft being used for training or undergoing depot maintenance or modernization .

 ( j ) a description of the logistics concept of operations and assumptions , including any support concepts , methods , combat support forces , and combat service support forces that are required to enable the projection and enduring support to forces both deployed and in combat for each analytic scenario .

 ( k ) an assessment , and incorporation as necessary , of the findings , conclusions , capability gaps , and shortfalls derived from the study under section 112 ( d ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 ( p.l .

112-81 ; 125 stat .

1318 ) .

 ( 3 ) submission. — the director of cost assessment and program evaluation and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff shall jointly submit to the congressional defense committees a report containing the study under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 4 ) form. - the report required by paragraph ( 3 ) shall be submitted in unclassified form , but may include a classified annex .

sec .

143 .

avionics systems for c - 130 aircraft .

 ( a ) limitations. - ( 1 ) avionics modernization program. - the secretary of the air force may not take any action to cancel or modify the avionics modernization program for c – 130 aircraft until a period of 90 days has elapsed after the date on which the secretary submits to the congressional defense committees the cost - benefit analysis conducted under subsection ( b ) ( 1 ) .

 ( 2 ) cns / atm program. - ( a ) in general. - the secretary may not take any action described in subparagraph ( b ) until a period of 90 days has elapsed after the date on which the secretary submits to the congressional defense committees the cost - benefit analysis conducted under subsection ( b ) ( 1 ) .

 ( b ) covered actions. - an action described in this subparagraph is an action to begin an alternative communication , navigation , surveillance , and air traffic management program for c - 130 aircraft that is designed or intended - ( i ) to meet international communication , navigation , surveillance , and air traffic management standards for the fleet of c - 130 aircraft ; or ( ii ) to replace the current avionics modernization program for the c - 130 aircraft .

 ( b ) cost - benefit analysis. - ( 1 ) ffrdc - the secretary shall seek to enter into an agreement with the institute for defense analyses to conduct an independent cost - benefit analysis that compares the following alternatives: ( a ) upgrading and modernizing the legacy c - 130 airlift fleet using the c - 130 avionics modernization program .

 ( b ) upgrading and modernizing the legacy c - 130 airlift fleet using a reduced scope program for avionics and mission planning systems .

 ( 2 ) matters included. - the cost - benefit analysis conducted under paragraph ( 1 ) shall take into account - ( a ) the effect of life - cycle costs for - ( i ) adopting each of the alternatives described in subparagraphs ( a ) and ( b ) of paragraph ( 1 ) ; and ( ii ) supporting c - 130 aircraft that are not upgraded or modernized ; and ( b ) the costs associated with the potential upgrades to avionics and mission systems that may be required for legacy c - 130 aircraft to remain relevant and mission effective in the future .

title x – general provisions subtitle f - miscellaneous authorities and limitations sec .

1059 .

limitations on retirement of fixed - wing intra - theater airlift aircraft for general support and time sensitive / mission critical direct support airlift missions of the department of defense .

 ( a ) limitation on retirements. - during fiscal year 2013 , the secretary of the air force shall retain an additional 32 fixed wing , intra - theater airlift aircraft beyond the number of such aircraft proposed to be retained in the secretary's total force structure proposal provided to the congressional defense committees on november 2 , 2012 .

appendix b .

key events march 2014 usaf submitted fy2015 budget request for 13 c - 130js .

usmc requested one kc - 130j .

f ebruary 2014 rolls - royce corp. in indianapolis , in received a $54.3 million firm - fixed - price , indefinite - delivery / indefinite - quantity contract for depot level repair of 50 kc - 130 aircraft engines , propellers and other propulsion system components for the u.s. marine corps ( 47 planes / $50.2m / 92% ) and the government of kuwait ( 3 planes / $4.1m / 8% ) .

$24.5 million committed immediately , using fy2014 navy o&m budgets .

work to be performed in indianapolis , in ( 92% ) , al mubarak , kuwait ( 2.1% ) ; various locations in japan ( 2% ) ; cherry point .

nc ( 1.3% ) ; miramar , ca ( 1.3% ) ; and fort worth , tx ( 1.3% ) , and is expected to be complete in february 2015 .

this contract was not competitively procured pursuant to far 6.302-1 by u.s .

naval air systems command in patuxent river , md ( n00019-14-d - 0007 ) .

lockheed martin aeronautics co. in marietta , ga received a sole - source $12.2 million firm - fixed - price contract modification to provide spare parts that are unique to u.s. socom's hc / mc - 130js , and cannot be drawn from general c - 130j fleet spares .

all funds were committed immediately , using fy2012 aircraft budgets .

work to be performed at marietta , ga , and is expected to be complete by feb 16 , 2016 .

usaf life cycle management center / wisk at wright - patterson afb , oh manages the contract ( fa8625-11-c - 6597 , po 0209 ) .

lockheed martin and rolls - royce complete a long - term agreement worth up to $1 billion , to deliver approximately 600 ae2100 turboprop engines for american and international contracts from 2014 through 2018 .

that totals about 150 aircraft , but it is probably closer to 125 with spares added in .

january 2014 the usaf flew a fully - converted ac - 130j gunship for the 1 st time , at eglin afb , fl .

a $105.3 million indefinite - delivery / indefinite quantity contract modification , exercising the 3 rd option under the usaf's c - 130j long term sustainment program .

it is a two - year ordering period for sustainment services including logistical support , program management support , engineering services , spares , and technical data .

funds to be committed as needed through task orders .

work to be performed at marietta , ga , and is expected to be complete by jan 31 , 2016 .

usaf life cycle management center / wlkca at robins afb , ga manages the contract ( fa8504-06-d - 0001 , po 0026 ) .

usaf fy2013 operational test and evaluation annual report released reviewing ac - 130j , hc / mc - 130j .

report identified survivability and interoperability issues to be addressed .

rolls royce in indianapolis , in received a $182.7 million firm - fixed - price , requirements contract modification , exercising the 7 th annual option for ae2100-d3 engine logistics support , program management support , engineering services , spares , and technical data .

funds to be spent as needed .

work to be performed at indianapolis , in , and is expected to be complete by jan 31 , 2015 .

the usaf life cycle management center / wlkca at robins afb , ga , manages this contract ( fa8504-07-d - 0001 , po 0023 ) .

december 2013 lockheed martin in marietta , ga received an $11,060,628 firm - fixed - price , indefinite - delivery / indefinite - quantity contract for logistics and engineering services in support of the c / kc - 130j aircraft for the u.s. marine corps / marine corps reserve , u.s. coast guard and the kuwait air force .

work to be performed in marietta , ga ( 65.3% ) ; afghanistan ( 12% ) ; palmdale , ca ( 9.2% ) ; kuwait ( 3.3% ) ; okinawa , japan ( 3% ) ; miramar , ca ( 1.8% ) ; cherry point , nc ( 1.7% ) ; elizabeth city , nc ( 1.6% ) ; fort worth , ( 1.5% ) ; and greenville , sc ( .6% ) ; and is expected to be completed in december 2014 .

no funds were obligated at time of award .

funds to be obligated against individual delivery orders as they are issued .

this contract combined purchases for the u.s. marine corps / marine corps reserve ( $8,886,223 ; 80.3% ) ; u.s. coast guard ( $1,423,148 ; 12.9% ) ; and the government of kuwait ( $751,257 ; 6.8% ) under the foreign military sales program .

this contract was not competitively procured pursuant to 10 u.sc 2304 ( c ) ( 1 ) .

the naval air systems command , patuxent river , md manages the contract ( n00019-14-d - 0006 ) .

a sole - source , maximum $169.7 million firm - fixed - price advance procurement contract for funding related to 18 c - 130js .

all funds were committed immediately , using fy2013 procurement budgets .

work to be performed at marietta , ga , and is expected to be complete by oct 31 , 2016 .

the usaf life cycle management center / wlnnc at wright - patterson afb , oh manages this contract ( fa8625-14-c - 6450 ) .

a $48.5 million advance procurement contract modification for funding related to 5 more c - 130js .

all funds were committed immediately , using fy2012 procurement budgets .

all funds are committed immediately , using fy2012 aircraft budgets .

work under this multi - year contract to be performed at lockheed martin in marietta , ga until dec 31 , 2016 .

the usaf life cycle management center / wlnnc at wright - patterson afb , oh manages the contract ( fa8625-11-c - 6597 , po 0230 ) .

lockheed martin in marietta , ga received a not - to - exceed $81.2 million modification to an existing contract to fund israeli c - 130j - 30 aircraft #4 , advance long - lead procurement of c - 130js #5 and 6 , and external fuel tank modification kits .

work to be performed at marietta , ga , and is expected to be completed by june 30 , 2016 .

this contract is 100% foreign military sales for israel , with the usaf life cycle management center / wlnnc at wright - patterson afb , oh acting as israel's agent ( fa8625-11-c - 6597 , po 0231 ) .

october 2013 lockheed martin corp. , marietta , ga. , was awarded a $21.6 million contract modification to redesign the c - 130j's color multipurpose display unit and multi - function color display for c - 130j aircraft .

the cdu & mfcds need new central processor and graphics processor chip sets , in order to cope with "diminishing manufacturing sources. .

work to be performed at marietta , ga and is expected to be complete by september 30 , 2015 .

this contract actually includes 15% foreign military sales to c - 130 customers norway , israel and kuwait , on top of the $21.6 million in fy2012 in usaf procurement funds that were committed immediately .

usaf force life cycle management center / wlnnc at wright - patterson afb , oh manages the contract ( fa8625-11-c - 6597 , po 0228 ) .

appendix c. c - 130 force basing appendix d. comparing c - 130 cockpits the following pictures are provided for context when discussing cockpit modifications on the c - 130 aircraft .

figure d - 1 is an unmodified c - 130h .

figure d - 2 is a c - 130h with the amp modification .

figure d - 3 is a production c - 130j cockpit .

these pictures may also provide some clarity on why aircrew members are only allowed to be qualified on one version of the aircraft .

while the outside of the aircraft looks very similar the inside is quite different between models .

the crew makeups are different as well .

on the older h models there are a minimum of 5 crewmembers ( 2 pilots , 1 navigator , 1 engineer , 1 loadmaster ) .

the amp modification takes away the navigator position and the new j models take away the engineer and navigator position for a minimum crew of three .

