since 2008 , california has experienced more dry years than it has wet years .

drought conditions in california are currently "exceptional" and "extreme" in much of the state , including in prime agricultural areas of the central valley , according to the u.s. drought monitor ( see figure 1 ) .

such conditions pose significant challenges to water managers who before this dry winter were already grappling with below - normal surface water storage in the state's largest reservoirs .

groundwater levels in many areas of the state also have declined due to increased pumping over the last three dry years .

while rains in march improved the water year outlook somewhat — moving the year from the driest on record in terms of precipitation to date to the third - driest — water managers are concerned about how long this drought will last and its long - term impacts .

further , the short - term effects of the drought are also a concern .

a relatively dry winter with little existing snowpack raises the question over whether water supplies will be refreshed later in the year .

the extent of the drought in california has generated varied and widespread effects .

most of the san joaquin valley is in exceptional drought — the most intense level of drought reported by the drought monitor — and federal and state water supply allotments are at historic lows .

many farmers are fallowing lands and some are removing permanent tree crops .

cities and towns have also been affected , and the governor of california has requested voluntary water use cutbacks of 20% .

the drought has also affected fish and wildlife species and the recreational and commercial activities they support .

current drought conditions in california and much of the west have fueled congressional interest in drought and its effects on water supplies , agriculture , and ecosystems .

several bills have been introduced in the 113 th congress to address different aspects of drought in california and other regions .

of these bills , s. 2198 ( emergency drought relief act of 2014 ) has passed the senate , and h.r .

3964 ( sacramento - san joaquin valley emergency water delivery act ) has passed the house .

this report summarizes these two bills , discusses similarities and differences between the bills , and analyzes how these bills could address issues and questions associated with the drought in california .

central to addressing the drought from a federal and state perspective is the coordinated operation of the federal central valley project ( cvp ) and the state water project ( swp ) .

both projects collect and store water in reservoirs in northern california .

they also divert water from the san joaquin and sacramento rivers delta confluence with san francisco bay ( bay - delta ) and pump water south to water users in central and southern california .

while the cvp serves mostly agricultural water contractors , the swp serves largely urban or municipal and industrial contractors ; however , both projects serve some contractors of both varieties .

the operation of this system has been of interest congress since there is a federal nexus with respect to the cvp .

congress and the administration have been involved in addressing cvp operations through manuals and procedures laid out by existing federal laws such as the endangered species act ( esa , p.l .

93-205 , 16 u.s.c .

§§1531-1543 ) and the central valley project improvement act ( cvpia , title 34 of p.l .

102-575 ) .

h.r .

3964 and s. 2198 share the objective of increasing water supplies for agricultural and urban users .

the bills , however , largely differ in their approach to achieve this objective .

this section summarizes and provides analysis of selected similarities and differences between the bills .

h.r .

3964 and s. 2198 have few similarities in their specific approaches to addressing drought conditions in california ; however , to different degrees , they both aim to provide more water for users that receive water from the cvp and swp .

the primary thematic similarity among the bills is to authorize or direct activities to increase water supplies for users , while , in some cases , decreasing or meeting the minimum water needs of the environment ( eg , fish and wildlife , and water quality ) .

the duration of these changes varies .

in some cases , they would be authorized only in times of a declared drought or decreased water supplies , and in other cases , these activities would be authorized permanently under all conditions .

h.r .

3964 primarily aims to increase water deliveries to california's cvp contractors , particularly those south of the delta , who have seen reductions in deliveries since passage of the cvpia in 1992 .

the bill would potentially ease some restrictions on cvp and swp water operations and would allow more water to be available for users resulting from those changes .

the bill would likely result in greater water deliveries by preempting some federal and state laws , including fish and wildlife protections and other cvp operational mandates tied to the coordinated operations of the cvp and swp .

it is unclear what impacts such changes would have on other water users in the state .

h.r .

3964 would establish the 1994 bay delta accord ( accord ) as a basis for operation of the cvp and swp pumps in the delta , rather than current ( and evolving ) in - delta water quality standards and proscriptions included in federal biological opinions ( biops ) .

these standards and restrictions impose water flow restrictions that appear to be a contributing factor to reduced pumping and water availability in the delta .

s. 2198 would direct the secretaries of selected federal agencies to provide the maximum quantity of water supplies possible to cvp and other water users in the state of california by approving , consistent with applicable laws and regulations , projects and operations to provide additional water supplies as quickly as possible .

although activities are to be consistent with laws and regulations , presumably including those regarding the environment , s. 2198 provides direction to federal agencies to maximize water supplies within such constraints .

this juxtaposition makes it difficult to understand the potential effect of the proposed legislation .

it would appear to fall to the implementing agency to decide what actions are both in compliance with s. 2198 directives to increase storage while remaining consistent with law and regulations .

it is not clear for example how or when agencies would determine the effects of providing "maximum water supplies" on species viability and water quality .

such effects may not be apparent , quantifiable , or known for several years into the future .

conversely , agencies and water users may not agree that an agency's actions adequately implement the legislations direction to provide "maximum water quantities. .

while some observers believe that agencies should not maximize water supplies to the detriment of species in the long term , others are advocating relaxation of some laws and regulations , or meeting minimum standards of environmental laws while maximizing water supplies .

drought conditions in california and proposed state and federal solutions to address them under h.r .

3964 and s. 2198 raise several issues and questions that might be of interest to congress .

many of these issues relate to the central question of how to increase water supplies for users while sustaining environmental and other conditions in a manner that satisfies existing or altered federal and state laws .

a background discussion of selected key questions and the issues they generate is provided below .

the objective of both bills is to increase water deliveries and reliability for users ; in particular water users south of the delta .

neither bill contains assurances for delivering a certain amount of water , nor quantifies an amount of additional water to be generated by activities authorized in each respective bill .

based on this uncertainty , some might question how much more water might be delivered to users by each bill if enacted ? .

s. 2198 contains broad language that would direct agencies to maximize water supplies and approves pilot projects for increasing water stored in water stressed areas .

it is uncertain how much water could be delivered to users from specified projects authorized under s. 2198 and other projects that are not .

further , s. 2198 would provide federal agencies with broad discretion to conduct operations that would maximize water use while still adhering to state and federal laws and regulations .

it is unclear how changes to this authority would affect how much water would be delivered to users since the amount would be based on federal actions yet to be documented .

h.r .

3964 would implement several measures that would redirect water from fish and wildlife uses , among others , to agricultural and municipal users .

however , quantifying the amount of additional water for users if h.r .

3964 is enacted is difficult .

for example , one of the bill's most significant changes would be to set the 1994 bay delta accord as the operational guide for the cvp and the swp , while also waiving federal esa regulations and other laws pertaining to the operation of the cvp and swp .

this would set maximum restrictions on water exports from the delta depending on the time of year and guarantee a reliable supply of water for certain stakeholders , among other things .

however , the exact amount of additional water made available in accordance with this change would depend on a number of factors .

for instance , while h.r .

3964 appears to waive implementation of the esa as it pertains to operations , the accord included a section that authorized operational flexibility to comply with federal esa regulations .

it is unclear if the esa provisions regarding operational flexibility would be applicable if h.r .

3964 were enacted .

under a separate provision , the accord protected water users from losing water supplies to support future listings of species under esa .

according to the accord , the protection of species that are listed after the accord shall result in no additional water cost relative to the bay - delta protections embodied in the plan and will , to the maximum extent possible , use the flexibility provided within section 4 ( d ) of the esa .

additional water needs will be provided by the federal government on a willing seller basis financed by federal funds , not through additional regulatory re - allocations of water within the bay - delta .

it is unclear if this provision in the accord would reflect the listing of species after the bill would be enacted or would date back to when the accord was written in 1994 .

in summary , the accord provided water supply reliability as well as discretion to export water to users .

h.r .

3964 would further these advantages by making operations not subject to esa or any other law pertaining to the cvp and swp .

h.r .

3964 also includes several other provisions that would be likely to increase water deliveries for users , but are difficult to quantify .

for example , h.r .

3964 would provide replacement water for cvp contractors for water dedicated for fish and wildlife purposes , approves the development of a plan to increase cvp yield , and would authorize non - federal construction of water storage projects .

both bills support reallocating water supplies to users from environmental considerations .

under h.r .

3964 , some laws and regulations that dedicate water supplies for environmental uses would be exempted , thus allowing federal agencies to supply more water to users .

for example , the provision to operate the cvp and swp under the bay - delta accord , without regard to esa , would benefit some water users , but environmental stakeholders may contend that the loss of esa regulations will harm listed species in the region .

requirements for operational flexibility and planning for sustaining endangered and threatened fish species in the delta would appear to be lowered as it relates to pumping by h.r .

3964 .

operations under the bill are to strictly adhere to the prescripts in the bay - delta accord ; however laws pertaining to operations ( including esa ) would be disregarded under h.r .

3964 .

on the other hand , some might contend that the existing biological opinions also do not allow enough operational flexibility for water supply purposes , and that restrictions to date have not had a meaningful impact on species ( including those that were already declining ) .

if pumping operations maximize water exports to users under the guidelines proposed by h.r .

3964 , lower water supplies for fish and the ecosystem could have short and long term environmental consequences , although the extent of these consequences is currently unknown .

some may argue that the environmental damage from the change will be minimal , and would be tempered by the benefits of greater water deliveries to some agricultural and municipal users affected by the drought .

under s. 2198 , the secretaries would be directed to maximize water supplies in project development and operations while the california governor's drought declaration is in effect .

some might question if the actions in this section and the broad direction to maximize water supplies for users might have unintended or long - term consequences for species in the bay - delta .

for example , projects and actions might meet the minimum requirements under law for addressing species and water quality , but not account for long term effects .

indeed , some contend that if managers were required to maximize water supplies in implementing projects and actions under 103 ( b ) , their discretionary flexibility to make decisions would be narrower .

therefore , maximizing water supplies would appear to benefit water users under drought conditions ; the long term effects on other factors such as species viability , recreation , and water quality would be unclear .

longer - term consequences of the proposed bills may be of interest to congress .

provisions under h.r .

3964 would be in effect beyond the current drought , and would continue in perpetuity absent future changes to the statute .

as discussed above , this could have long - term environmental effects that change the scope of water planning in the bay - delta region .

for example , some have argued that if esa and state protections in the bay - delta are removed as proposed , there would be no incentive to implement the bdcp , a habitat conservation plan currently under development .

further , the bill , if enacted , would set some precedents .

for example , the waiver of esa and state laws in order to provide increased water deliveries for federal contractors would be a significant departure from other approaches that defer to state laws and federal environmental statutes such as esa .

some might use this provision as an example and justification for proposing exceptions to esa guidelines on a species by species basis .

h.r .

3964 would also elevate the supply and use of natural resources as a priority over species concerns , which could have ramifications beyond the water - use arena .

s. 2198 would largely be applicable during the current drought declaration ( with few exceptions ) , thereby reducing its long - term effects .

however , some might contend that its directive to maximize water use when contemplating actions taken under existing law would also elevate resource use at the expense of the environment .

even though environmental laws and regulations would have to be followed , it appears that s. 2198 would encourage federal agencies to meet the minimal requirements for the environment under applicable laws .

neither s. 2198 nor h.r .

3964 has specifically authorized new appropriations to fund activities authorized under the bill .

s. 2198 would use existing authorities for funding under other laws to fund certain projects and activities , and in some cases provisions under s. 2198 would re - direct or re - prioritize activities under existing authorities to address drought - related activities .

h.r .

3964 largely authorizes changes under existing laws for operations , activities , and procedures to generate water for users , and would redirect funding from some sources .

there is less emphasis placed on implementing projects and activities in h.r .

3964 compared to s. 2198 .

in some cases under h.r .

3964 , funding is assigned to water districts , such as funding for the pilot program to protect native anadromous fish is directed to water districts .

additionally , the bill would require certain studies that could eventually result in the construction of projects ( and , potentially , federal funding requirements ) in the future .

there are some potential precedent - setting provisions in both bills that might be of interest to congress .

both bills elevate the need to supply additional water to users in comparison to other uses ( eg , environment and recreation ) .

the directive to maximize water supplies for users under s. 2198 as a priority over other considerations ( eg , water quality or habitat conservation ) might cause some to describe the provision as precedent - setting since it lowers the discretionary flexibility of agencies and prioritizes one resource need over others during a time of water shortage .

others might counter this notion by stating that other factors such as water quality and species needs are addressed in other laws and regulations that s. 2198 is not changing .

essentially , agencies would have to balance the new directives with parameters prescribed in existing law and regulations , yet do so with less flexibility .

the long - term effects of s. 2198 itself would be tempered since most of its provisions will sunset after the drought declaration in california is lifted .

however , some might view the directive to maximize water supplies for users for actions specified within biops as precedent setting .

even if regulations in the biops are followed , any discretionary flexibility provided to agencies to manage water supplies would be narrowed because they would directed to maximize water supplies for users .

these directives could eventually be significant during other water supply shortages , especially during times of drought .

h.r .

3964 contains several potential precedent - setting provisions .

similar in theme to s. 2198 , h.r .

3964 would prioritize water supplies for users over other competing uses .

the policy mechanisms used to achieve this objective differ from s. 2198 .

for example , the waiver of esa and state laws in order to provide increased water deliveries for federal contractors would be a significant departure from previous approaches that defer to state laws and federal environmental statutes such as esa , nepa , and the clean water act , and may attract attention despite section 501 of the bill , which notes that nothing in the act shall serve as precedent for other states .

specifically , some might contend that provisions under h.r .

3964 that waive certain federal esa provisions for the region could set a precedent for addressing esa on a species by species basis , or region by region basis .

further , h.r .

3964 would prohibit "any" state or federal law ( including the public trust doctrine ) from reducing water supplies beyond those allowed in the bay - delta accord and declaring a federal supremacy over water management to "protect existing water rights throughout the system. .

all of these changes are significant , and could hypothetically be a model for similar legislation in other areas .

