a significant portion of the more than $50 billion the federal government spends annually on research projects supports biomedical research .

and a host of different government agencies — primarily those housed within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) — financially support biomedical research .

in addition to directly supporting certain biomedical research projects , the government — primarily though the food and drug administration ( fda ) — continually reviews the biomedical research that is used to support an application to market certain products , like drugs or medical devices .

collectively , the various federal agencies that either support or oversee biomedical research have a strong interest in ensuring that the underlying research is scientifically rigorous and free of bias .

if a researcher has a conflict of interest — that is , a real or potential incompatibility between one's private interests and one's public or fiduciary duties — that conflict , including a financial conflict , can potentially undermine the research .

for example , a researcher employed by a university might be paid a consulting fee from a private company to help the company analyze the results of a clinical trial for an experimental cancer drug that the company hopes to one day market .

at the university , the researcher might also be participating in a similar clinical investigation that is funded by a grant from the national institutes of health .

in such a case , the researcher might feel pressured to analyze the university research in a way that enhances his standing with the pharmaceutical company in the hopes that the he will be offered opportunities to consult with the pharmaceutical company in the future .

as a result , a potential conflict may exist that could bias the research or at the very least undermine the credibility of the research .

to prevent such financial conflicts of interest ( fcois ) from undermining government supported or regulated biomedical research , the relevant government agencies have established an often - complex set of regulations and policies governing the identification and management of financial conflicts as they relate to biomedical research .

this report provides a legal overview of the current federal requirements regarding fcois held by any investigator who participates in biomedical research funded or otherwise regulated by the federal government .

in particular , the report focuses on the hhs requirements , as those requirements are the most widely applicable to medical research .

nonetheless , the requirements of other federal agencies that often fund or regulate research , such as the fda , the national science foundation , and the department of defense , are also discussed .

this report concludes with an overview of the current developments with respect to the law governing fcois and biomedical research .

to guide the discussion that follows , table 1 provides a brief synopsis of the various federal regulations on fcois and biomedical research .

by its nature , most federal funding for biomedical research flows from hhs .

the united states public health service ( phs ) is the primary division of the department that oversees grants for research funded by the eight primary agencies and three human services divisions of hhs .

congress granted the surgeon general authority , with the approval of the secretary , to issue regulations necessary to administer the department .

under that authority , hhs has promulgated rules applicable to phs divisions to ensure federally funded biomedical research is objective and serves the public welfare .

institutions applying for grants from a phs agency must establish procedures to "provide a reasonable expectation that the design , conduct , and reporting of research" will be free from bias resulting from conflicts of interest .

some federal agencies outside the scope of phs , but which also fund biomedical research , voluntarily follow the phs regulations .

further , because much of the research conducted at both public and private universities relies on federal funding , most universities have adopted conflict of interest policies that mirror , or build on , the phs regulations .

as a result , the phs general objectivity requirements are the most widely applicable to biomedical research , and accordingly , the phs regulations will be discussed in more detail .

to guide the discussion that follows , figure 1 provides a flowchart of the process by which fcois are identified and managed pursuant to the phs general objectivity requirements .

in 2011 , the phs "objectivity in research" regulations for the disclosure of fcois were revised to their current form .

the revisions to the phs objectivity rules included the lowering of financial interest reporting thresholds , expanding reporting obligations , and requiring institutions receiving federal funds to develop and enforce policies on fcois through training and education programs .

although the revisions arguably increased clarity and transparency with respect to the phs financial conflict rules , the administration of the phs fcoi process is still largely left to grantee institutions .

as a result , even though a relatively small number of federal laws govern fcoi with respect to biomedical research , the process is still potentially cumbersome for investigators who participate in research with multiple institutions because each institution may have different processes for complying with the same federal rules .

beyond potential issues arising because of a lack of uniformity among biomedical research institutions , the delegation of fcoi oversight to individual institutions arguably risks compliance problems , with some institutions inevitably having more lax financial conflict policies than others .

some commentators have even suggested that the discrepancies among research institutions with respect to their fcoi policies may lead to a "race to the bottom" where investigators "leave institutions with stringent policies to go to more lenient ones. .

others have raised concerns that the delegation of the administration of fcoi policies to grantee institutions generally has resulted in fcoi policies that are vague and provide little guidance to researchers as to the "kinds of relationships with industry that are permitted or prohibited. .

as a consequence , some have advocated for a uniform federal conflict of interest policy that must be followed by all institutions and investigators applying for federal funds .

at the same time , others have cautioned against imposing a "one size fits all" conflict management approach because "a degree of flexibility is essential to maintaining a balance between 'caution' and 'an environment in which legitimate research can flourish. .

regardless , as a consequence of the most recent revisions to the phs objectivity rules , the debate over the appropriate scope and reach of federal fcoi regulations with respect to biomedical research , which has at times "captured the attention" of congress , will likely continue .

while the phs general objectivity requirements have been recently updated , the hhs and fda rules respecting human subject research have not been substantially altered in decades .

as a consequence , the hhs and fda have jointly provided advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) to "modernize" the common rule .

with respect to fcois , the anpr noted that a key "problem[]" with the current version of the common rule is its failure to ensure that institutions effectively provide human test subjects with "appropriate information about [the] financial relationships between researchers and study sponsors...." to remedy this problem , hhs has requested comments about whether the common rule should be amended to require that institutions disclose in consent forms "information about financial relationships [researchers] have with [their] sponsors. .

more broadly , the anpr has suggested that ( 1 ) the scope of the hhs common rule should be expanded to reach all research activities at domestic institutions that receive " some funding from a common rule agency" and ( 2 ) the federal rules on human subject testing should be harmonized and refined across adopting agencies .

while a new common rule that is broader in scope and more precise and uniform could potentially expand the rule's impact on fcoi management with respect to biomedical research , since soliciting comments from the public in july of 2011 , hhs has not yet issued any new final rules amending the common rule .

in addition to the common rule anpr , in july 2014 the fda announced new draft guidance on human subject testing and sought public commentary on the guidance .

included in the draft guidance was a series of broad recommendations that "clinical investigators should consider whether information related to financial relationships or interests should be provided to subjects. .

in addition , members of congress have at times sought to encourage , through proposed legislation , hhs to expand the common rule to explicitly impose regulations respecting the definition and management of potential fcois with regard to human subject testing .

to date , however , no recent changes to the either the hhs or fda common rules have been enacted into law that implicate fcoi policy .

