ebola virus disease ( ebola , or evd ) is a severe , often fatal disease that was first detected in the democratic republic of the congo ( drc ) in 1976 .

originating in animals , evd is spread to and among humans through contact with the blood , other bodily fluids , organs , and corpses of those infected .

it is not transmitted through the air , and the world health organization ( who ) maintains that there is minimal risk of contracting evd on a plane , though most airlines have suspended flights to and from the affected countries .

in march 2014 , an evd outbreak was reported in guinea , west africa .

the outbreak is the first in west africa and has become the largest , most persistent ever documented .

the outbreak is continuing to spread in guinea , sierra leone , and liberia ( "affected countries" ) and has ended in nigeria and senegal , after having infected 20 people in nigeria and one in senegal .

as of late october , nearly 10,000 people have contracted evd , of whom almost 5,000 have died ( figure 1 ) .

who regularly updates evd cases at http: / / www.who.int / ebola .

due to inadequate disease surveillance capacities in the region , who estimates that actual cases may be two to four times higher than reported .

some health experts are concerned that the weak surveillance systems in neighboring countries may miss evd cases .

on october 23 , mali reported its first evd case and some suspect that cote d'ivoire may have undetected cases .

who is reportedly sending a team to mali to help with clinical management , epidemiology , contact tracing and social mobilization .

the health systems in the affected countries were already weak before the ebola outbreak , and have become overwhelmed by the crisis .

according to who , there are six components of a health system: ( 1 ) human resources ; ( 2 ) governance and leadership ; ( 3 ) financing ; ( 4 ) commodities and supply chain networkers ; ( 5 ) service delivery ; and ( 6 ) information .

the affected countries face severe deficiencies in each of these areas and the outbreak is exacerbating these challenges .

this section describes how constraints in each component of the affected countries' health systems enable the virus to continue to spread .

table 1 summarizes these issues .

international responses are accelerating , though it remains to be seen how much it will ultimately cost to contain the outbreak and when this will be achieved .

the financial requirements for containing the outbreak are rising along with the spread of the outbreak ( figure 7 ) .

in march , who estimated that it would take $4.8 million to contain the outbreak .

at the end of april , more than 200 evd cases had been discovered in guinea , less than a dozen in liberia , and none in sierra leone .

in august , the organization revised its ebola response plan , estimating it would cost roughly $490 million to contain the outbreak .

by then , the outbreak had reached sierra leone and nigeria and had caused 3,685 evd cases , including 1,841 deaths .

the outbreak is continuing to spread , is causing broader social and economic disruptions , and has infected more than 10,000 people .

in september , the united nations ( u.n. ) established the u.n. mission for ebola emergency response ( unmeer ) to coordinate the international response to the outbreak .

that month , the united nations security council held a special meeting on ebola , urging member states to expedite support for the affected countries and to contribute to a u.n. integrated ebola response plan .

the six - month , $988 million plan calls for addressing the health and social impacts of the outbreak ( table 3 ) .

roughly half of the funds would be spent on health programs and the balance would be spent on addressing issues such as food insecurity , economic disruptions , and establishing and maintaining supply chain networks .

as of october 29 , 2014 , donors have contributed $493 million towards the un plan and pledged to provide an additional $279 million ( figure 8 ) .

donors are also providing resources for addressing the ebola outbreak outside of the un response .

the united nations office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( unocha ) estimates that some $894 million has been committed for addressing the outbreak and an additional $938 million has been pledged for the immediate and long - term preparedness needs .

who and unocha will likely revise their requests for funding and material support as the outbreak continues to spread .

the united states is the leading funder of the international ebola response and its financial support is continuing to rise .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) reports that as of october 22 , u.s. humanitarian funding for evd responses totaled $344.6 million .

in addition , the department of defense ( dod ) is planning to spend more than $1 billion on containing the outbreak in support of u.s. evd activities in west africa , as described below .

on october 17 , president obama established an ebola czar to coordinate u.s. domestic and global responses to the ebola outbreak .

the u.s .

global ebola strategy has four key goals: 1 ) control the outbreak , 2 ) mitigate second order impacts , 3 ) establish coherent leadership and operations , and 4 ) advance global health security .

u.s. global efforts focus primarily on liberia , where the outbreak is most widely spread , although the united states is engaged in all three affected countries .

as of october 25 , nearly 900 u.s. government personnel are stationed in the region , more than 700 of which are among the 4,000 military personnel who will be deployed to the region .

u.s. responses to the current ebola outbreak are built on prior and ongoing efforts to build the capacity of foreign nations to prepare and respond to disease outbreaks — including ebola .

these activities are primarily implemented through usaid and cdc , though the u.s .

departments of agriculture , defense , and state also contribute to such efforts .

pandemic preparedness programs began in earnest after the 2005 avian flu outbreak and have experienced varying levels of congressional support .

the section below briefly describes u.s. pandemic preparedness efforts , including ebola outbreak responses , by agency .

the current ebola outbreak has overwhelmed the governments of guinea , sierra leone , and liberia .

insufficient capacity to detect , treat , and prevent the spread of disease has enabled the virus to spread and has further weakened health systems that were already inundated and in dilapidated conditions .

congress has held several hearings on the outbreak and enacted legislation that urged expanding u.s. and international responses and that provided funds for u.s. responses .

as the outbreak continues to spread , the administration may request additional funds to contain the outbreak .

this section describes issues congress may consider as it assesses u.s. and international responses .

in an august 29 , 2014 report , who warned that bordering countries , namely benin , burkina faso , côte d'ivoire , guinea - bissau , mali , and senegal , were "at risk" of seeing ebola cases .

on october 23 , 2014 , mali reported its first ebola case and health officials suspect that cases may exist in other neighboring countries .

who is reportedly helping neighboring countries to build evd surveillance , preparedness and response plans .

an oxford university study concluded that some 22 million people across central and west africa live in forested areas where one of the suspected vectors ( fruit bats ) resides , raising concerns among some that future ebola outbreaks may occur in the region and other parts of sub - saharan africa .

the article notes that "changes in human mobility and connectivity will likely have profound impacts on the dispersion of ebola cases. .

prospects for future ebola outbreaks in urban areas and in countries with limited pandemic preparedness capacity raise several questions , including: is the u.s. response to the ebola outbreak effective ? .

does the united stated sufficiently support pandemic preparedness efforts ? .

does disease - specific funding encumber pandemic preparedness efforts ? .

will the reprogramming of usaid funds to address the ebola outbreak impact ongoing global health and development programs ? .

are ongoing outbreak responses by the u.s. and international improving the capacity of the affected countries , as well as others in the region , to identify , detect , and respond to future outbreaks ? .

