several issues related to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting on federal and state lands are addressed in various bills in the 113 th congress .

hunting and conservation have been linked since the advent of federal wildlife legislation , such as the lacey act of 1900 ( the first federal wildlife law , making it a federal crime to ship game killed in violation of one state's laws to another state ) or the migratory bird treaty act of 1918 ( regulating the killing , hunting , buying , or selling of migratory birds ) .

controversy exists about exactly what hunting , fishing , or shooting sports currently are allowed on federal land and when .

under current law , opening more lands to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting is to be balanced against good game management , public safety , resource management , and the statutory purposes of the lands .

this report focuses on the bipartisan sportsmen's act of 2014 ( s. 2363 ) , now pending in the senate .

it addresses various issues of interest to sportsmen and congress .

among other things , it covers land management priorities for hunting , trapping , fishing , and recreational shooting on various categories of federal lands ; changes to the duck stamp program ; recreational shooting ; imports of polar bear trophies ; hunting waterfowl over baited fields ; and funding for land acquisition to support hunter access .

section 101 of s. 2363 concerns duck stamps .

currently , duck stamps are purchased by hunters for the right to hunt migratory birds ; proceeds from their sale go to the migratory bird conservation fund ( mbcf ) for acquisition of migratory bird habitat for inclusion in the national wildlife refuge system .

stamps are good for one year , and cost $15 , a price set in legislation in 1991 .

since 2008 , a pilot program has tested the feasibility of the sale of duck stamps through the internet ; a number of states now participate in the pilot program .

in other states , stamps continue to be available at u.s. post offices or other approved sites .

s. 2363 would permanently authorize the electronic issuance of duck stamps .

states would apply to the secretary of the interior for authority to issue the electronic stamps , under a procedure specified in the section .

provisions for revocation of state authority to issue electronic stamps are included .

section 102 of s. 2363 would exempt lead shot , ammunition , and fishing sinkers from provisions of the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) .

the section would prohibit regulation under tsca of "shot , bullets and other projectiles , propellants , and primers" and "any sport fishing equipment. .

the bill further adds that the section does not limit the need to comply with other federal , state , or local laws .

this provision appears to seek legislative certainty for a denied citizen petition to force the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate lead in ammunition and in fishing sinkers .

on august 27 , 2010 , epa denied one portion of the petition relating to the production of lead for use in ammunition , stating that the agency did not have legal authority to regulate ammunition under tsca .

epa continued to evaluate the petition with respect to fishing tackle and accepted public comments until september 15 , 2010 .

epa denied that portion of the petition on november 4 , 2010 .

on april 30 , 2012 , a lawsuit challenging the denial was dismissed .

on june 7 , 2012 , a suit was filed challenging epa's 2012 denial of a new petition to regulate lead shot under tsca .

the court rejected the plaintiffs' case in july 2013 , and an appeal has been filed .

these provisions would prevent federal regulation through tsca , but not through other statutory authorities: lead shot has been banned in the united states for the hunting of migratory waterfowl since 1991 under authority of the migratory bird treaty act and the endangered species act .

consequently , it is unclear what effect the provision might have .

section 103 of s. 2363 is designated the target practice and marksmanship training support act .

it would allow territories and states to use more of the funds allocated to them under the pittman - robertson wildlife restoration act ( 16 u.s.c .

§669 ) for projects involving land acquisition , construction , and expansion of public target ranges for firearms or archery .

a state's allocation of federal funds may currently be used to support a maximum of 75% of any project , with the remainder coming from nonfederal sources .

section 103 would amend 16 u.s.c .

§669h - 1 ( a ) , apparently intending to increase the maximum federal share from the pittman - robertson ( p - r ) program from 75% to 90% , for projects acquiring land for , expanding , or constructing target ranges .

however , the bill contains a provision stating that a state "may pay up to 90 percent of the cost of acquiring land for , expanding , or constructing a public target range. .

on its face , the language appears to give a state federal approval to pay for nearly all of the cost of a project .

however , it is more likely that the purpose is to allow a state to use its p - r allocation of federal funds to pay for up to 90% of the cost of a project , with the state ( or other nonfederal sources ) needing to pay for no more than 10% of the project .

there is no committee report to clarify the intent of the provision .

the bill would define a public target range , for the purposes of p - r , specifying that it is a location identified by a government agency , is open to the public , may be supervised , and accommodates archery or rifle , pistol , or shotgun shooting .

s. 2363 ( section 104 ) would exempt alaska natives who are subsistence users from 16 u.s.c .

718a , which requires waterfowl hunters to purchase the duck stamp .

before may 15 , 2008 , when the listing of polar bears as a threatened species under the endangered species act ( esa ) took effect , it was legal under u.s. law to import polar bear trophies legally taken in canada .

after that date , import was not allowed .

once the proposed rule to list polar bears as a threatened species was published in january 2007 , an extensive campaign was conducted by the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) to alert hunters to the potential impact of esa listing on the ability to import polar bear trophies .

however , fws continued to authorize the import of polar bear trophies under existing law until the esa listing became final .

the permitting process was truncated by court order , making the listing effective immediately rather than after 30 days .

s. 2363 ( section 105 ) would amend the marine mammal protection act ( mmpa ) to allow hunters with polar bear trophies legally hunted in canada to import these trophies to the united states .

it would direct fws to issue permits for importing these sport - hunted trophies , if a permit was sought before may 15 , 2008 .

it would further amend the mmpa to provide that the permits may be issued regardless of the polar bears' status as a depleted species , which is the basis on which the permits were denied .

fws does not oppose legislation allowing importation for hunters who both applied for an import permit and completed their legal hunt prior to esa listing .

others oppose allowing these permits , believing it would encourage hunting of species whose listing is imminent .

the humane society of the united states testified in the 112 th congress that allowing polar bear imports would "would roll back polar bear conservation efforts and set a dangerous precedent for gutting the protections provided under the marine mammal protection act and the endangered species act. .

a federal court has upheld the current permit ban , finding that there was no procedural flaw in blocking permits as of the day the bear was listed as threatened .

hunting of migratory game birds over baited fields is forbidden by the migratory bird treaty act and its implementing regulations .

there is little controversy over whether such hunting is an unsportsmanlike practice that should not be allowed .

there is , however , controversy over precisely what constitutes baiting , how long hunters should wait after an agricultural field has been harvested to avoid the baiting prohibition , and whether the effects of natural disasters might affect whether a field is considered baited .

section 106 of s. 2363 addresses these issues by allowing hunting over crops in certain circumstances .

section 106 defines a bait area as an area where there has been the placement of salt grain , or feed to attract game birds ; and an area where there has been manipulation of unharvested cropland ( eg , through mowing or discing ) , unless the manipulation is a normal agricultural practice .

it then explicitly excludes from the definition any areas ( a ) with a treatment that is a normal agricultural practice , ( b ) with unmanipulated standing crops , or ( c ) with standing crops that are or were flooded .

the last provision appears to exclude flooded cropland , whether naturally or artificially flooded .

the section defines normal agricultural practice .

some features of this long definition are particularly noteworthy .

first , the practice is to be considered normal if recommended by the state office of the cooperative extension system of the department of agriculture .

in addition , the applicable state game department is to be consulted and , if requested , may be asked to concur .

it is unclear who may do the requesting , and what would be the effect if the applicable state game department does not concur .

a normal agricultural practice is also defined to include the destruction of crops as required by the federal crop insurance corporation to obtain a crop insurance payment after a natural disaster .

section 106 also requires an annual report from the secretary of agriculture to the secretary of the interior on any changes to normal agricultural practices .

section 107 of s. 2363 addresses hunting , trapping , fishing , and recreational shooting on federal land , and appears to create an "open until closed" management policy for federal lands .

it describes the factors a land management agency must consider to justify closing federal lands to hunting , trapping , fishing , or recreational shooting .

the steps include specific criteria for closure determinations , revising planning documents , and filing reports with congress .

this analysis will focus potential impacts of section 107 on lands managed by the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service ( fs ) .

while the bill's definition of federal public lands explicitly excludes national park service ( nps ) and fish and wildlife service ( fws ) lands , it may include other federal public land .

 ( see below. ) .

section 108 of s. 2363 would reduce fees and facilitate access to "federal land and waterways" for commercial film crews of up to five people .

it would amend 16 u.s.c .

460 l - 6d to specify that such crews could obtain a permit for $200 , good for one year , for commercial filming in areas and times that are open to public use .

no additional fees may be charged .

the agency may deny access if resources may be damaged and the damage cannot be mitigated ; if public use would be unreasonably disrupted ; if the public would face health or safety risks ; or if the filming would use "models or props that are not part of the natural or cultural resources or administrative facilities of the federal land. .

currently , such fees are variable and must generate a "fair return" based on the number of days of use , size of the crew , and amount and type of equipment .

sometimes , the best access to federal land is through private property .

at least two federal land management agencies , blm and fs , have authority to acquire property to provide easier access to federal lands .

the authority includes eminent domain .

section 201 of s. 2363 would amend the land and water conservation fund act ( lwcf ) by directing that the secretaries of the interior and of agriculture prepare priority lists to identify land or rights - of - way acquisition projects where access to federal public land for hunting , fishing , and other recreational purposes currently is "significantly restricted. .

the bill would require each agency in the two departments to devote the greater of $10 million or 1.5% of the annual appropriation for lwcf to acquisition of lands , rights of way , or other interests from willing sellers to improve access for these activities .

the term federal public land is not defined for this section either .

the department of the interior agencies currently receiving lwcf appropriations are blm , fws , and nps ; for agriculture , only fs receives lwcf funds .

the section does not specify how the moneys set aside are to be divided among agencies or departments .

in addition , section 107 ( b ) ( 1 ) could be read as encouraging agencies to exercise their statutory authority to facilitate access to federal lands by acquiring property , such as easements , from adjoining property owners .

section 202 of s. 2363 would amend the federal land transaction facilitation act ( fltfa ) .

fltfa was designed to allow proceeds from the disposal of public land to be used to acquire inholdings and other lands to improve federal land management .

it focuses on acquiring property that adjoins protected sites such as wilderness areas and national parks .

under section 205 of the current law , proceeds from the "sale or exchange of public land identified for disposal under approved land use plans" are to be put in the fltfa fund .

approved land use plans are those made under the federal land policy and management act ( flpma ) that were in effect as of the date fltfa was enacted .

section 206 ( a ) of fltfa states that "notwithstanding any other law [except for laws requiring proceeds to go into state trust funds] the gross proceeds of the sale or exchange of public land under this act shall be deposited in a separate account in the treasury of the united states to be known as the 'federal land disposal account.' .

section 202 of s. 2363 would amend fltfa by extending the expiration of the act and eliminating the expiration of the authorization of the fltfa fund .

the current law prevents revenue going to the fund from sales of the lands listed under the santini - burton act ( p.l .

96-586 ) , and under the southern nevada public land management act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-263 ) .

to that list , section 202 would add lands in the following bills whose sales revenue would not accrue to the fltfa fund , meaning these land sales would not have to share their revenues: white pine county [nevada] conservation , recreation , and development act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) ; lincoln county [nevada] conservation , recreation , and development act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-424 ) ; owyhee wilderness , nevada , in subtitle f of title i of the omnibus public land management act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-11 , §1501 ) ; lands in washington county , utah , subtitle o of title i of the omnibus public land management act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-11 , §1971 ) ; carson city , nevada , exchanges , section 2601 of the omnibus public land management act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-11 , §2601 ) ; and douglas county , washington , exchanges , section 2606 of the omnibus public land management act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-11 , §2606 ) .

section 203 of s. 2363 would reauthorize the north american wetlands conservation act ( 16 u.s.c .

§4406 ( c ) ( 5 ) ) through fy2019 .

section 204 of s. 2363 would amend the national fish and wildlife foundation establishment act .

the foundation is a federally chartered tax - deductible non - profit organization which accepts contributions for the benefit of wildlife and natural resource conservation .

among other things , the proposed changes would modify selection criteria for its board of directors and enlarge the board's membership .

it would clarify the foundation's authority to receive restitution , mitigation , and other amounts from specified proceedings , so that these funds can be used for resource conservation .

the changes also clarify that federal departments or agencies may provide funds to the foundation that would be used for conservation and management of wildlife and other natural resources ; the foundation would be permitted to collect fees for managing these funds .

further , federal agencies would have authority to waive competitive processes in awarding grants or contracts under the act if necessary to address a disaster , or if the head of the agencies determines that such a waiver would reduce administrative expenses .

gifts to the foundation would be made available without further appropriation .

