o ne of the ongoing controversies related to the affordable care act ( aca ) has been the scope of exemption from certain health care coverage requirements , including the contraceptive coverage requirement .

a series of regulations have been promulgated to address concerns of certain entities with religious objections to the coverage requirement , but until 2014 , the regulations applied only to churches and nonprofit religious organizations , not to for - profit corporations .

though closely divided , the u.s. supreme court's 5-4 decision in burwell v. hobby lobby stores , inc .

has settled the question of whether certain for - profit corporations must be exempt from the requirement , unless congress chooses to amend the statute providing those corporations legal protection .

imputing the beliefs of owners of closely held corporations to the corporations themselves , the court found that the aca could not require such companies to provide contraceptive coverage in group health plans offered to their employees .

it based its decision on the religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ) , which provides heightened protection for burdens on religious exercise .

although the case has been analogized to citizens united v. federal election commission , a 2010 case holding that corporations have free speech rights under the first amendment , the hobby lobby decision was not decided on constitutional grounds .

instead , it provides protection on a statutory basis , meaning that congress has the ability to respond to the decision if it disagrees with the court's ruling .

this report analyzes the court's opinions in hobby lobby , examining the rights of closely held corporations under the religious freedom restoration act .

it also addresses the implications for the contraceptive coverage mandate under aca and discusses potential legislative responses to the court's decision .

finally , it analyzes the impact that hobby lobby may have in other contexts in which employers may claim religious objections , including developments in a separate set of legal challenges brought by religious nonprofit organizations , which have claimed that the process for the accommodation imposes an impermissible substantial burden under rfra .

the companies challenging the contraceptive coverage requirement alleged violation of their religious exercise rights under both the first amendment's free exercise clause and rfra .

the free exercise clause prohibits the government from prohibiting the free exercise of religion .

traditionally it had been interpreted to require that the government show a compelling interest for any government action that interfered with a person's exercise of religious beliefs .

however , in 1990 , the supreme court reinterpreted that standard , explaining that the free exercise clause never "relieve[s] an individual of the obligation to comply with a valid and neutral law of general applicability. .

the court's decision lowered the baseline of protection , but emphasized that congress remained free to consider whether additional protection would be appropriate through the legislative process .

congress responded to the court's decision by enacting rfra , which essentially reinstated the heightened standard of protection .

rfra states that the "[g]overnment shall not substantially burden a person's exercise of religion even if the burden results from a rule of general applicability , except as provided in subsection ( b ) . .

subsection ( b ) requires that any substantial burden must further a compelling governmental interest and use the least restrictive means to achieve that interest .

a number of potential legislative responses have been mentioned since the court announced its decision in hobby lobby .

it is important to remember that the court's decision was based on the statutory protections in rfra , not in constitutional protections of the first amendment .

just as congress may enact heightened protections for religious exercise as it did in rfra and as it may determine the scope of protection available , it may enact statutory language to clarify the effect of rfra regardless of the court's decision .

the court essentially created a working definition of person under rfra , but congress may confirm or alter that definition at its discretion .

alternatively , it may consider preempting rfra with respect to certain legislative requirements .

generally speaking , the hobby lobby decision clarified the scope to which persons may be eligible for protection under rfra , but in the practical context of the contraceptive coverage requirement , it essentially addressed the question of whether the requirement's implementing regulations sufficiently addressed the range of entities with religious objections .

since aca's enactment , hhs has developed various iterations of administrative regulations to address religious objections .

the rules in effect at the time hobby lobby was decided were promulgated in july 2013 , and respond to religious entities' objections to contraceptive coverage in two ways: ( 1 ) an exemption for religious employers covered under subsections ( a ) ( 3 ) ( a ) ( i ) or ( a ) ( 3 ) ( a ) ( iii ) of section 6033 of the tax code and ( 2 ) an accommodation for other eligible organizations .

entities covered by the relevant provisions for the exemption generally include churches , church auxiliaries , church associations , or other religious orders .

under the exemption , employees of religious employers would not receive contraceptive coverage either from their employers or from the issuers directly .

eligible employers that are not covered by the exemption may instead seek protection through the accommodation .

to qualify for the accommodation under the july 2013 final rules , an organization was required to ( 1 ) object to coverage of at least some of the contraceptive services based on religious beliefs ; ( 2 ) be a nonprofit entity ; ( 3 ) hold itself out as a religious organization ; and ( 4 ) comply with the self - certification requirements of the rule .

following hobby lobby , the regulations implementing the accommodation were amended to reflect broader eligibility , as discussed in more detail below .

under the accommodation , employees of eligible organizations would not receive contraceptive coverage from their employers , but would have coverage provided directly through the health plan issuers at no cost to the employee or the employer .

simply put , hobby lobby held that the regulations also must provide some accommodation for closely held for - profit corporations .

however , the court did not examine the sufficiency of the existing regulations with regard to other types of entities with religious objections .

it did not decide any legal issues with respect to the merits of the exemption or accommodation available to churches and religious organizations , respectively , nor did it address protection from state contraceptive coverage requirements .

as a result , a number of legal questions remain with regard to the obligations of employers to provide contraceptive coverage .

in addition to its decision in hobby lobby , the court has considered procedural requests filed by nonprofits that objected to the process under which they could qualify for accommodation , specifically claiming that the certification process required under the july 2013 rules burdens their religious exercise .

notably , three days after the hobby lobby decision was announced , the court issued an injunction in wheaton college v. burwell , effectively preventing enforcement of the contraceptive coverage requirement against wheaton college pending a final decision in its case if the school provided written notice to hhs of its qualifications for the accommodation .

providing such a letter would allow the school to claim eligibility without using the official form — to which it objects — prescribed by the regulations .

although the order explicitly emphasized that it was not "an expression of the court's views on the merits" of the case , three justices wrote in dissent from the court's order .

the dissenting justices stated that the college's assertion "that its filing of a self - certification form will make it complicit in the provision of contraceptives by triggering the obligation for someone else to provide the services to which it objects" was not a viable claim under rfra and therefore not eligible for injunctive relief .

the dissenters noted that the hobby lobby decision considered the accommodation to be "'an alternative that achieves all of the government's aims while providing greater respect for religious liberty.' .

despite the widespread attention focused on the wheaton college order , it indeed does not provide any final decision on the merits of the challenge to the accommodation .

additionally , though the majority in hobby lobby noted the possibility that the accommodation could be a "less restrictive" means to achieve the government's interest in the contraceptive coverage mandate , it did not determine it to be the least restrictive means .

in other words , simply because the court pointed to the accommodation as an option that burdened the companies' religious exercise less does not mean that there may not be a third option that minimized the burden even more effectively .

in july 2015 , the obama administration issued final regulations regarding the scope and procedure for seeking accommodation .

the final regulations clarify that the accommodation is available to organizations that ( 1 ) oppose providing coverage for required contraceptive services ; ( 2 ) are either nonprofit religious organizations or closely held for - profit entities whose governing body takes official action to establish its objection to the required contraceptive services ; and ( 3 ) self - certify their objections , either by use of a standard form or written notice to the relevant agency .

the regulations generally define closely held entities as ones with no publicly traded ownership interests and having five or fewer individuals who own over 50% of its ownership interests ( or a substantially similar structure ) .

despite the final rules' expansion to apply to certain for - profit entities as a result of the court's decision in hobby lobby , implementation of the accommodation has continued to be challenged in courts , particularly by nonprofit religious entities , which object to the process by which the accommodation is granted .

in november 2015 , the supreme court announced it would review seven consolidated cases .

prior to the court's granting certiorari , each of the federal circuit courts to decide the issue on the merits had upheld the accommodation , until september 2015 , when the u.s. court of appeals for the eighth circuit granted a preliminary injunction after finding that the method for qualifying for the accommodation likely would violate the nonprofit organizations' rights under rfra .

hobby lobby involved a challenge to the federal contraceptive coverage requirement by companies seeking protection under the federal rfra .

thus , the decision to expand protection under rfra to closely held corporations affects only federal law .

a number of states have enacted separate contraceptive coverage requirements , predating aca .

therefore , the closely held companies that now have been recognized as protected by rfra may still be obligated to provide contraceptive coverage under state requirements if the states do not have an applicable exemption to such coverage requirements .

in some cases , such companies may seek protection under state versions of rfra , as the federal rfra only applies to protect against burdens imposed by federal actions .

many states enacted laws modeled on the federal rfra to prohibit state or local governments from substantially burdening religious exercise .

the applicability of these state rfras to various types of organizations would depend on each state's legislative language .

if the state rfra did not define the entities which may claim protection , a court may look to hobby lobby as guidance in interpreting the proper scope , but would not be bound to reach the same conclusion as the court did .

notably , a recent trend in state rfra legislation has reflected a broader approach to religious freedom protections , though proposed laws have had mixed success .

for instance , in march 2015 , indiana enacted a version of rfra that defined covered "persons" to include individuals , religious organizations , and a broad range of business entities , regardless of their for - profit or nonprofit status or the type of ownership , if the entity exercised religious beliefs held by its owners .

that definition extends further than the supreme court's interpretation , which presently includes only business entities that are closely held .

however , a similar law was vetoed in arizona in february 2014 .

the controversy raised over the expansion of persons and entities subject to rfra protection has highlighted one of the potential impacts of hobby lobby — could a rfra be used to avoid compliance with a variety of laws of general applicability , including , as one example , public accommodations requirements in civil rights laws ? .

in response to these concerns , indiana enacted an amendment to its rfra , stating that the law does not authorize individuals or entities generally "to refuse to offer or provide services , facilities , use of public accommodations , goods , employment , or housing ... on the basis of race , color , religion , ancestry , age , national origin , disability , sex , sexual orientation , gender identity , or united states military service," or establish a defense to such claims in civil or criminal proceedings .

the amendments do not apply to entities which are tax - exempt churches and nonprofit religious organizations , or to ministerial employees of a church or nonprofit religious organization .

