the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) is proposing to require event data recorders ( edrs ) — widely referred to as "black boxes" — on all new passenger vehicles sold in the united states .

although over 90% of the new cars and light trucks sold in the united states already come with edrs intended to capture information about the final seconds before a crash , these are installed voluntarily by the manufacturers ; nhtsa's current rules mainly specify certain types of information that must be recorded if a vehicle is equipped with an edr .

nhtsa's proposed regulation would make edrs mandatory , but would not substantively change federal requirements about the information the devices must collect .

edrs are not new .

flight data recorders , also widely referred to as "black boxes," have been installed in aircraft since the 1950s and are used after accidents to reconstruct the critical moments of a plane's operations .

event recorders are also in use in railroad locomotives and large cargo and passenger ships .

but the mandatory installation of edrs in passenger cars has been controversial in congress .

while legislators have generally recognized the devices' potential safety value , in passing the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act in 2012 ( map - 21 ) , congress declined to mandate edrs in new passenger vehicles due to some members' concerns about driver privacy .

a proposal to bar the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) from using appropriated funds to develop regulations mandating data recorders was passed by the house of representatives in 2013 , but was not enacted .

a bill to limit access to edr data , s. 1925 , was ordered to be reported by the senate commerce committee in april 2014 .

an edr is a device installed in a motor vehicle that records certain technical information about a vehicle's operational performance for a few seconds immediately prior to and during a crash .

early versions of edrs used analog signal processing and recording to analyze and store data and were first tested by nhtsa in the 1970s .

the first commercial edrs were installed by general motors corp. ( gm ) in select models in 1974 .

edrs have evolved over the past 40 years as motor vehicles have increasingly come to rely on electronic sensors .

greater energy efficiency was a primary goal of the move to electronics .

a key component in the electronics system is the engine control unit ( ecu ) , which collects and analyzes information about the engine's operation , such as throttle position , revolutions per minute , and airflow .

based on these engine variables , the ecu sends instructions to the fuel injectors varying the length of time a fuel injector pulses or specifying how much spark advance the engine receives in order to improve fuel economy .

these are among the variables which are recorded by edrs .

but over time , as automakers sought ways to evaluate the sensors and make the new systems easier to service , the role of the ecu was expanded to include a diagnostic component which stored data on problems detected through the sensors .

this new source of information was helpful to mechanics attempting to address vehicle performance issues , but also laid the groundwork for data recovery technology .

for example , the airbag sensor could store a fault , but also could count the number of times the engine had been started since the fault was generated .

an edr is a small box , which is generally installed under one of the front seats of a vehicle or sometimes in the center console .

the edr is the key electronic component in recording an accident .

it accumulates data from a dedicated sensor or , sometimes , from a vehicle network .

passenger vehicle edrs are usually incorporated within an air bag electronic controller .

a crash - sensing algorithm decides within 15-50 milliseconds ( msec ) after an impact when the airbag should be inflated , based on model - specific criteria stored in a sensor .

the algorithm also determines when the pre - crash data will be recorded .

as discussed later in this report , a current nhtsa rule specifies that if the vehicle has an edr , information on 15 data elements must be recorded at the time of a crash .

edrs installed by some manufacturers collect other data not mandated by federal regulations .

among the data points a particular manufacturer's edr may record are seat track positions , the weight of the occupants of the driver's seat and front passenger seat , and additional detail on air bag deployment .

neither existing nor proposed regulations mandate that such information be recorded , but nhtsa regulations specify what intervals must be recorded if a manufacturer installs a black box designed to collect such data .

information stored is limited only by the amount of available memory in the sensor .

once the crash data are stored on the edr , they cannot be erased or altered .

an exception is a "near - deployment" of the airbag , i.e. , an accident which does not set off the airbag .

in such cases , the data stored on the sensor are cleared from the memory after 250 ignition cycles ( about 60 days on average ) .

the edr is connected to other sensors , such as the anti - lock brake computer ( figure 2 ) .

it collects data from these sensors and continually replaces previously stored data every five seconds .

only the most recent data are retained when airbags are deployed in a crash situation .

the data are retrieved by a cable to the edr or , alternatively , to the vehicle's onboard diagnostic port ( known as obd - ii ) located near the steering wheel .

edrs in passenger vehicles collect a much more limited range of information than "black boxes" aboard other types of transportation vehicles .

for example , flight data recorders aboard aircraft can record hundreds of flight parameters for up to 25 hours , and cockpit voice recorders capture all voices in the cockpit for the duration of a flight .

data recorders in railroad locomotives must preserve information on about 25 different variables over a 48-hour period .

edrs in automobiles have no voice recording capabilities and are not designed to store large volumes of data .

the edr data can be useful in a variety of ways .

they may be used by law enforcement agencies to help determine why an accident occurred .

they could potentially be used to evaluate a driver's responsibility for a crash .

the data are used by automakers to better understand vehicle performance in crash situations , thereby possibly leading to vehicle redesign and safer automobiles .

they may also be used by federal , state , and local highway officials to evaluate road conditions and safety configurations that could be improved to mitigate accidents .

nhtsa's special crash investigations ( sci ) program first used edr information in a crash investigation in 1991 ( in conjunction with gm , which had manufactured the vehicle involved in the crash being reviewed ) .

in the years following , nhtsa worked with automakers to improve understanding of how electronic sensors could contribute to the evaluation of crash conditions .

in 1997 , the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) recommended greater use of edrs because of their potential to improve highway safety .

in 1997 , the ntsb recommended that nhtsa "pursue crash information gathering using edrs" and that it develop and implement , in conjunction with the domestic and international automobile manufacturers , a plan to gather better information on crash pulses and other crash parameters in actual crashes , utilizing current or augmented crash sensing and recording devices .

two years later , the ntsb issued additional recommendations that nhtsa require edrs to be installed in school buses and motor coaches .

to address these recommendations , nhtsa established an edr working group of industry , academic , and other government organizations , which met from 1998-2000 .

in 2001 , the working group concluded that edr technology could have the potential to improve highway safety through improved occupant protection systems ; be applied to all types of motor vehicles , but that different types of edrs would be needed for lightweight vehicles than for heavy trucks and buses ; capture a wide range of crash - related data which would be beneficial to researchers , investigators , and manufacturers ( if open access , without personal identifiers , was provided ) ; reduce the number and severity of crashes if there is driver and employee awareness of how edr systems work ; be most successful if many vehicles on the road utilize edrs and there is a corresponding infrastructure to use the data ; and be even more effective if integrated with automatic crash notification systems and the car's other electronics ( such as global positioning system and cellular phones ) , thereby providing early notice of and details about a collision .

the working group reported that nhtsa was already incorporating edr data into its motor vehicle research databases .

in addition , it pointed out that most edr systems were unique and proprietary , such that only the vehicle manufacturer was able to download and analyze the data .

based on the research and recommendations of the working group and consumer petitions for using the technology for increasing vehicle safety , nhtsa proposed its first edr regulation in june 2004 and issued the final regulation in august 2006 .

although the federal drivers privacy protection act ( dppa ) places some limits on access to a vehicle owner's personal information , it does not protect information collected by an edr .

the only explicit restrictions on the use of edr data are in state law .

specific laws have been enacted in 14 states to clarify that the data recorded on an edrs is owned primarily by the motor vehicle owner and that a car owner must be notified ( usually in the owner's manual ) that the car is equipped with an edr .

the state laws differ , but generally allow others to access edr data: with the owner's consent ; in response to a court order or probable cause of an offense ; for improving vehicle safety ; by auto dealers and auto technicians seeking to repair a vehicle ; and to dispatch emergency personnel .

in its 2006 rulemaking setting minimum edr data requirements , nhtsa noted that manufacturers had asked it to explicitly state that the rule preempted inconsistent state and local regulations .

nhtsa declined to do so , although it noted that general principles of preemption law would operate so as to displace any conflicting state law or regulations .

it is our view that any state laws or regulations that would require or prohibit the types of edrs addressed by our regulation , or that would affect their design or operation , would create a conflict and therefore be preempted .

perhaps the most prominent concern about edrs is their impact on personal privacy .

while current regulations provide only that edrs , if installed , track 15 specific data elements , technological advances may allow greater data collection .

in addition , individual auto manufacturers are free to collect more data , or to collect data for longer time periods , than required under nhtsa's edr rule .

when combined with other technologies , such as onboard navigation systems and mapping apps , edr data could be transmitted beyond the vehicle owner's control .

part of the concern over edrs and personal privacy may stem from a mistaken notion that edrs , like airplane black boxes , are recording audio and even location information .

in principle , there is no technological reason that edrs could not collect such data , as the cost of sensors and data storage steadily shrinks .

as one critic contended , the edrs , if made mandatory , will provide a wide open door to the comings and goings of every american .

tracking not simply how fast you drive or whether you ride your brakes , edrs have the ability to collect the location and distances of where you drive every time you get into your car .

nhtsa has noted that "there is concern about crash - related data being collected from privately owned motor vehicles that could be used against the owner. .

while nhtsa itself is not allowed by federal law to disclose personal identifiers of crash information , other entities — such as insurance companies , salvage yards , local police departments , or subsequent vehicle owners — can also obtain a car's data .

appendix b lists entities that may seek to access edr data and their reasons for using it .

nhtsa has said that edr data used by nhtsa should not raise privacy concerns because the agency does not collect information that would identify an individual ; the closest information to that would be the vehicle identification number ( vin ) , which can only be used to identify the owner ( although not the driver ) of a vehicle if linked to a vehicle registration database that includes this information .

the ownership and privacy of the data recorded by an edr have been issues of concern among legislators since 2004 .

in every congress since then , bills have been introduced that include these requirements: at the time of purchase , auto dealers would have to disclose the presence of edrs in new automobiles , the type of information collected , and its possible use by law enforcement officials .

owner's manuals would be required to include the same information .

new vehicles equipped with edrs could not be sold unless the devices could be disabled by car owners .

the federal trade commission would be tasked with enforcement of violations of these edr provisions , which would be identified as unfair or deceptive acts .

nhtsa would be tasked with studying and reporting to congress on the usefulness and consequences of implementing edr technology .

the only vote on a proposal in this category came in 2012 on h.amdt .

1368 , offered by representative landry to h.r .

5972 , the transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies appropriations act for 2013 .

his amendment was supported by representative rahall , the ranking democrat on the transportation and infrastructure committee .

passed by voice vote , it would have prohibited the use of funds in that bill to develop regulations mandating a range of recording technology ( including edrs ) on passenger and commercial vehicles .

in his floor statement , representative landry argued that the department of transportation has become obsessed with electronically monitoring vehicle movements .

right now , the dot is working on a mandate which would require that every car have a device which is very similar to an airplane's black box .

several members of congress argued that the proper venue for consideration of this amendment was the soon - to - be - debated surface transportation reauthorization .

the landry amendment was not enacted , because the senate did not pass a comparable transportation appropriation bill in 2012 ; dot funding was governed by a separate continuing resolution .

separately , congress has considered a number of bills mandating the use of edrs .

for example , a motor vehicle safety act , introduced in 2010 in both the house and senate , included a provision to establish a council for vehicle electronics , vehicle software and emerging technologies within nhtsa to integrate nhtsa's expertise in these areas .

the bills also mandated that all new passenger vehicles be equipped with edrs by 2015 and all new medium and heavy duty vehicles by 2017 , and had provisions limiting retrieval and access to edr data .

the bills were reported by committees in each house , but neither was passed .

three other bills to mandate edrs were introduced in the 111 th congress as well .

their provisions included the following: phase - in of edrs in passenger automobiles over several years ; establishment of a universal data retrieval method and an edr database for research and analysis ; requirement that every new car owner's manual disclose the presence of an edr ; limitation on retrieval of edr data except by vehicle owners , mandated by a court , or retrieved by nhtsa .

alternatively , some bills allowed full retrieval if driver and vehicle identification number ( vin ) were not disclosed .

none of these bills was passed .

the 2010 proposal to establish a council on vehicle electronics was incorporated into s. 1813 , the surface transportation reauthorization , which passed the senate on april 24 , 2012 .

the bill mandated that all new passenger cars have edrs by model year 2015 and , like the proposed motor vehicle safety act of 2010 , stipulated that data are owned by the car owner , except in certain circumstances .

it required dot to submit a report within two years of enactment , assessing the safety and privacy impacts of edrs .

the house - passed surface transportation bill , h.r .

4348 , did not contain the edr provisions or provide for the council on vehicle electronics .

the house - senate conference eliminated the edr provisions from the bill , which was enacted as the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 , p.l .

112-141 ) .

the law did establish a council for vehicle electronics .

while not focused specifically on edrs , its mission is to examine and report back to congress on "the need for safety standards with regard to electronic systems in passenger motor vehicles" and to consider "security needs for those electronic systems to prevent unauthorized access , and the effect of surrounding environments on the electronic systems .

in the 113 th congress , representative capuano introduced h.r .

2414 , which would require manufacturers to post a window sticker in each new car , stating that there is an edr in the vehicle , where it is located , the type of information it records and that such information may be used in law enforcement .

it would prohibit the sale of vehicles after 2015 unless vehicle owners can control the recording of information on the edr .

the legislation also states that any data recorded by an edr is the vehicle owner's property and can only be retrieved with the owner's consent , in response to a court order , or by a vehicle repair technician .

it is pending in the house energy and commerce and judiciary committees .

in april 2014 , the senate committee on commerce , science and transportation unanimously ordered reported s. 1925 , the driver privacy act , sponsored by senators hoeven and klobuchar .

the bill would limit access to edr data to the vehicle owner or lessee .

exceptions would allow access if authorized by judicial or administrative authorities ( for the retrieval of admissible evidence ) , with the informed written consent of owners or lessees for any purpose , and for safety investigations , emergency response purposes , or traffic safety research .

if used for safety research , information that would identify individual owners and vehicle identification numbers would have to be redacted .

the bill requires nhtsa to conduct a study to determine the amount of time edrs should capture and record data , and to issue regulations on that subject within two years of submitting the study to congress .

on june 10 , 2014 , during consideration of h.r .

4745 , the transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies appropriations act for 2015 , the house adopted by voice vote h.amdt .

8335 , sponsored by representative yoho , which would bar use of federal funds to enforce regulations mandating passenger vehicle edrs .

the amendment would also prohibit the use of federal funds that might mandate global positioning system tracking .

in his floor remarks , representative yoho cited a need to provide clarity to the confusion surrounding who is the owner of the data collected by these event data recorders .

i believe that ownership resides with the owner of the vehicle .

however , until such time as this issue is resolved , i must defer to my constituents back home who are adamantly opposed to these black boxes .

appendix a .

data recorded by an edr appendix b .

entities seeking use of edr dat .

