there has been growing concern over sex trafficking of children in the united states .

demand for sex with children ( and other forms of commercial sexual exploitation of children ) is steady , and profit to sex traffickers has increased .

while law enforcement , policy makers , social service providers , and the public have acknowledged the presence of this issue , they have grappled with measuring the extent of child sex trafficking as well as determining how best to combat it from a number of angles .

within the criminal justice realm , law enforcement is tasked with investigating and prosecuting both the supply side ( sex traffickers , or pimps ) as well as the demand side ( buyers of commercial sex ) of sex trafficking .

in addition to the challenges in prosecuting traffickers and buyers of sex with children , law enforcement faces challenges with how to handle the girls and boys whose bodies are sexually exploited for profit .

indeed , the u.s. view of juveniles involved in commercial sexual activity has evolved over the past decade .

how to categorize the juveniles involved in commercial sexual activities has become one of the perennial issues for law enforcement and policy makers .

a central question is whether these youth should be characterized as victims or perpetrators .

the federal government and some states have conceptualized these children differently , and this variability has contributed to the implementation of differing policies throughout the country .

in short , while the federal government considers these minors as victims and thus eligible for specialized services , some states may still treat these minors as perpetrators engaged in prostitution and related crimes .

this report examines juvenile victims of sex trafficking and their intersection with states' juvenile justice systems throughout the united states .

it outlines the federal conceptualization of minors involved in commercial sexual activities and discusses factors that may contribute to the treatment of sex trafficking victims as perpetrators .

it then outlines various criminal justice policy options and approaches to victim - centered policing regarding sex trafficking of minors .

the report concludes with a discussion of the federal role in incentivizing states' juvenile and criminal justice systems and treatment of sex trafficking victims .

the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 ( tvpa ) is the primary law that addresses human trafficking .

in outlining what constitutes "severe forms of trafficking in persons," the tvpa includes both sex trafficking and labor trafficking .

generally , both forms of trafficking involve some element of force , fraud , or coercion .

with respect to sex trafficking , however , the law specifies that when a minor — an individual under the age of 18 — is involved , the commercial sexual activity need not contain force , fraud , or coercion in order to be deemed sex trafficking .

in other words , for purposes of prosecuting a trafficker , if a minor is involved in a commercial sex act , he or she is considered a victim of sex trafficking ( and thus a victim of a severe form of trafficking in persons ) in the federal government's eyes .

notable elements of this position include the following: a minor is considered a victim of trafficking regardless of whether the commercial sex act is believed to be forced or voluntary .

a minor is considered a victim of trafficking regardless of whether the minor represents himself / herself as an adult .

the law provides that in prosecutions involving a minor victim , the government is not required to prove that the defendant knew that the victim was under the age of 18 .

a minor is considered a victim of trafficking regardless of whether he or she is removed from his or her community .

as the tvpa considers juveniles involved in prostitution as victims of trafficking , federal enforcement efforts are aimed at combating the traffickers and buyers of commercial sex .

at the federal level , these perpetrators are often prosecuted for violations of the mann act , the racketeer influenced and corrupt organization act ( rico ) , or the tvpa .

notably , the investigation and prosecution of child prostitution are mostly state matters .

every state outlaws the prostitution of children as well as human trafficking broadly ( including sex trafficking of children ) .

however , despite their protected status at the federal level , juvenile victims of sex trafficking may at times be labeled and treated as criminals or juvenile delinquents at the state and local levels .

consequently , these children may be arrested and placed in juvenile detention facilities with juveniles who have committed serious crimes instead of in environments where they can receive needed social and protective services .

in addition , because of being processed through the criminal justice system , they may then have permanent records as offenders .

some researchers have noted that labeling these victims as prostitutes or offenders and subsequently placing them in the juvenile justice system is a practice that may further harm these victimized youth .

as researchers have noted , "law enforcement personnel often are the first to respond to commercial sexual exploitation and sex trafficking cases" and "their ability to identify victims , investigate cases , and make appropriate referrals is crucial. .

in other words , juvenile victims may come in contact with law enforcement before other officials or victim services specialists .

as such , some experts have focused on law enforcement and juvenile justice systems' central roles in combating sex trafficking .

researchers and policy makers have suggested a number of options aimed at preventing minor trafficking victims from being caught up in the juvenile justice system and diverting them to programs and services that can help rehabilitate and restore these youth .

these have included supporting law enforcement training on human trafficking , enhancing law enforcement and community partnerships , enacting safe harbor laws that prevent the prosecution of victims as offenders , establishing diversion programs for juveniles involved in commercial sex , and establishing provisions to seal or expunge records of trafficked youth's involvement in the juvenile justice systems .

as noted , because federal law considers juveniles involved in prostitution as victim s of trafficking , and because much of the policing to combat prostitution and sex trafficking — both of adults and children — happens at the state level , federal policy makers have considered how to influence states' treatment of trafficking victims ( particularly minors ) such that state policies are more in line with those of the federal government .

often , federal incentives to states are implemented through the provision or withholding of grant funding .

with respect to the treatment of juvenile sex trafficking victims , policy makers may be particularly interested in those programs wherein funds may be used to enhance state and local law enforcement awareness and treatment of sex trafficking victims .

notably , policy makers may debate a range of options aimed at identifying juveniles involved in commercial sex and treating them as victims .

however , a central element of the current policy discussion has surrounded potential means to incentivize states' implementation of policies that are in line with the federal conceptualization of juveniles involved in commercial sex as victims .

as such , this section solely focuses on possible federal incentives to states , particularly to support law enforcement's treatment of these trafficked youth .

the tvpa , as amended , has authorized a number of criminal justice - focused grants that may help law enforcement identify and assist minor victims of sex trafficking as well as prosecute trafficking cases .

some of these programs are focused specifically on combating the sex trafficking of minors while others have a broader scope .

notably , the tvpa has authorized a broad spectrum of programs to support trafficking investigations and victim services ; however , the programs outlined below are only those with a law enforcement nexus and , more specifically , which could be used to combat sex trafficking of minors within the united states .

only one law enforcement - centered program — the department of justice grants for victim services — has received funding , and it is generally not targeted to serve child victims of sex trafficking .

doj grants for victim services .

through this program , doj may award grants to states , indian tribes , local governments , and nonprofit , nongovernmental victims' services organizations to develop , expand , or strengthen service programs for victims of trafficking in the united states .

in fy2014 , this program received $14.3 million in appropriations .

reportedly in fy2009 , the doj grants for victim services used funding specifically to serve u.s. citizen and lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) minor victims of trafficking .

doj : grants to state and local law enforcement for anti - trafficking programs .

doj may award grants to state and local law enforcement for programs to ( 1 ) investigate and prosecute severe forms of trafficking , and related offenses that occur , in whole or in part , within the united states ; ( 2 ) train law enforcement personnel in identifying victims of severe forms of trafficking ; ( 3 ) investigate and prosecute those who engage in the purchase of commercial sex and prioritize the investigations and prosecutions of cases involving minor victims ; ( 4 ) educate those individuals who have been convicted of these and related offenses ; and ( 5 ) train law enforcement to work specifically with trafficking victims .

doj: grants for law enforcement training programs .

doj may award grants to state and local governments to assist law enforcement in identifying and protecting victims of trafficking .

funds may be used to train prosecutors to identify , investigate , or prosecute trafficking as well as to utilize and develop laws to prohibit trafficking .

doj and department of health and human services ( hhs ) : assistance for u.s. citizens and lprs .

doj and hhs ( in consultation with the department of labor ) are to establish a grant program to assist u.s. citizens and lprs who are victims of severe forms of trafficking .

doj and hhs are to consult with nongovernmental organizations that provide victims services to determine the assistance that would be most beneficial to victims .

the program is to facilitate communication and coordination between assistance providers , provide a means to identify such providers , and provide a means to make referrals to programs for which victims are already eligible .

doj and hhs may award grants to states , indian tribes , local governments , and nonprofit , nongovernmental victims' services organizations .

doj and hhs: grant program for certain persons subject to trafficking .

doj , in consultation with hhs , may make block grants to four entities located in different regions of the united states to combat sex trafficking of children .

these entities refer to state or local units of government that have significant criminal activity involving sex trafficking of minors ; have demonstrated cooperation between federal , state , local , and where applicable , other stakeholders , in addressing sex trafficking of minors ; and have developed a workable , multi - disciplinary plan to combat sex trafficking of minors .

the grants may be used to provide residential care , social services , clothing and other daily necessities , case management , and legal services , among other supports .

although the federal government does not directly administer juvenile justice systems , it funds a number of grant programs that assist ( and influence ) states' juvenile justice programs .

the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( ojjdp ) administers the juvenile justice grant programs .

one of the primary vehicles through which grant funding has been allocated to states is the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( jjdpa ) .

over the years , and under the umbrella of the jjdpa , congress has funded a number of formula and competitive grants to states for a variety of purpose areas .

until fy2014 , congress also funded juvenile justice grants through the juvenile accountability block grant ( jabg ) program .

in an attempt to divert trafficking victims out of juvenile justice systems , some policy makers may look to the purpose areas of existing juvenile justice grant programs .

some may consider whether purpose areas may be modified or expanded to help reduce the juvenile justice contact of minor victims of sex trafficking .

one of the primary grant programs under the purview of the jjdpa is the state formula grants program .

states may use money from this program for a variety of purpose areas including the planning , establishment , operation , coordination , and evaluation of projects for the development of more effective juvenile delinquency programs and improved juvenile justice systems .

notably , within the wide range of purpose areas , there are a number of relevant purpose areas relevant to steering trafficked youth away from the juvenile justice systems .

specifically , grant money can be allocated toward community - based alternatives to incarceration , treatment for juvenile offenders who have been the victims of child abuse or neglect , mentoring programs for at - risk or offender youth , and mental health services .

in order to receive its share of the formula grant funding , each state must adhere to four core mandates .

policy makers may examine the existing set of core mandates and question whether this may be one vehicle for influencing states' behavior regarding the criminalization of minors involved in commercial sexual activity .

from fy1998 through fy2013 , the jabg program provided grants to states and units of local government to strengthen their juvenile justice systems and foster accountability within their juvenile populations .

the program focused resources on holding juveniles accountable for their actions and building up the juvenile justice system in the states .

among the 17 purpose areas for which grant funding could be used , a number related to diverting youth away from the traditional juvenile justice systems and providing needed services .

specifically , these included establishing juvenile drug and gun courts as well as establishing risk assessment , early intervention programs , and comprehensive services for juvenile offenders .

jabg funds have been used to support diversion courts serving specific populations ; in 2005 , the hawaii girls court received jabg funding to hire specialized staff to help develop and enhance the program .

since the late 1980s , congress has established a number of grant programs , including the jag program and its predecessors , to help state and local law enforcement in their crime control efforts .

currently , jag funds can be used for "additional personnel , equipment , supplies , contractual support , training , technical assistance , and information systems for criminal justice" for purpose areas including prosecution and court programs , corrections and community corrections programs , and crime victim and witness programs , among others .

grants are made to states and units of local government .

while these funds are generally targeted toward traditional ( adult ) criminal justice systems , nothing in the authorizing language prohibits states and local governments from using their funds to serve individuals under the age of 18 .

vawa primarily addresses certain types of violent crime ( namely intimate partner violence , dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking ) through grant programs to state , local , and tribal governments ; nonprofit organizations ; and universities .

through the most recent vawa reauthorization ( p.l .

113-4 ) , congress clarified that victim services and legal assistance ( authorized by vawa ) include services and assistance to victims of domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , or stalking who are also victims of severe forms of trafficking in persons ( as defined under the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ) .

while this did not specifically add services to trafficking victims to the purpose areas of all vawa programs , it clarified that services can be provided to certain victims populations who are also trafficking victims .

this reauthorization also amended several vawa grant programs to specifically add to their allowable activities serving victims of trafficking .

as such , these grants may be used to enhance the criminal and juvenile justice response to child victims of sex trafficking .

the creating hope through outreach , options , services , and education for children and youth ( choose children & youth ) program was established under p.l .

113-4 in order to enhance the safety of youth and children who are victims of or exposed to domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , stalking , or sex trafficking , and to prevent future violence .

p.l .

113-4 expanded the purpose areas of the grants to indian tribal governments program to serve victims of trafficking .

the program aims to , among other things , assist tribal governments in developing and enhancing effective plans to respond to domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , sex trafficking , and stalking .

purpose areas include improving services for victims ; strengthening tribal criminal justice systems ; creating community education and prevention campaigns ; addressing the needs of children who witness domestic violence ; providing supervised visitation and safe exchange programs ; and providing transitional housing assistance and legal assistance .

p.l .

113-4 also expanded the purpose areas of the tribal domestic violence and sexual assault coalitions grant program to serve victims of trafficking , in addition to victims of domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking .

this grant program aims to increase awareness of domestic violence and sexual assault against american indian and alaska native women ; enhance the response to violence against women at the tribal , federal , and state levels ; identify and provide technical assistance to tribal coalition membership and tribal communities to enhance access to essential services ; and develop and promote state , local , and tribal legislation and policies that enhance best practices for responding to violent crimes against indian women .

the crime victims fund ( cvf ) was established by the victims of crime act ( voca , p.l .

98-473 ) to provide funding for state victim compensation and assistance programs .

since its enactment , voca has been amended several times to support additional victim - related activities including ( 1 ) discretionary grants for private organizations , ( 2 ) the federal victim notification system , ( 3 ) funding for victim assistance staff within the federal bureau of investigation and executive office of u.s .

attorneys , ( 4 ) funding for the children's justice act program , and ( 5 ) assistance and compensation for victims of terrorism .

thus far , cvf money has not been used to fund grant programs outside of those authorized by voca .

the administration's fy2015 budget included a proposal to raise the cvf cap and specified that the additional money should be used to fund two initiatives — one being victims of trafficking grants "focused on providing services to domestic victims of human trafficking. .

policy makers may question whether they want to expand the uses of the cvf to support victim - centered grant programs outside of those authorized by voca .

