federal regulations generally result from an act of congress and are one significant means by which statutes are implemented .

congress delegates rulemaking authority to agencies for a variety of reasons , and in a variety of ways .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , as amended ) provides a notable example of congressional delegation of rulemaking authority to federal agencies .

a previous crs report identified more than 40 provisions in the aca that explicitly require or permit the issuance of rules to implement the law .

the rules that agencies have issued , and will continue to issue , pursuant to the aca have a major impact on how the law is implemented .

for example , in an article posted on the new england journal of medicine ' s health care reform center shortly after the aca was signed into law , henry j. aaron and robert d. reischauer wrote , making the legislation a success requires not only that it survive but also that it be effectively implemented .

although the bill runs to more than 2000 pages , much remains to be decided .

the legislation tasks federal or state officials with writing regulations , making appointments , and giving precise meaning to many terms .

the spring 2014 edition of the unified agenda listed 14 aca - related rules in the "proposed rule stage" ( indicating that the agencies expected to issue proposed rules on the topics within the next 12 months , or for which the closing dates of the comment periods are the next step ) .

ten of the 14 upcoming proposed rules were expected to be issued by components of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) : centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms , four rules ) ; the office of inspector general ( oig , three rules ) ; the health resources and services administration ( hrsa , one rule ) ; the office for civil rights ( ocr , one rule ) ; and the administration for children and families ( acf , one rule ) .

two other proposed rules were expected to be issued by the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) .

the final two proposed rules are to be issued jointly by cms , the department of labor's ( dol ) employee benefits security administration ( ebsa ) , and the department of the treasury's ( treas ) internal revenue service ( irs ) .

the spring 2014 edition of the unified agenda listed 17 upcoming rules in the final rule section ( indicating that the agencies expected to issue these final rules within the next 12 months ) .

eleven of the 17 upcoming final rules are expected to be issued by components of hhs: the health resources and services administration ( hrsa , one rule ) ; the food and drug administration ( fda , two rules ) ; and cms ( eight rules ) .

three of the 17 upcoming final rules are expected to be issued by treas / irs .

other final rules are expected to be issued by dol's occupational safety and health administration ( osha , one rule ) ; the architectural and transportation barriers compliance board ( atbcb , one rule ) ; and the department of veterans affairs ( va , one rule ) .

as noted earlier in this report , the unified agenda also identifies "long - term actions" ( i.e. , regulatory actions that are under development that the agencies do not expect to take action on in the next 12 months ) .

the spring 2014 edition of the unified agenda listed four long - term actions related to the aca .

in comparison to the proposed and final rules previously discussed , it is much less clear when the aca - related long - term actions are expected to occur .

in each of the four long - term actions listed , the agencies said that the dates for the actions were "to be determined": an hhs / hrsa proposed rule on "340b civil monetary penalties for manufacturers" ; an hhs / hrsa proposed rule on "340b drug pricing program ; administrative dispute resolution process" ; an hhs / hrsa proposed rule on "340b ceiling price regulations" ; and a dol / ebsa "undetermined" action on "automatic enrollment in health plans of employees of large employers under flsa section 18a. .

as noted earlier in this report , when federal agencies issue substantive regulations they are carrying out legislative authority delegated to them by congress .

therefore , congress often oversees the rules that agencies issue to ensure that they are consistent with congressional intent and various rulemaking requirements .

in order for congress to oversee the rules issued pursuant to the aca , congress must first know what rules are being issued — ideally as early as possible .

the unified agenda is perhaps the best vehicle to provide that early information , as it describes the rules that are expected to be issued and provides information regarding their significance and timing .

congress has a range of tools available to oversee the rules that federal agencies are expected to issue to implement the aca .

congress may conduct oversight hearings and confirmation hearings for the heads of regulatory agencies .

individual members of congress may also participate in the rulemaking process by , among other things , meeting with agency officials and filing public comments .

congress , committees , and individual members can also request that the government accountability office ( gao ) evaluate the agencies' rulemaking activities .

another option is the congressional review act ( cra , 5 u.s.c .

§§801-808 ) , which was enacted in 1996 to establish procedures detailing congressional authority over rulemaking "without at the same time requiring congress to become a super regulatory agency. .

the cra generally requires federal agencies to submit all of their covered final rules to both houses of congress and gao before they can take effect .

it also established expedited legislative procedures ( primarily in the senate ) by which congress may disapprove agencies' final rules by enacting a joint resolution of disapproval .

the definition of a covered rule in the cra is quite broad , arguably including any type of document ( eg , legislative rules , policy statements , guidance , manuals , and memoranda ) that the agency makes binding on the affected public .

after these rules are submitted , congress can use the expedited procedures specified in the cra to disapprove any of the rules .

cra resolutions of disapproval must be presented to the president for signature or veto .

for a variety of reasons , however , the cra has been used to disapprove of only one rule in the 18 years since it was enacted .

perhaps most notably , it is likely that a president would veto a resolution of disapproval to protect rules developed under his own administration , and it may be difficult for congress to muster the two - thirds vote in both houses needed to overturn the veto .

congress can also use regular ( i.e. , non - cra ) legislative procedures to disapprove agencies' rules , but such legislation may prove even more difficult to enact than a cra resolution of disapproval ( primarily because of the lack of expedited procedures in the senate ) , and if enacted could be subject to presidential veto .

finally , outside the cra , congress has regularly included provisions in the text of agencies' appropriations bills in order to influence the regulatory process .

such provisions include prohibitions on the finalization of particular proposed rules , restrictions on certain types of regulatory activity , and restrictions on implementation or enforcement of certain provisions .

appropriations provisions can also be used to prompt agencies to issue certain regulations or to require that certain procedures be followed before or after their issuance .

the inclusion of regulatory provisions in appropriations legislation as a matter of legislative strategy appears to arise from two factors: ( 1 ) congress's ability via its "power of the purse" to control agency action , and ( 2 ) the fact that appropriations bills are usually considered "must pass" legislation .

congress's use of regulatory appropriations restrictions has fluctuated somewhat over time .

this report's appendix contains a table listing the upcoming proposed and final rules published in the spring 2014 unified agenda .

for each upcoming proposed and final rule listed , the table identifies the department and agency expected to issue the rule , the title of the rule and its rin , an abstract describing the nature of the rulemaking action , and the date that the proposed or final rule is expected to be issued .

the abstracts presented in the table were taken verbatim from the unified agenda entries .

within the proposed and final rule sections of the table , the entries are organized by agency .

the table includes only those unified agenda entries in which the affordable care act was mentioned .

