in the united states , births to unmarried women ( i.e. , nonmarital births ) are widespread , including families of varying income class , race , ethnicity , and geographic area .

many analysts attribute this to changed attitudes over many years about fertility and marriage .

they find that many adult women and teenage girls no longer feel obliged to marry before , or as a consequence of , having children .

during the period from 1940 to 2008 , the percentage of births to unmarried women increased from 3.8% in 1940 to 40.6% in 2008 , and has remained at about 41% each subsequent year through 2013 .

this represented 1.6 million children in 2013 ( see table a - 1 . ) .

although nonmarital childbearing is not a new phenomenon , the relatively recent factors associated with historically high levels of nonmarital childbearing are that women are marrying later in life and more couples are cohabiting .

other factors include decreased childbearing of married couples , increased marital dissolution , increased sexual activity outside of marriage , participation in risky behaviors that often lead to sex , improper use of contraceptive methods , and lack of marriageable partners .

"nonmarital births" can be first births , second births , or higher - order births ; they can precede a marriage or occur to a woman who has never married .

"nonmarital births" can occur to divorced or widowed women .

moreover , a woman with several children may have had one or more births within marriage and one or more births outside of marriage .

a majority of nonmarital births now are to cohabiting parents .

between 2006 and 2010 , 58% of nonmarital births were to cohabiting parents , compared with 40% in 2002 .

unlike in years past , although most of the children born outside of marriage are raised by a single parent ( who may or may not have a "significant other" ) , many , especially during their infancy , live with both of their biological parents who are not married to each other .

parents and family life are the foundation that influences a child's well - being throughout the child's development and into adulthood .

the family also is the economic unit that obtains and manages the resources that meet a child's basic needs while also playing an instrumental role in stimulating the child's cognitive , social , and emotional development .

most children who grow up in mother - only families , father - only families , step - parent families , or families in which the mother is cohabiting with a male partner become well - adjusted , productive adults .

however , a large body of research indicates that children who grow up with only one biological parent in the home are more likely to be financially worse off and have worse socioeconomic outcomes ( even after income differences are taken into account ) compared to children who grow up with both biological parents in the home .

to emphasize , this research indicates that all family situations in which both biological parents are not living together ( regardless of whether the mother is divorced , separated , widowed , or was never married ) are more likely to result in less favorable outcomes for children than a family situation in which the child is living in a household with both biological parents .

it is also noteworthy that some researchers conclude that even among children living with both biological parents , living with married parents generally results in better outcomes for children than living with cohabiting parents , mainly because marriage is a more stable and longer lasting situation than cohabitation .

in 2012 , 70% of the children under age 18 who lived with both of their married parents were in households with incomes at least 200% above the poverty level , whereas 44% - 46% of children who lived with their mother only , two unmarried parents , or no parents were living below the poverty level .

the federal concern about nonmarital childbearing generally centers on its costs via claims on public assistance .

these federal costs primarily reflect the fact that many of these "nonmarital children" are raised in single - parent families that are financially disadvantaged .

federal concern also arises because of the aforementioned research indicating that children living in single - parent families are more likely to face negative outcomes ( financially , socially , and emotionally ) than children who grow up with both of their biological parents in the home .

as mentioned earlier , many children born outside of marriage are raised in single - parent families .

this report analyzes the trends in nonmarital childbearing in the united states , discusses some of the characteristics of unwed mothers , addresses some issues involving the fathers of children born outside of marriage , and offers some concluding remarks .

declining marriage rates , increased childbearing among unmarried women , an increased number of unmarried women in the childbearing ages ( i.e. , 15-44 ) , and decreased childbearing among married women have contributed to the rising share of children being born to unwed women .

many social science analysts attribute the increase in nonmarital births to the decades - long decline of "shotgun marriages," rather than to an increased incidence of nonmarital conceptions .

they contend that when the social pressure to get married once pregnancy became obvious lessened , the likelihood that women would marry between conception and birth decreased substantially .

the entry of more and more women into the paid labor force also made childbearing outside of marriage more economically feasible .

through the 1960s , most americans believed that parents should stay in an unhappy marriage for the sake of the children .

by the 1970s , this view was not as prominent .

divorce and not getting married to the father of a child — which were generally considered not to be in the best interest of the child — became more acceptable if they resulted in the happiness of the adult .

thus , many observers and analysts agree that marriage is now more likely to be viewed through a framework of adult fulfillment rather than through a framework of child well - being .

in this report , births to unmarried women are termed nonmarital births .

data on nonmarital births are usually expressed by three measures: the number of nonmarital births , the percent of births that are nonmarital , and the rate of nonmarital births per 1,000 unmarried women .

the number of nonmarital births provides the total count of babies who are born to women ( including adolescents ) who are not married .

the percent of all births that are nonmarital is the number of all nonmarital births divided by all births ( both nonmarital births and marital births ) .

the nonmarital birth rate is defined as the number of nonmarital births ( to females of any age ) per 1,000 unmarried women ages 15-44 .

this section discusses some of the characteristics of unmarried mothers .

some of the highlights include the following: black women are more likely to have children outside of marriage than other racial or ethnic groups ; it is not teenagers but rather women in their early twenties who have the highest percentage of births outside of marriage ; single motherhood is more common among women with less education than among well - educated women ; a substantial share of nonmarital births ( 44% ) were to women who had already given birth to one or more children ; a significant number of unwed mothers are in cohabiting relationships ; and women who have a nonmarital birth are less likely than other women to eventually marry .

this section highlights several demographic factors associated with the fathers of children born outside of marriage .

it also discusses the importance of establishing paternity for children born outside of marriage .

it has been pointed out that fathers are far too often left out of discussions about nonmarital childbearing .

it goes without saying that fathers are an integral factor in nonmarital childbearing .

it appears that one result of the so - called sexual revolution was that many men increasingly believed that women could and should control their fertility via contraception and abortion .

as a result , many men have become less willing to marry the women they impregnate .

there are myriad reasons why so many children live in homes without their fathers .

some reasons are related to choices people make about fertility , marriage , and cohabitation .

but others are the result of unexpected events , such as illness , or incarceration .

some noncustodial fathers are active in the lives of their children , whereas others are either unable or unwilling to be involved in their children's lives .

whatever the reason , a father's absence from the home results in social , psychological , emotional , and financial costs to children and economic costs to the nation .

a 2008 report maintains that the federal government spends about $99.8 billion per year in providing financial and other support ( via 14 federal social welfare programs ) to father - absent families .

this section of the report discusses the race and ethnicity of fathers to children born outside of marriage , age of fathers , educational attainment of fathers , and the importance of establishing paternity for children born outside of marriage .

one of the prominent , but perhaps not unexpected , findings related to fathers and nonmarital births is that when older men have sexual relationships with young women it often results in nonmarital births .

the language regarding births to unmarried women has changed in significant ways .

what once were referred to as "bastard" or "illegitimate" children are now termed "out - of - wedlock," "outside of marriage," or "nonmarital" births .

the stigma and shame that was once attached to these children is generally no longer recognized by the public .

some commentators in fact claim that our nation has gone too far and that now the media , in particular , tends to glorify unwed mothers , especially if they are famous .

others contend that it is often the case that adults pursue individual happiness in their private relationships , which may be in direct conflict with the needs of children for stability , security , and permanence in their family lives .

it also is recognized that most people , especially unmarried parents , have a positive attitude towards marriage .

most unmarried parents value marriage but may be reluctant to marry because of real or perceived barriers .

based on information from the fragile families and child wellbeing study , at the time of their child's birth 72% of unmarried mothers said that their chances of getting married were 50 / 50 or better and 65% said that marriage is better for children ( the comparable percentages for unmarried fathers were 90% and 78% ) .

some researchers maintain that many couples , to a certain extent , put marriage on a pedestal and are thus reluctant to marry until everything is perfect ( eg , they have a middle - class income , can afford a nice wedding , can afford a house ) .

some observers contend that the problem is not the weakening of marriage ( about 80% of all women ages 15 and older eventually marry ) , but rather the de - linking of marriage and having children and the abdication of the traditional view of marriage as a life - long commitment .

some researchers and policymakers argue that although couple relationships are a private matter , an overwhelming body of evidence suggests that not all family structures produce equal outcomes for children .

they maintain that there is widespread agreement that a healthy , stable ( i.e. , low - conflict ) family with two biological parents is the best environment for children .

finally , some observers assert that we as a society have not strayed too far , and that it is not too late to return to the somewhat old - fashioned , but not simplistic , precept of falling in love , getting married , and having a baby , in that order .

an examination of nonmarital births from a demographic perspective is perhaps the only analysis that does not view nonmarital births as a negative phenomenon .

having the birth rate reach the replacement rate is generally considered desirable by demographers and sociologists because it means a country is producing enough young people to replace and support aging workers without population growth being so high that it taxes national resources .

the replacement rate is the rate at which a given generation can exactly replace itself .

the fertility level required for natural replacement of the u.s. population is about 2.1 births per woman ( i.e. , 2,100 births per 1,000 women ) .

the nation's total fertility rate — the number of children the average woman would be expected to bear in her lifetime — generally has been below the replacement level since 1972 .

in 2006 and 2007 , the u.s. total fertility rate reached the replacement rate .

however , the total fertility rate has steadily declined over the last six years .

the total fertility rate for the united states was 1,869.5 births per 1,000 women in 2013 .

given that the marital birth rate has been decreasing over time , if the birth rate of unmarried women significantly decreased , the u.s. population would cease growing ( if immigration is excluded ) .

this means that those who support policies to lower nonmarital fertility do so at the risk of lowering overall u.s. fertility that has been hovering near replacement levels .

although marriage and family life are generally considered private issues , they have become part of the public arena primarily because of public policies that help families affected by negative outcomes associated with nonmarital births to maintain a minimum level of economic sufficiency .

the abundance of research on the subject of the impact on children of various living environments also raises the stakes , in that it is now almost unanimously agreed that children living with married biological parents fare better on a host of measures — economic , social , psychological , and emotional — than children living with a single parent or in a step - parent or cohabiting situation .

some observers contend that although women of all age groups are having children outside of marriage , given the scarcity of resources in most areas of public finance , it may be wiser to pursue a strategy that focuses primarily on reducing nonmarital births of adolescents and women in their early twenties .

one of the trends that this report highlights is that although there has been a rise in nonmarital births , it does not mean that there has been a subsequent rise in mother - only families .

instead , it reflects the rise in the number of couples who are in cohabiting relationships .

because the number of women living in a cohabiting situation has increased substantially over the last several decades , many children start off in households in which both of their biological parents reside .

nonetheless , cohabiting family situations are disrupted or dissolved much more frequently than married - couple families .

given the patterns of swift transitions into and out of marriage and the high rate of single parenthood , a family policy that relies too heavily on marriage will not help the many children who will live in single - parent and cohabiting families — many of them poor — during most of their formative years .

moreover , national data from the 2002 panel of the national survey of family growth indicate that 14% of white men , 32% of black men , and 15% of hispanic men had children with more than one woman .

thus , children in the same family may potentially face different outcomes .

for example , children with the same mother and different fathers may potentially face less desirable outcomes if their mother marries the biological father of their half - brothers or half - sisters .

the large number of nonmarital births has added to the complexity of families .

children now live in a myriad of living situations .

some may live with both biological parents who may or may not be married , some live with a mom and her cohabiting partner or a dad and his cohabiting partner , others live with a mom and another adult who may or may not be related to the child , or a dad and another adult who may or may not be related to the child .

others live with their mothers only or with their fathers only .

moreover , in each of the family living arrangements mentioned there may or may not be other children , some full siblings , some half - siblings , some step - siblings or perhaps unrelated .

nonmarital childbearing , cohabitation , divorce , re - partnering , and multi - partner fertility ( i.e. , adults who have biological children by more than one partner ) significantly impact children , and public policies that may work for less complicated families may not work for them .

