the electric utility industry operates as an integrated system of generation , transmission , and distribution facilities to deliver electric power to consumers .

in the united states , this system consists of over 9,000 electric generating units connected to over 200,000 miles of high - voltage transmission lines strung between large towers and rated at 230 kilovolts ( kv ) or greater .

this network is interspersed with hundreds of large electric power transformer substations whose function is to adjust electric voltage as needed to move power across the network ( figure 1 ) .

high voltage ( hv ) transformer units make up less than 3% of transformers in u.s. power substations , but they carry 60% or more of the nation's electricity .

because they serve as vital transmission network nodes and carry bulk volumes of electricity , hv transformers are critical elements of the nation's electric power grid .

the u.s. electric power grid has historically operated with such high reliability that any major disruption caused by weather , operational errors , or sabotage , makes news headlines .

the various parts of the electric power system are all vulnerable to failure due to natural , operational , or manmade events .

such outages can have considerable negative impacts on business , government services , and daily life .

notwithstanding its high reliability overall , the u.s. power grid has periodically experienced major regional outages .

recent examples include the northeast blackout of 2003 ( which affected 55 million customers in eight states and canada ) and extended outages in the new york / new jersey area after superstorm sandy in 2012 .

for reasons discussed below , however , hv transformers are considered by many experts to be the most vulnerable to intentional damage from malicious acts .

the physical security of hv transformers and associated policy issues are the subject of this report .

the main risk from a physical attack against the electric power grid — primarily towers and transformers — is a widespread power outage lasting for days or longer .

utilities regularly experience damage to transmission towers due to both weather and malicious activities ; they are able to recover from this damage fairly rapidly .

thus , while occasionally causing blackouts , physical attacks on towers generally have not resulted in widespread or long - lasting outages .

the power industry also has experienced mechanical failure of individual hv transformers within a single control area resulting in blackouts lasting hours .

however , no region in the united states has experienced simultaneous failures of multiple hv transformers .

experts have long asserted that a coordinated and simultaneous attack on multiple hv transformers could have severe implications for reliable electric service over a large geographic area , crippling its electricity network and causing widespread , extended blackouts .

such an event would have serious economic and social consequences .

this section discusses in more detail hv transformer characteristics and physical security risks associated with them .

over the last decade or so the electric utility industry and government agencies have engaged in a number of initiatives to secure hv transformers from physical attack and to improve recovery in the event of a successful attack .

these initiatives include coordination and information sharing , spare equipment programs , security standards , grid security exercises , and other measures discussed below .

the recent transformer substation incidents , together with federal grid security exercises , have focused attention on the vulnerability of hv transformer substations to organized physical attacks .

as the electric power industry and federal agencies continue their efforts to improve the physical security of critical hv transformer substations , congress may consider several key issues as part of its oversight of the sector .

a fundamental consideration regarding hv transformer security is a clear and stable understanding of which transformers are "critical. .

the usa patriot act of 2001 defines "critical infrastructure" in the most general sense as "systems and assets ... so vital to the united states that the incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on security , national economic security , national public health or safety , or any combination of those matters. .

in its 2009 guidelines for identifying critical assets specifically in the electricity sector , nerc defines critical assets as those "that if destroyed , degraded , compromised ( eg , misused ) or otherwise rendered unavailable would unacceptably affect the reliability or operability of the [bulk - power system] as a whole.... " ferc's 2014 order mandating physical security standards for the grid defines a "critical facility" as "one that , if rendered inoperable or damaged , could have a critical impact on the operation of the interconnection through instability , uncontrolled separation or cascading failures on the bulk - power system. .

all three definitions associate "criticality" with a failure event of national significance , although none provides a more prescriptive basis for identifying such assets .

in its physical security order , ferc does not require that a "mandatory" number of critical facilities be identified under the standards .

determination of whether a specific hv transformer is "critical" will be based on each individual asset owner's "objective analysis , technical expertise , and experienced judgment. .

in its physical security standards , nerc requires transmission owners with hv assets meeting prescriptive criteria to examine whether they may have critical transformers , but it is up to the owners to determine themselves if any of their assets are critical through a periodic risk assessment based on their own respective transmission analyses , subject to independent validation .

thus , grid owners could have considerable latitude in determining which of their transformer substations ( if any ) are critical and therefore subject to the requirements of the new standard .

although there are many candidate transformer substations in the grid , relatively few are likely to be of national significance .

as discussed above , of the numerous hv transformer substations in the united states , ferc's 2013 power flow analysis identified only 30 as being critical to the national grid ( although each of these substations may contain multiple hv transformers ) .

whether the number of critical transformer substations under ferc's definition above turns out to be higher or lower than 30 , it will likely be only a small fraction of the total asset base .

this conclusion is consistent with ferc's expectation that under nerc's new standard "the number of facilities identified as critical will be relatively small.... for example , of the many substations on the bulk - power system , our preliminary view is that most of these would not be 'critical' as the term is used in this order. .

consistent with this view , the nerc working group responsible for drafting the proposed physical security standard likewise expected the number of critical facilities to be "small and that many transmission owners that meet the applicability of this standard will not actually identify any such facilities. .

although the new nerc physical security standards were approved by ferc after extensive utility and public comments , some stakeholders take issue with specific requirements and methodology in the standards .

for example , some analysts have objected to nerc's standards as focusing too narrowly on a limited number of substations evaluated individually .

they argue this approach fails to adequately consider potential impacts from a planned , multi - substation attack .

they assert that nerc's approach may overlook transformers that are "critical" in the context of such an attack .

ferc has rejected these arguments ( for the time being ) arguing that "by protecting individual critical facilities , responsible entities will necessarily protect critical facilities against simultaneous attacks. .

ferc states that it is not prepared "to expand the scope of covered facilities to include those not individually critical ... at this early stage of industry experience with the new requirements .

our priority at this time is to have responsible entities protect the most critical facilities. .

however , the commission also states that it remains "open to a different approach in the future as industry continues to gain experience in this area and as risks may evolve. .

properly identifying which hv transformer substations are critical is a key issue .

otherwise , the electricity sector risks the possibility of hardening too many substations , hardening the wrong substations , or both .

either outcome could increase ultimate costs to electricity consumers without commensurate security benefits , and could potentially divert limited security resources from other important grid priorities ( eg , cybersecurity ) .

hardening too few substations could leave the grid exposed to unacceptable levels of risk .

independent verification is intended to validate utility assessments of substation criticality , but the standard's reliance on company - by - company assessments may still allow for important differences in analytic methodology or assumptions , and thus inconsistent conclusions about transformer criticality .

furthermore , company - specific studies may not align with a "top down" assessment of asset criticality like that performed by ferc in its electrically significant location ( esl ) analysis .

congress may examine whether company - specific assessments of transformer criticality could differ from national - level assessments or assessments using other analytic approaches , and what implications , if any , such differences might have on overall grid security and company efforts to protect particular substations .

ensuring the confidentially of critical infrastructure information has been a long - standing concern across all critical infrastructure sectors .

it is a key reason for the establishment of sector information sharing and analysis centers ( isacs ) , including the electricity sector isac , discussed above .

confidentiality also factors into the administration of the industry's spare transformer programs and other activities related to critical infrastructure .

ferc has established policies for the protection of critical energy infrastructure information ( ceii ) through a series of orders , beginning with order 630 , issued february 21 , 2003 .

the order ( §27 ) defines ceii as information that "must relate to critical infrastructure , be potentially useful to terrorists , and be exempt from disclosure under the freedom of information act [foia]. .

it also establishes procedures and responsibilities for determining what information qualifies as ceii and handling ceii requests .

ferc's 2014 order mandating physical security standards also requires procedures to ensure confidential treatment of sensitive information .

press articles in the wake of the metcalf attacks , notably in the wall street journal , cited specific details about ferc's 2013 esl analysis , reportedly from a copy of a ferc presentation obtained by the paper .

notwithstanding ferc's orders on ceii , members of congress and ferc officials have expressed concern that the release of the presentation by ferc staff and the publication of details in the press potentially compromised grid security .

others reportedly have disputed this concern , including the former ferc commissioner responsible for commissioning and presenting the esl study findings at industry meetings .

in april 2014 , the doe inspector general issued a management alert which concluded that the ferc presentation in question "should have been classified and protected from release" and "that the commission may not possess adequate controls for identifying and handling classified national security information. .

the acting chairman of ferc testified at the time that the commission was adopting the inspector general's recommendations to improve its handling of ceii and requested additional authority from congress for exemption from foia .

on january 30 , 2015 , the doe inspector general released a follow up inspection report related to the ig's earlier examination of ceii handling by ferc .

the report concluded that the commission's controls , processes and procedures for protecting nonpublic information were severely lacking .

specifically , we found that staff inconsistently handled and shared commission - created analyses that identified vulnerability of the nation's electric grid without ensuring that the data was adequately evaluated for sensitivity and classification .

the ig report noted that ferc's actions to remediate its ceii lapses since the ig's earlier management alert were "a good start," but that additional measures were recommended .

according to the ig , ferc's comments and additional plans in response to the new report were generally responsive to the report's findings and recommendations .

ferc staff may be taking steps to improve the way ceii is safeguarded in response to the inspector general's reports , but securing ceii may continue to be an issue if nerc's new physical security regulations are approved by the commission .

nerc's regulations would require independent risk assessments by multiple grid owners and 3 rd party validation of those assessments .

this process , by construction , would cause considerable new ceii to be created ( eg , multiple midwest power flow models ) and shared among utilities , rtos , and consultants in ways that may be new to the industry .

ensuring that ceii generated and transferred among these entities remains secure could require special attention .

as ferc's improper management of the esl study information shows , having strong ceii policies in the context of nerc's new physical security regulations may not guarantee that those policies will be correctly and uniformly followed — even by the agency that created them .

the critical electric infrastructure protection act ( h.r .

2271 §2 ( a ) ) would strengthen federal protections for critical electric infrastructure information .

among other provisions , the bill would exempt such information from disclosure under the freedom of information act or any state , tribal , or local law requiring such disclosure .

the bill would also require ferc to promulgate regulations , issue orders , provide standards , and specify sanctions to ensure appropriate sharing of critical electric infrastructure information and prevent its unauthorized release .

the bill would allow federal officials to grant temporary access to classified information to key personnel of entities subject to grid security emergency measures , further discussed below .

the electric power sector has had physical security guidelines in place for well over a decade , as discussed above .

these voluntary guidelines have been updated and expanded periodically to reflect industry experience , changes in the security environment , and new technologies .

prior to 2014 , however , it appears that the physical security initiatives among grid owners were focused primarily on preventing vandalism and theft ( of copper wire ) rather than a terrorist attack .

as the recent substation attacks in california , arkansas , and florida have shown , many other security measures available to grid owners were not implemented — even at critical hv substations .

a grid owner's focus on vandalism and theft may be understandable because such incidents have occurred frequently and their associated costs are tangible and well - understood .

investing in security against a terrorist attack presents a greater challenge in terms of costs and benefits .

as a 2006 report from the electric power research institute states , security measures , in themselves , are cost items , with no direct monetary return .

the benefits are in the avoided costs of potential attacks whose probability is generally not known .

this makes cost - justification very difficult .

note that cost - justification requires not only the approval of utility management , but also of ferc and potentially state public utility commissions which regulate the rates grid owners may charge for electric transmission and distribution service .

regulators are responsible for ensuring that electricity rates are just and reasonable .

they must be convinced that any new grid security capital costs and expenses are necessary and prudent before they will allow them to be passed through to ratepayers .

the metcalf incident and gridex exercises have provided the electric sector with valuable new information about the potential threat , vulnerability , and consequence of a coordinated attack on hv transformers .

risk assessments incorporating this information presumably would justify ( with or without a new nerc standard ) increased security investments at critical substations to prevent intentional attacks .

the spending plans announced in 2014-2015 at pg&e , dominion , bpa , and other utilities for hv substation security appear to reflect such risk and cost - benefit reassessments .

nonetheless , there continues to be considerable uncertainty about the risk of terror attacks on the power grid , and what measures are economically justified in addressing them .

pg&e , bpa , and the other utilities announcing large security investments have already decided to make such investments .

other major owners of critical hv transformers have not publicly announced similar plans , in some cases because they have not yet completed security evaluations under nerc's new standards , so they are unsure what new measures they will require .

for example , based upon a security gap analysis after the metcalf incident , florida power and light ( fpl ) identified multiple potential security enhancements , but has only implemented some of them ; other measures have been delayed for comparison to requirements under nerc's new standards .

nerc's proposed standards for power grid physical security would ensure considerable consistency in the analytic process utilities must undertake to identify critical substations and develop plans to secure them .

however , the standard may not ensure consistency among the various security plans nor in the specific measures the individual asset owners will choose to implement to reduce the risk of intentional attacks .

apart from the physical aspects of their assets , a number of factors may lead to differences in security implementation among grid owners , including differences in organization , ratemaking , accounting , and management capability .

in particular , how physical security is managed within a corporate structure can influence the effectiveness of physical security programs .

for example , a 2014 corporate memo from pg&e leaked to the press states that "due to the existing structure and limited authority of csd [corporate security division] , little has changed relative csd's abilities to make significant and intended security improvements. .

how capital is allocated and accounted for can also be a barrier to physical security implementation and verification .

in a 2014 report to florida regulators , fpl stated that not all security costs are contained within the corporate security budget .

some physical security costs are shared with appropriate operational business units .

for example , the cost of security equipment for new substations is rolled into the cost of the substation .

not all physical security costs are budgeted and tracked in separate line items .

therefore , difficulties exist estimating total costs of fpl's physical security efforts .

as ferc continues to implement its policy of regulating physical security of the power grid , congress may examine whether company - specific security initiatives appropriately reflect the risk profiles of their particular assets , and whether additional security measures across the grid uniformly reflect terrorism risk from a national perspective .

examining the extent to which the corporate structures and accounting functions support company - specific physical security programs may be of particular interest as grid owners adapt to evolving threats and physical security requirements .

the power industry's physical security risk assessments rely upon information about security threats provided by the federal government , among other sources , communicated through the isac , during dhs and other agency briefings , or through other channels .

the quality and timeliness of this threat information is a key determinant of what grid owners need to be protecting against and what security measures to take .

incomplete or ambiguous threat information — especially from the federal government — may lead to inconsistency in physical security among grid owners , inefficient spending of limited security resources at facilities ( eg , that may not really be under threat ) , or deployment of security measures against the wrong threat .

for example , prior to ferc's physical security order , the head of nerc , which initially opposed mandatory physical security standards , stated ? .

i am concerned that a rule - based approach for physical security would not provide the flexibility needed to deal with the widely varying risk profiles and circumstances across the north american grid and would instead create unnecessary and inefficient regulatory burdens and compliance obligations .

differences in the interpretation or application of threat information , as discussed in the previous section , may be a reason why some large utilities have announced major new substation security initiatives while others have not .

concerns about the quality and specificity of federal threat information have long been an issue across all critical infrastructure sectors .

threat information continues to be an uncertainty in the case of power grid physical security .

for example , the pjm regional transmission organization employs probabilistic models to assess risks to the grid due to equipment malfunction and severe weather , but its model has not incorporated an assessment of a physical attack due to insufficient data .

some federal officials reportedly have characterized the metcalf incident as a domestic terrorist attack , potentially a "dry run" for a more destructive attack on multiple hv transformer substations , while the federal bureau of investigation has stated that it does not believe metcalf was a terrorist incident .

because the perpetrators have not been identified , it is impossible to know for certain , but the ambiguity has significant implications for hv substation security going forward .

although there is wide consensus that the metcalf attack was extremely serious , some industry analysts have opined that ferc's physical security order may be an "overreaction" to metcalf .

by contrast , former dhs secretary michael chertoff has predicted that "the sophistication and resulting damage of the metcalf attack will ... be exceeded" in a future attack .

still others have expressed concern that ferc's physical security concerns may be too heavily focused on another metcalf - type scenario ( the last threat ) rather than a wider range of potential future threats ( the next threat ) .

there is widespread agreement among government , utilities , and manufacturers that hv transformers in the united states are vulnerable to terrorist attack , and that such an attack potentially could have catastrophic consequences .

but the most serious , multi - transformer attacks could require acquiring operational information and a certain level of sophistication on the part of potential attackers .

consequently , despite the technical arguments , without more specific information about potential targets and attacker capabilities , the true vulnerability of the grid to a multi - hv transformer attack remains an open question .

as congress seeks to establish the best policies to address hv transformer vulnerability relative to other infrastructure security priorities , understanding this vulnerability in the context of specific demonstrable threats may become increasingly important .

to this end congress may examine how federal threat information is developed and used by grid owners , and how limitations and uncertainty of this information may affect the hv transformer physical security among electric utilities .

physical security for hv transformer substations has the primary purpose of preventing successful attacks against these critical assets within the power grid .

however , in the event of a successful attack , measures to minimize its effect on the overall grid are equally important so that the loss of any particular transformer remains a local event .

to this end the electric power industry emphasizes its strategy of "defense - in - depth," which includes incident response and recovery in addition to preparation and prevention .

industry initiatives to enhance grid resiliency , including incident recovery programs such as the dhs recovery transformer program and eei's spare transformer program , contribute to the power grid's ability to sustain a terrorist attack without widespread grid failure .

indeed , some analysts have pointed to the metcalf incident as a successful demonstration of grid resiliency ; electric service was not interrupted despite the loss of a critical substation in the san francisco bay area .

nonetheless , some policymakers have proposed additional federal authorities to respond to physical incidents affecting grid critical infrastructure , including hv transformers .

some stakeholders , including ferc officials , have asserted that the commission's current grid reliability authority under the federal power act ( §215 ) does not provide ferc with adequate authority for emergency action in the event of an attack on the grid .

a house bill to amend the federal power act with respect to critical electric infrastructure security ( h.r .

2271 ) would allow the president to authorize the secretary of energy to order emergency measures to protect grid reliability during a "grid security emergency" ( § ( b ) ( 1 ) ) .

the director of ferc's electric reliability office has testified in support of the bill that ferc's existing "procedures ... for the development and approval of reliability standards do not provide an effective and timely means of addressing urgent cyber or other national security risks to the bulk power system. .

nerc's president likewise has testified that he generally supports legislation clarifying federal authority during grid emergencies , as long as they focus clearly on "national , catastrophic instances" and do not conflict with the existing system of ongoing measures in place to protect the grid .

utility industry representatives also support facilitation of industry - government coordination in the event of an attack on the grid .

as consideration of h.r .

2271 or similar legislation continues , congress may focus on specific language related to consultation , duration of emergency measures , grid recovery activities , and other details to ensure that they align with a complex industry structure while achieving the bill's objectives in the event of a future security incident .

as discussed above , the doe's quadrennial energy review calls for federal efforts to develop one or more critical hv transformer reserves .

h.r .

2244 would mandate a doe plan for how such a reserve program could be carried out .

some in the utility industry support the policy intentions of such a reserve , as already demonstrated by the industry's own spare hv transformer programs and planned expansion of those programs , but they believe stakeholders "will be better served by allowing the industry to create the structure , cost responsibility and pricing for [transformer] sparing services as opposed to a top - down government solution. .

they believe federal assistance would be most helpful if limited to funding the startup of a transformer reserve program administered by the asset owners themselves .

the grid assurance sparing service appears consistent with a private sector - driven approach to expand existing spare transformer initiatives .

others have questioned the cost - effectiveness of a new national hv transformer reserve program , asserting that — had it been in place — the reserve program envisioned by h.r .

2244 would not have been called upon by any grid incident over the last ten years .

as congress considers any plans for a federally administered strategic transformer reserve , it may consider the relationship of such a program to ongoing industry efforts to maintain hv transformer spares , the relationship between federal and state administrators of such a program , its cost - effectiveness , and its practical requirements ( eg , size , location , and transportation ) .

in addition to measures focused on the protection of critical hv transformers from physical attack , analysts have advocated policies to reduce the criticality of individual hv assets by enhancing the overall "resiliency" of the electric power grid .

as a report from the executive office of the president states , grid resilience ... includes hardening , advanced capabilities , and recovery / reconstitution .

although most attention is placed on best practices for hardening , resilience strategies must also consider options to improve grid flexibility and control .

resilience includes reconstitution and general readiness such as pole maintenance , vegetation management , use of mobile transformers and substations , and participation in mutual assistance groups .

a number of federal , state , and industry initiatives exist to address various aspects of electric power grid resiliency .

while many of these initiatives have been motivated by weather - related events such as the northeast blackout of 2003 and electric grid failure during superstorm sandy , policies to improve grid resilience also have benefits in the context of intentional physical attacks .

for example , an official from pjm has reportedly stated , you can only harden a substation so much .

if someone wants to attack a substation , they will.... that leads us to the resilience piece .

maybe the best way to make a substation less critical is to build more transmission .

a substation is critical basically because we're pushing too much power through it .

grid scale energy storage , distributed generation , smart grid technology , and other measures to redistribute or optimize transmission system power flows may also increase grid resiliency and reduce vulnerability to physical security threats .

the enhanced grid security act of 2015 ( s. 1241 ) would require the secretary of energy develop an advanced energy security program to increase the "functional preservation" of the electric grid in the face of both natural and human - made threats and hazards ( §7 ( b ) ) .

the objectives of the program would explicitly include both "security and resiliency" through vulnerability assessment , modeling , exercises , research , and technical assistance ( §7 ( c ) ) .

the grid modernization act of 2015 ( s. 1243 ) would likewise encourage greater grid resilience , including modelling , research , and investment in grid modernization and new technologies — including tools to increase physical security ( §101 ( 3 ) ( e ) ) .

other legislation related to power grid resilience or efficiency would also likely have physical security implications .

as congress continues its examination of physical security policy , maintaining an integrated perspective on prevention , recovery , and resilience may help to promote an effective balance among industry investment , regulatory requirements , and federal oversight .

