the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) is a federal - state program that provides health coverage to certain uninsured low - income children and pregnant women in families that have annual income above medicaid eligibility levels , but have no health insurance .

chip is jointly financed by the federal government and states , and the states are responsible for administering chip .

participation in chip is voluntary and all states , the district of columbia , and the territories participate .

the federal government sets basic requirements for chip , but states have the flexibility to design their own version of chip within the federal government's basic framework .

as a result , there is significant variation across chip programs .

chip was established as part of the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba 97 ; p.l .

105-33 ) under a new title xxi of the social security act ( ssa ) .

since that time , other federal laws have provided additional funding , and made significant changes to chip .

most notably , the children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 ( chipra ; p.l .

111-3 ) increased appropriation levels for chip , and changed the formula for allotments ( i.e. , federal funds allocated to each state for the federal share of their chip expenditures ) , eligibility , and benefit requirements .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) largely maintains the current chip structure through fy2019 .

the law also extends federal appropriations through fy2015 and requires states to maintain their medicaid and chip child eligibility levels through fy2019 as a condition for receiving medicaid federal matching funds .

on april 16 , 2015 , president obama signed into law the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ; p.l .

114-10 ) .

macra repeals the sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) mechanism ( which overrides the reduction in the medicare physician fee schedule that was set to begin in april 2015 ) and extends funding for chip , among other provisions .

specifically , macra extends chip funding for two additional years ( i.e. , through fy2017 ) and maintains the current allotment formula with the 23 percentage point increase to the enhanced federal medical assistance percentage ( e - fmap ) .

macra also extends the "qualifying state" option , the child enrollment contingency fund , "express lane" eligibility , outreach and enrollment grants , the pediatric quality measures program , and the childhood obesity demonstration project .

congress will face a decision with regard to the future of chip when federal chip funding expires after fy2017 .

the health insurance market is far different today than when chip was established .

chip was designed to work in coordination with medicaid to provide health coverage to low - income children .

in general , chip allows states to cover chip children with no health insurance in families with annual income above state medicaid eligibility levels .

before chip was established , no federal program provided health coverage to children with family with annual incomes above medicaid eligibility levels .

the aca further expanded the options for children in certain low - income families with incomes above chip eligibility levels by offering subsidized coverage for insurance purchased through health insurance exchanges .

congress's action or inaction on the chip program will affect the health insurance options available to targeted low - income children and their resulting health coverage .

this report describes the basic elements of chip , focusing on how the program is designed , who is eligible , what services are covered , how enrollees share in the cost of care , and how the program is financed .

the report ends with a brief discussion of the future of chip .

states may design their chip programs in three ways .

they may cover eligible children under their medicaid programs ( i.e. , chip medicaid expansion ) , create a separate chip program , or adopt a combination approach where the state operates a chip medicaid expansion and one or more separate chip programs concurrently .

in all cases , federal chip funding is available to pay for the costs for services provided to chip children .

state choices for program design impact the coverage that enrollees receive .

when states provide medicaid coverage to chip children ( i.e. , chip medicaid expansion ) , medicaid rules ( title xix of ssa ) typically apply .

when states provide coverage to chip children through separate chip programs , title xxi of ssa rules typically apply .

states that want to make changes to their programs beyond what both laws allow may seek approval from the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) through the use of the section 1115 waiver authority .

where relevant , differences between title xix and title xxi of the ssa program rules regarding eligibility , benefit coverage , cost sharing , and financing are summarized in table 1 , and highlighted throughout the report .

as of july 1 , 2014 , 8 states , the district of columbia , and the territories had chip medicaid expansions , 13 states had separate chip programs , and 29 states used a combination approach .

 ( see appendix a , table a - 1 for 50-state information on chip program design. ) .

fy2013 state - reported chip enrollment data ( the most recent data available ) show that the bulk of chip enrollees received coverage through separate chip programs ( approximately 70% ) .

the remainder received coverage through a chip medicaid expansion .

this enrollment distribution has largely held true over the course of the program's history ( see figure 1 below ) .

however , this landscape likely will change due to modifications to chip eligibility rules enacted under the aca .

 ( for more information on these and other eligibility related requirements , see the " eligibility " subsection. ) .

preliminary fy2014 chip enrollment data show about half of chip enrollees are in chip medicaid expansion programs and about half are in separate chip programs .

this section describes chip eligibility rules .

in general , chip extends coverage to certain low - income children and pregnant women without health insurance in families with annual family income too high to qualify them for medicaid .

specifically , title xxi of the ssa defines a targeted low - income child as one who is under age 19 with no health insurance , and who would not have been eligible for medicaid under the federal and state rules in effect when chip was first initiated in 1997 .

 ( hereinafter , targeted low - income children are referred to as chip children , chip - eligible or chip - enrolled , as applicable. ) .

states have broad discretion in setting their income eligibility standards , and eligibility varies across states .

children under age 19 represent the vast majority of chip program enrollment .

as with eligibility and benefits , cost - sharing rules depend on a state's chip program design ( see table 1 ) .

cost sharing refers to the out - of - pocket payments made by beneficiaries of a health insurance plan , and may include premiums ( usually on a monthly basis ) , enrollment fees , deductibles , copayments , coinsurance , and other similar charges .

the federal government and the states jointly finance chip .

the federal government reimburses states for a portion of every dollar they spend on chip ( for both chip medicaid expansions and separate chip programs ) up to state - specific limits called allotments .

in fy2013 , chip expenditures totaled $13.2 billion .

the federal share totaled $9.2 billion and the state share was $4.0 billion .

with federal funding for chip set to end after fy2017 , congress will need to decide whether to continue the chip program .

in considering the future of chip , it is helpful to recall why the program was created in 1997: to provide affordable health coverage at a time when there were few other insurance coverage options for low - income children outside of medicaid .

the health insurance market is far different today , with the enactment of the aca .

now , if chip funding is exhausted , current chip - eligible children potentially could be eligible for medicaid , for subsidized coverage in the health insurance exchanges , or for their parent's employer - sponsored insurance coverage , but not all chip - eligible children would be eligible for these programs and some could end up being uninsured without the availability of chip .

some argue that it is important to continue providing child - specific safety net coverage because each of the low - income subsidy programs ( eg , chip , medicaid , and subsidized exchange coverage ) plays a unique role in the health care delivery system .

for instance , greater cost - sharing protections exist for the programs that target families at the lower ends of the income - eligibility spectrum .

in addition , some are wary of providing coverage for children in the health insurance exchanges because the exchanges are new and there is little evidence about how coverage in the exchanges compares to chip coverage .

with fy2017 being the final year for which federal chip funding is provided in statute , congress's action or inaction will determine the future of chip and of health coverage for chip children .

in considering the future of chip , congress has a number of policy options , including extending federal chip funding and continuing the program or letting chip funding expire .

if congress decides to extend federal chip funding , there are a number of policy options to consider , including the length of the funding extension and whether to make programmatic changes .

funding could be extended for just a few years ( eg , two or four years ) or indefinitely , and the extension could maintain , phase down , or eliminate the 23 percentage point increase to the e - fmap rate .

in addition , the extension could make programmatic changes to eligibility , benefit coverage , or other aspects of the program .

although fy2017 is the last year for which federal chip funding is provided under current law , states are expected to have federal chip spending in fy2018 because states will have access to unspent funds from their fy2017 allotments and to unspent fy2016 allotments redistributed to shortfall states ( if any ) .

if congress takes no action and chip funding runs out , states need to adhere to the moe requirements that are in effect through fy2019 .

the moe requires states to maintain income eligibility levels for chip children through september 30 , 2019 , as a condition for receiving medicaid payments ( notwithstanding the lack of corresponding federal chip appropriations for fy2016 through fy2019 ) .

the moe requirements impact chip medicaid expansion programs and separate chip programs differently .

for chip medicaid expansion programs , when federal chip funding is exhausted , the chip - eligible children in these programs continue to be enrolled in medicaid but financing switches from chip to medicaid .

this switch would cause the federal share of expenditures to decrease from the e - fmap rate to the regular fmap rate , which means the cost of covering these children would increase for states .

for separate chip programs , states are provided a couple of exceptions to the moe: ( 1 ) after september 1 , 2015 , states may enroll chip - eligible children into qualified health plans in the health insurance exchanges or ( 2 ) states may impose waiting lists or enrollment caps in order to limit chip expenditures .

in addition , in the event that a state's chip allotment is insufficient to fund chip coverage for all eligible children , a state must establish procedures to screen children for medicaid eligibility , and enroll those who are medicaid - eligible .

for children not eligible for medicaid , the state must establish procedures to enroll chip children in qualified health plans in the health insurance exchanges that have been certified by the hhs secretary .

if no additional federal chip appropriations are provided , chip children in chip medicaid expansion programs ( roughly half of chip enrollees ) would continue to receive coverage through the medicaid program through fy2019 , but coverage of chip children in separate chip programs ( roughly half of chip enrollees ) who are not eligible for medicaid is reliant on whether the children have access to qualified health plans that are certified by the hhs secretary .

under the moe , if states do not receive a chip allotment , after establishing procedures to enroll all medicaid eligible children in medicaid , states are only required to establish procedures to enroll children in qualified health plans certified by the hhs secretary .

if there are no certified plans , the moe does not obligate states to provide coverage to these children .

if there are certified plans , not all chip children will be eligible for subsidized exchange coverage due to the "family glitch," among other reasons .

under each of the policy options outlined above under " if federal chip funding expires ," at least some chip enrollees would continue to have coverage through chip , medicaid , the health insurance exchanges , or the employer - sponsored insurance market .

however , not all chip children would continue to have coverage under each of the policy options .

if the federal chip program funding is permitted to expire before ( or after ) the moe requirements that are in effect through fy2019 , the coverage landscape is expected to change for some portion of the current chip enrollees .

although the specific results of coverage projections may look different in future years , it is possible to learn from the information they offer .

in anticipation of the fy2015 congressional debate regarding the future of chip , the urban institute conducted an analysis for macpac to generate estimates of the sources of coverage for children in separate chip programs who were projected to lose chip coverage if federal chip funding was exhausted in fy2016 .

the analysis found that if federal chip funding was not renewed and states exhausted their fy2015 federal allotments , approximately two - thirds of current separate chip - enrolled children would move to their parent's employer - sponsored insurance coverage ( i.e. , approximately 1.2 million , or 32.6% ) or to subsidized exchange coverage ( i.e. , approximately 1.4 million , or 36.5% ) .

the remaining one - third of such children ( approximately 1.1 million , or 30.9% ) would become uninsured in fy2016 .

for the children who would receive coverage under alternative coverage options , there would be variation among the coverage in terms of benefits , cost sharing , and financing .

with respect to benefit coverage , a recent macpac analysis of benefits available under separate chip programs , medicaid , exchange plans , and employer - sponsored insurance found the following: covered benefits vary within each source — between states for medicaid and chip and among plans for exchange plans and employer - sponsored insurance .

most chip , medicaid , exchange plans , and employer - sponsored insurance plans cover major medical benefits , such as inpatient and outpatient care , physician services , and prescription drugs .

although medicaid and chip cover pediatric dental services , dental benefits are offered as a separate , stand - alone insurance product in most exchanges .

chip and medicaid cover many services that are not always available in exchange plans .

for example , all chip and medicaid programs cover audiology exams , and 95% of chip programs cover hearing aids .

however , only 37% of exchange plan essential health benefit benchmarks cover audiology exams , and only 54% cover hearing aids .

for other benefits , such as applied behavioral analysis therapy and autism services , coverage varies .

macpac's analysis of affordability of exchange coverage for children currently covered by chip found that the out - of - pocket costs for chip generally are higher than under medicaid but significantly lower than in the exchanges or under employer - sponsored insurance .

when comparing out - of - pocket costs across coverage types , macpac found that for families with employer - sponsored insurance , "projected premiums could average $3,751 per year or 9.1% of family income .

families with subsidized coverage on the exchange might see smaller or no premium costs , but they would face much higher cost - sharing amounts ( in the form of deductibles and service - level cost - sharing ) than under chip. .

with respect to financing , under chip and medicaid the coverage for chip enrollees would continue to be jointly financed by the federal government and states , but moving chip children into medicaid would increase the state share of expenditures for these children .

under the option to move chip children into the health insurance exchanges , the federal government alone would fund the subsidized coverage , without any contribution from states .

for employer - sponsored insurance coverage , premiums are largely shared by the employer and its employees .

appendix a .

chip data by state table a - 1 provides fy2013 data by state regarding chip program type , income eligibility levels , and enrollment .

table a - 2 shows fy2015 chip e - fmap rates and fy2013 chip expenditures ( including both federal and state expenditures ) .

appendix b .

upper income eligibility levels in medicaid , chip , and subsidized exchange coverage state - by - state income eligibility level for medicaid , chip , and subsidized exchange coverage for infants , children aged 1 to 5 , children aged 6 to 18 , and pregnant women and unborn children are provided in figure b - 1 , figure b - 2 , figure b - 3 , and figure b - 4 ( respectively ) .

most children and pregnant women in families with income under 400% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) are eligible for medicaid , chip , or subsidized exchange coverage .

the income eligibility levels for medicaid and chip vary by state and population ( i.e. , age of child or pregnant women ) , and subsidized exchange coverage is available for most children and pregnant women with incomes between 100% fpl and 400% fpl that do not have access to other minimum essential coverage , such as medicaid or chip .

