on june 23 , 2014 , the supreme court decided a much - anticipated case in the area of federal securities law .

the case , halliburton co. v. erica p. john fund , inc. , presented to the court the following two questions , both dealing with the certification of a class of securities fraud plaintiffs: 1 .

whether the court should overrule or substantially modify the holding of basic , inc. v. levinson , 485 u.s. 224 ( 1988 ) , to the extent that it recognized a presumption of class - wide reliance derived from the fraud - on - the - market theory .

2 .

whether , in a case where the plaintiff invoked the presumption of reliance to seek class certification , the defendant might rebut the presumption and prevent class certification by introducing evidence that the alleged misrepresentations did not distort the market price of its stock .

class certification is important in the securities area , and lawsuits are often brought to challenge the class of plaintiffs attempting to be certified .

class certification is necessary before the case can go forward to be decided on the merits .

in addition , the amount of money involved in a class action securities lawsuit may be significant .

individuals with small claims may not be willing to pursue individual lawsuits , but individuals who create a class of plaintiffs may result in a formidable plaintiff .

a securities class action lawsuit often presents a stronger case and a case better able than small , individual cases to obtain major attorney representation .

proponents and opponents of securities class actions have actively argued their points .

proponents believe that certification requirements must be kept to a minimum because investors should be able easily to pursue companies that have committed fraud .

they argue that investor protection benefits both individual investors and the securities markets in general by maintaining the integrity of the marketplace .

opponents of minimum certification requirements argue that too often investors bring lawsuits that are frivolous , such as when the share price drops for reasons unrelated to fraud , and that companies may feel pressured to pay out large settlements rather than risk even higher litigation costs .

they also argue that the only people who benefit from securities class actions are the attorneys who receive large legal fees .

the halliburton cases illustrate the importance of class certification .

the history of the cases leading to the second supreme court halliburton decision is lengthy , spanning more than a decade .

thus far , the courts have dealt only with the issue of class certification ; they have not yet had the opportunity to address the merits of the plaintiffs' arguments .

there have been three rounds of decisions in the federal district court for the northern district of texas and two rounds in the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit and the u.s. supreme court .

after its second decision , the supreme court remanded the case for further proceedings consistent with its opinion .

the federal district court for the northern district of texas has issued a third decision on class certification after the supreme court's remand .

this report will first discuss requirements for securities fraud class action certification and then go through the rounds of the halliburton federal decisions , ending with the third federal district court decision .

it appears that over the past thirty years the supreme court has struck something of a middle ground in setting out the parameters for securities fraud class action certification , finding for neither plaintiffs nor defendants in all challenges .

the court has held that there must be predominance of common issues of fact or law ( general telephone company of the southwest v. falcon , as affirmed by basic v. levinson ) , a burden which plaintiffs must meet .

presuming reliance on material misstatements is allowed under certain circumstances ( basic v. levinson ) , a development opposed by defendants , who have argued for direct reliance .

limiting or eliminating proof of materiality at the class certification stage ( amgen , inc. v. connecticut retirement plans ) is another development which defendants opposed .

not having to prove loss causation at the class certification stage ( supreme court's first halliburton decision ) was another favorable decision for class action plaintiffs .

requiring proof of market efficiency ( basic v. levinson ) is a burden which the plaintiffs may find difficult at times to meet .

allowing defendants at the class certification stage to rebut the presumption of reliance ( basic v. levinson ) is a decision which plaintiffs may oppose .

in the same way , the supreme court struck a kind of middle ground in its decision of halliburton ii .

the court did not overrule basic v. levinson and its fraud - on - the - market theory which allows a presumption of reliance , rather than required direct reliance , under certain circumstances , but the court did allow defendants to rebut this presumption of reliance at the class certification stage by introducing evidence that the alleged misrepresentations did not distort the stock's market price .

basic had stated that the defendants could rebut the presumption of reliance , and in halliburton ii the court recognized that one way to rebut the presumption of reliance is to show an absence of price impact caused by defendant's alleged misstatements .

despite the court's not jettisoning the fraud - on - the - market reliance presumption of reliance set out in basic , some commenters believe that defendants achieved a significant victory in halliburton ii .

an attorney who represented halliburton stated that "[t]he defense has argued for the ability to rebut the presumption with price impact evidence since the case went up to the court the first time in 2010. .

when she stated that the defendant has the burden of showing the absence of price impact , justice ginsburg in her brief concurring opinion may have anticipated that many will believe that the halliburton ii decision will make class action certification more difficult .

the halliburton ii decision has already begun to have an impact on class certification .

in a case decided not long after halliburton ii , the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit on august 6 vacated the certification of a plaintiff class in a lawsuit brought against regions financial corporation so that the lower court could consider regions' evidence of lack of price impact caused by allegedly fraudulent statements about real estate investments .

halliburton ii was clearly not the end of the erica p. john fund v. halliburton saga .

the federal district court decision has fleshed out some of the particulars of the supreme court's halliburton ii decision .

it approved the use of event studies by both parties to attempt to determine whether alleged misstatements cause a drop in share price .

however , this case is not the end of the class certif .

tion challenges , as the fifth circuit has granted halliburton leave to appeal .

if the class is finally certified , the courts may then face the merits of the case .

