the office of advocacy ( advocacy ) is an "independent" office within the u.s. small business administration ( sba ) that is responsible for advancing "the views and concerns of small businesses before congress , the white house , federal agencies , the federal courts , and state and local policymakers as appropriate. .

the chief counsel for advocacy ( chief counsel ) directs the office and is appointed by the president from civilian life with the advice and consent of the senate .

the chief counsel and advocacy support the development and growth of american small businesses by "intervening early in federal agencies' regulatory development processes on proposals that affect small entities and providing regulatory flexibility act compliance training to federal agency policymakers and regulatory development officials ; producing research to inform policymakers and other stakeholders on the impact of federal regulatory burdens on small businesses , to document the vital role of small businesses in the economy , and to explore and explain the wide variety of issues of concern to the small business community ; and fostering a two - way communication between federal agencies and the small business community. .

advocacy has 55 staff members and received an appropriation of $9.120 million for fy2019 .

advocacy's responsibilities have expanded over time , and legislation has been introduced in recent congresses to increase its authority still further .

for example , during the 115 th congress , the house passed h.r .

5 , the regulatory accountability act of 2017 ( title iii , small business regulatory flexibility improvements act ) , by a vote of 238-183 .

the bill would have , among other provisions , revised and enhanced requirements for federal agency notification of the chief counsel prior to the publication of any proposed rule ; expanded the required use of small business advocacy review panels from three federal agencies to all federal agencies , including independent regulatory agencies ; empowered the chief counsel to issue rules governing federal agency compliance with the rfa ; specifically authorized the chief counsel to file comments on any notice of proposed rulemaking , not just when the rfa is concerned ; and transferred size standard determinations for purposes other than the small business act and the small business investment act of 1958 from the sba's administrator to the chief counsel .

during the 113 th congress , these provisions were included in h.r .

2542 , the regulatory flexibility improvements act of 2013 , and were later included in h.r .

2804 , the achieving less excess in regulation and requiring transparency act of 2014 ( alerrt act of 2014 ) , which the house passed on february 27 , 2014 , and in h.r .

4 , the jobs for america act ( of 2014 ) , which the house passed on september 18 , 2014 .

during the 114 th congress , these provisions were included in h.r .

527 , the small business regulatory flexibility improvements act of 2015 , which was passed by the house on february 5 , 2015 .

more recently , s. 83 , the advocacy empowerment act of 2019 , would empower the chief counsel to issue rules governing federal agency compliance with the rfa .

in addition , during the 114 th congress , s. 2847 , the prove it act of 2016 , which was reported by the senate committee on small business and entrepreneurship , would have authorized the chief counsel to request the office of management and budget's ( omb's ) office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) to review any federal agency certification that a proposed rule , if promulgated , will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities and , as a result , is not required to submit a regulatory flexibility analysis of the rule .

if it is determined that the proposed rule would , if promulgated , have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities , the federal agency would then be required to perform both an initial and a final regulatory flexibility analysis for the rule .

the bill was reintroduced during the 115 th congress ( s. 2014 , the prove it act of 2017 ) .

this report examines advocacy's origins and the expansion of its responsibilities over time ; describes its organizational structure , funding , functions , and current activities ; and discusses recent legislative efforts to further enhance its authority .

the small business act of 1953 ( p.l .

83-163 , as amended ) authorized the sba and directed the agency to "aid , counsel , assist , and protect , insofar as is possible , the interests of small - business concerns. .

the sba provided this advocacy function primarily through its administration of small business loan guaranty programs , contracting assistance programs , and management and training programs .

the sba administrator serves as the lead advocate for small businesses within the federal government .

as mentioned previously , advocacy currently has 55 staff members: 4 , including the chief counsel , in the office of the chief counsel ; 16 in the office of interagency affairs ( regulatory staff ) ; 9 in the office of economic research ; 6 in the office of information ; 13 in the office of regional affairs ( regional advocates ) ; and 7 in the administrative support branch .

the office of advocacy's organizational chart is presented below , with its anticipated staffing level .

advocacy received an appropriation of $9.120 million for fy2019 .

staff salaries and benefits account for about 95% of advocacy's budget , with the remainder used for economic research grants and direct expenses , such as subscriptions , travel , training , and office supplies .

advocacy is responsible for monitoring and reporting on federal agency compliance with the rfa ( 5 u.s.c .

§§601-612 ) and executive order 13272 , proper consideration of small entities in agency rulemaking ( august 13 , 2002 ) .

advocacy also comments on proposed rules and participates in small business advocacy review panels , among other activities .

advocacy's office of economic research "assembles and uses data and other information from many different sources to develop data products that are as timely and actionable as possible. .

these products typically relate "to the role that small businesses play in the nation's economy , including the availability of credit , the effects of regulations and taxation , the role of firms owned by women , minority and veteran entrepreneurs , factors that influence entrepreneurship , innovation and other issues of concern to small businesses. .

in addition to sponsoring and conducting research on small business , advocacy maintains web pages with links to state economic profiles , which are compiled annually by office of advocacy staff and provide information concerning small businesses in the state , such as number of small businesses in the state , the number of people employed by those small businesses in the state , and various demographic information concerning the small business owners in the state ; firm size economic data , which are compiled by advocacy staff from the u.s. bureau of the census and the u.s. bureau of labor statistics and provide information concerning various owner and business characteristics , such as the number of firms , number of establishments , employment , and annual payroll by the employment size of the business and by location and industry ; quarterly economic bulletins , which are authored by advocacy staff to examine trends in small business employment and lending ; research projects which have been authored by office of advocacy staff , either by choice or by congressional mandate , and by others sponsored by advocacy ; fact sheets , which are authored by office of advocacy staff , covering various topics , such as gender differences in financing , the availability of health insurance among small businesses , and credit card financing ; issue briefs , which are authored by advocacy staff , covering various topics , such as veteran business owners and access to capital for women - and minority - owned businesses ; and major sources of data collected by the federal government concerning small business .

advocacy also provides funding to the census bureau to support the generation of business data by firm size ; publishes "the small business advocate," a newsletter summarizing advocacy's research endeavors , which has more than 36,000 online subscribers ; and publishes "the small business economy," an annual report on the status of small businesses and their role in the national economy .

as mentioned previously , advocacy engages in outreach activities related to its role with the rfa .

for example , in fy2016 , advocacy participated in seven small business advocacy review panels ( one with the occupational safety and health administration , two with the consumer financial protection bureau , and four with the environmental protection agency ) and one in fy2018 ( with the occupational safety and health administration ) .

in each case , advocacy provided outreach to small business owners interested in sharing their views concerning the agency's proposed rule .

advocacy also regularly sponsors roundtable discussions , conferences , and symposia to provide small business owners an opportunity to share their views on issues of concerns to them .

for example , advocacy's regional advocates regularly "interact directly with small businesses , small business trade associations , governors and state legislatures to educate them about the benefits of regulatory flexibility and testify at state - level legislation hearings on small business issues when requested to do so. .

regional advocates also "work closely with the ten regional fairness boards in their respective regions to develop information for the sba's national ombudsman , as provided for by the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act and alert businesses in their respective regions about regulatory proposals that could affect them. .

the chief counsel also meets regularly with business organizations and trade associations , and participates in advocacy roundtable discussions , conferences , and symposia .

advocacy's economists provide economic presentations at academic conferences , trade association meetings , think tank events , and other government - sponsored events .

as has been discussed , advocacy's responsibilities have expanded over time .

during the 115 th congress , h.r .

5 , the regulatory accountability act of 2017 ( title iii , small business regulatory flexibility improvements act ) was passed by the house .

the bill would have increased advocacy's authority still further .

specifically , h.r .

5 would have revised and enhanced requirements for federal agency notification of the chief counsel prior to the publication of any proposed rule ; expanded the required use of small business advocacy review panels from three federal agencies to all federal agencies , including independent regulatory agencies ; empowered the chief counsel to issue rules governing federal agency compliance with the rfa ; specifically authorized the chief counsel to file comments on any notice of proposed rulemaking , not just when the rfa is concerned ; and transferred size standard determinations for purposes other than the small business act and the small business investment act of 1958 from the sba's administrator to the chief counsel .

the sba's office of advocacy is a relatively small office with a relatively large mandate — to represent the interests of small business in the regulatory process , produce and promote small business economic research , and facilitate small business outreach across the federal government .

it faces several challenges .

first , advocacy is generally recognized as being an independent office , but it is housed within the sba and remains subject to its influence through ( 1 ) its proximity to the agency and its organizational culture ; ( 2 ) the budgetary process , which provides the sba administrator a role , albeit recently reduced , in determining advocacy's budget ; and ( 3 ) the sheer size of the sba ( more than 5,000 employees and an annual budget exceeding $700 million ) relative to advocacy which , given their statutorily overlapping missions as advocates for small businesses , makes it more difficult than would otherwise be the case for stakeholders to recognize advocacy as the definitive voice for small businesses .

second , chief counsels tend to have relatively short tenures ( three years , eight years , one year , seven years , six years , four years , and one year ) .

when they leave office , there have often been delays in naming a successor , creating continuity problems for advocacy .

for example , the position was filled on an interim basis by claudia rodgers , a long - time advocacy senior staff member , from january 2015 ( following winslow sargeant's departure ) until darryl l. depriest's senate confirmation on december 10 , 2015 .

depriest left office in january 2017 .

major l. clark , iii , previously assistant chief counsel for procurement policy for advocacy , is currently filling the chief counsel's position on an interim basis .

chief counsels leave office for various reasons , such as a change in administration or for more lucrative positions in the private sector .

third , one of advocacy's primary functions is to monitor and report on federal agency compliance with the rfa , provide comments on proposed rules , and train federal regulatory officials to assist them in complying with the rfa's provisions .

however , as gao has noted , the rfa does not define significant economic impact or substantial number of small entities , two key terms for triggering advocacy's role under the rfa .

the lack of clarity concerning these key terms makes it difficult for advocacy to objectively determine agency compliance with the rfa and also makes it more difficult for advocacy to train federal regulatory officials in how to come into compliance with the act .

gao and others have recommended that congress clarify the meaning of these terms .

however , the rfa's original authors purposely decided not to provide a precise definition for these terms .

they argued that the varying missions and constituencies served by federal agencies necessitated the provision of discretion to allow federal agencies to "determine what is significant to their programs and particular constituencies. .

fourth , advocacy is subject to criticism from those who believe that it should be more aggressive in preventing federal regulations ( i.e. , from those who generally oppose federal regulations , especially regulations related to environmental issues and health care reform ) and from those who believe that it should be less aggressive in this regard ( i.e. , from those who generally view federal regulations favorably , especially in addressing environmental and workplace safety issues ) .

thus , advocacy often finds itself involved in ideological and partisan disputes concerning the outcome of federal regulatory policies for which it does not have the final say .

finally , advocacy's relatively limited budget restricts its ability to produce and promote economic research on small businesses and to engage in outreach activities , particularly outreach activities not directly related to its rfa role .

it could be argued that advocacy does not need additional resources for these endeavors because the sba engages in these same activities .

once again , this reflects the challenges the office of advocacy faces as an independent office operating within a much larger federal agency with an overlapping mission .

