the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill contains appropriations for the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) .

for fy2015 , the administration proposed a number of accounting changes .

some were accepted and others rejected by the committee , which in turn made other changes in various accounts and subaccounts .

as a result , comparisons of fy2015 funding with levels in previous years are particularly difficult for a number of accounts or subaccounts .

the house committee on appropriations specifically flagged some subaccount figures as "incomparable to the budget request because of the proposed budget restructuring. .

table 1 shows fy2014 levels , as well as the fy2015 funding recommended by the committee , somewhat rearranged to facilitate comparison with fy2014 levels where that is possible .

this report presents an overview of the committee's actions , compares them with the preceding year , and discusses those programs whose funding has generated controversy in recent budget cycles .

for readability , administration proposals are omitted from the table , but discussed in the text .

on july 23 , 2014 , the committee reported h.r .

5171 ( h.rept .

113-551 ) , approving $1.40 billion , down 2.0% from the fy2014 level of $1.43 billion contained in p.l .

113-76 .

the president had requested $1.48 billion in annual appropriations , an increase of 3.4% over fy2014 .

the committee's proposed changes in accounts and subaccounts range from elimination ( - 100% ) to an increase of 187.8% .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

among other things , the committee wished to protect certain subaccounts within the agency from transfers of their funds to other programs within the same account .

to do so , it lifted three subaccounts out of resource management , the largest account in the fws budget .

the three programs — partners for fish and wildlife , national wildlife refuge system , and fisheries and aquatic resources — are now funded as separate accounts in the text of h.r .

5171 .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

the following discussion singles out those accounts and subaccounts that have generated special congressional interest over the last few years .

not every account is discussed .

by far the largest portion of the fws annual appropriation is the resource management account , and it was within this account that both the administration and the committee focused their structural changes .

the administration proposed to collapse all funding under endangered species , habitat conservation , and environmental contaminants and their various subaccounts into new ecological services and habitat conservation accounts , with the subaccounts divided differently among them compared to previous years .

however , none of the administration's proposed changes removed subaccounts ( such as candidate conservation , consultation , and recovery ) from the overarching resource management account .

comparison of funding levels between years for such traditional accounts for esa could not be made as there were no longer any accounts with those labels .

the fy2015 budget justification made a case that the proposed structure more accurately reflected the field experience of its employees and would lead to more efficient allocation of resources .

the committee bill rejected this argument , although it did make other changes in the budget structure , as discussed below .

partners for fish and wildlife ( pfw ) works with private landowners to improve wildlife habitat on their lands .

assistance may take various forms , from telephone consultations and advice , to site visits and planning , and — where wildlife benefits are very high — to financial or material assistance in improving habitat .

the program offers great flexibility to landowners , and demand has generally exceeded resources .

until fy2105 , the program had been funded through the resource management account , and the administration would have continued that budget structure .

however , the committee recommended "moving the program to its own account in order to prevent the use of funds for activities not authorized by the partners for fish and wildlife act. .

it provided $52.1 million , a 0.6% increase over fy2014 , and directed that an initiative to protect sage grouse be the program's top priority .

the committee also moved funding for the national wildlife refuge system ( nwrs ) from the resource management account into its own separate account .

the result gives congress greater control over exact spending levels for the nwrs , as moneys cannot readily be transferred to another specific account .

the house committee approved $476.9 million for the nwrs , up 1.0% from fy2014 .

the president requested $476.4 million , up 0.9% .

costs of operations have increased on many refuges , partly due to special problems such as hurricane damage and more aggressive border enforcement , but also due to increased use , invasive species control , maintenance backlog , and other demands .

according to fws , refuge funding has not been keeping pace with these demands .

the committee included a provision providing that "none of the funds made available by this or any other act may be used to establish any refuge ( as that term is defined in ... ( 16 u.s.c .

§668cc ) ) , or to expand the boundary of any refuge ( as so defined ) , unless the establishment or boundary expansion , respectively , is expressly authorized by a law enacted after the date of enactment of this act. .

as written , the text appears to prevent the continued use of funds provided under the migratory bird conservation account ( mbca , sometimes called the duck stamp program ) without a new step of specific congressional approval .

 ( see " migratory bird conservation account: an acquisition supplement ," below. ) .

the committee report also asserts that fws authority to create and expand refuges "originated with the need to act quickly to save species from certain extinction. .

the committee moved funding for fisheries and aquatic resource conservation from the resource management account into its own separate account .

the result gives congress greater control over exact spending levels for this program , as moneys cannot readily be transferred to another specific account .

the committee approved $147.9 million for this program , a 9.3% increase over fy2014 , while generally commending the program for its work .

it went on to provide detailed recommendations for spending below the account level , limiting particularly funding for propagation of species listed under esa , but allowing fws to transfer funding to the fisheries program where such assistance is needed to aid a species' recovery .

in light of controversy in recent years over fws funding for the mitigation necessary for fisheries loss from projects actually built and run by other agencies , the secretary of the interior is directed to "secure reimbursement from other federal agencies for up to 100 but not less than 50 percent of the annual costs to the federal government to fulfill such mitigation responsibilities. .

the house committee provided $14.5 million for land acquisition , to be derived from the land and water conservation fund ( lwcf ) ; this figure is down 73.4% from fy2014 .

 ( see table 3 . ) .

the administration requested $55.0 million for land acquisition , an increase of 1.1% over the fy2014 level of $54.4 million .

within this program , the committee proposed that there be no new funding for general land acquisition , and that new acquisitions be directed only to inholdings , acquisition management , and overhead .

the committee included $3.5 million for the highlands conservation act ( hca ) .

the hca ( 16 u.s.c .

§3901 ) authorizes "the secretary of the interior to work in partnership with the secretary of agriculture to provide financial assistance to the highlands states [ct , nj , ny , and pa] to preserve and protect high priority conservation land in the highlands region. .

the national wildlife refuge fund ( nwrf , also called the refuge revenue sharing fund ) compensates counties for the presence of the non - taxable federal lands under the primary jurisdiction of fws .

a portion of the fund is supported by the permanent appropriation of receipts from various activities carried out on the national wildlife refuge system .

however , these receipts are sufficient for funding only a small fraction of the authorized formula , and county governments have long urged additional appropriations to make up the difference .

the committee approved $38.1 million for the fund ; if this level is approved , counties would receive 55.9% of the authorized level .

the administration requested no funding for nwrf in fy2015 ; based on receipts alone , counties would then receive 7.4% of the authorized level .

the administration argued that the savings are justified based on low costs of refuges to county infrastructure and economic benefits to local economies from increased tourism .

the committee contrasted the proposed elimination of nwrf funding with the administration's support for full funding for a similar program called payments in lieu of taxes and argued that the programs should be treated equally .

fws has long had a role in conserving species across international boundaries , beginning with species such as migratory birds , which spend some part of their life cycle within u.s. boundaries , and more recently including selected species of broader international interest .

one of the programs , the multinational species conservation fund ( mscf ) , generates considerable constituent interest despite the small size of the program .

it benefits asian and african elephants , tigers , rhinoceroses , great apes , and marine turtles .

the house committee increased the fund as a whole by 10.4% compared to fy2014 , and each individual program as well .

 ( see table 4 . ) .

the committee provided level funding for the neotropical migratory bird conservation fund relative to the fy2014 level .

the administration had requested the same amount .

the program provides grants for the conservation of hundreds of bird species that migrate among north and south america and the caribbean .

the act requires spending 75% of the funds on projects outside the united states .

state and tribal wildlife grants help fund efforts to conserve species ( including nongame species ) of concern to states , territories , and tribes .

the program was created in the fy2001 interior appropriations law ( p.l .

106-291 ) and further detailed in subsequent interior appropriations laws .

 ( it has no separate authorizing statute. ) .

the largest portion of the program is for formula grants to states and territories .

funds from the formula grants may be used to develop state conservation plans as well as to support specific practical conservation projects .

a portion of the funding is set aside for competitive grants to tribal governments or tribal wildlife agencies , and another portion for competitive grants to states .

the two programs for competitive grants have no specific matching requirements .

this grant program has generated considerable support from state and tribal governments .

the house committee recommended the fy2014 level , but shifted the program to a greater emphasis on competitive grants , keeping the state formula grants as the lion's share of the funding .

 ( see table 5 . ) .

the president requested $50.0 million for these grants , a 14.8% reduction from the amount approved for fy2014 .

the house committee retained the current minimum state match of 25.0% .

in addition to the regular appropriations provisions , h.r .

5171 contained administrative provisions affecting fws .

one provision ( section 115 ) concerned domestic trade in , and international import of ivory ; section 116 concerns conservation of the valley elderberry longhorn beetle ; section 117 delays issuance of further rules for conservation of sage - grouse ; and section 118 requires an economic analysis in the development of a recovery plan for certain california amphibians .

finally , two additional provisions in title iv affect matters relevant to wildlife .

section 426 affects the regulation of lead content in ammunition and fishing tackle under the toxic substances control act ( 15 u.s.c .

§2601 et seq. ) .

section 431 affects the regulation of hunting , fishing , or recreational shooting on forest service and blm lands .

crs report r42945 , the endangered species act ( esa ) in the 113 th congress: new and recurring issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21157 , international species conservation funds , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

for general information on the fish and wildlife service , see its website at http: / / www.fws.gov / .

for links to current and past budget justifications , see http: / / www.fws.gov / budget / .

