this report provides summary information on supplemental appropriations legislation enacted since fy2000 after significant large - scale disasters .

it includes funds appropriated to various departments and agencies .

the funds cited in this report were provided by congress in response to major disasters declared under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

92-288 , hereinafter the stafford act ) and include appropriations for disaster relief , repair of federal facilities , and hazard mitigation activities directed at reducing the impact of future disasters .

disaster assistance provided for agricultural disasters , counterterrorism , law enforcement , and national security appropriations are generally authorized by an authority separate from the stafford act and are not included in this report .

in addition , in some cases it is difficult to discern the specific purposes for the funds .

unless otherwise noted , this report does not take into account rescissions or transfers after congress appropriated the funds for disaster assistance .

as a result of the concern over the size of the federal deficit and debt , congress has implemented measures to limit federal spending .

for example , the budget control act ( p.l .

112-25 , hereinafter the bca ) , includes measures to limit spending .

the bca placed caps on discretionary spending for the next ten years , beginning with fy2012 .

if these caps are exceeded , an automatic rescission — known as sequestration — takes place across most discretionary budget accounts to reduce the effective level of spending to the level of the cap .

the bca , however , includes special accommodations to address the unpredictable nature of disaster assistance .

first , it redefined "disaster relief" as being federal government assistance provided pursuant to a major disaster declared under the stafford act , rather than assistance provided through the drf .

second , funding designated as disaster relief would now be "paid for" by adjusting upward the discretionary spending caps ( also referred to as an allowable adjustment ) .

the allowable adjustment for disaster relief is limited , however , to an amount based on the 10-year rolling average ( excluding the highest and lowest years ) of what has been spent by the federal government on relief for major disasters .

the bca requires omb to annually calculate the adjusted 10-year rolling average of disaster relief spending that sets the allowable cap adjustment for disaster relief .

these calculations are included in the final sequestration report and sequestration update report issued under section 254 of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 as amended ( bbedca ) .

in recent years , congress has provided more funding for the drf through annual appropriations than in the past .

many policy experts believe that the bca's cap adjustments have led congress to rely more on annual appropriations to fund disaster assistance than in the past .

the influence of the bca on disaster assistance is discussed further in - depth in " the debate over the use of supplemental appropriations for disaster assistance " section of this report .

it is worth noting that the cap is calculated in nominal dollars and does not adjust for inflation .

this may become more significant over time if inflation rises , and if the allowable adjustment begins to decrease as projected in 2016 .

this section provides summary information on emergency supplemental appropriations legislation enacted since 2000 .

the funds cited include both supplemental appropriations and loan authority to certain federal agencies that undertook disaster relief , repair of federal facilities , and hazard mitigation activities directed at reducing the impact of future disasters .

funds used for activities such as research , oversight , or administrative costs have been omitted from this analysis in an attempt to focus solely on disaster relief and assistance .

moreover , counterterrorism , law enforcement , and national security appropriations are not included in this compilation .

unless otherwise noted , this report does not take into account rescissions approved by congress after funds have been appropriated for disaster assistance .

as reflected in table 1 , supplemental appropriations have generally been enacted as stand - alone legislation .

in some instances , however , disaster assistance funding has been enacted as part of regular appropriations measures , continuing appropriations acts ( continuing resolutions ) , or as a part of omnibus appropriations legislation .

also , while the need for additional funds has historically been tied to a single , large - scale major disaster such as hurricanes katrina or sandy , in recent years the need for assistance has increasingly been caused by a string of incidents .

for example , legislation passed in fy2010 and fy2012 provided disaster relief for several incidents rather than a single , large scale disaster .

supplemental appropriations for disaster relief provide funding to a wide array of federal agencies depending on the unique needs of each disaster .

in general , agencies , such as fema or the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , are consistently included in supplemental appropriations for disaster relief .

on the other hand , many smaller agencies or programs have received funding for certain disasters and not others .

figure 1 and figure 2 below outline the total funding that has been given to each agency since fy2000 .

of the total amount provided for all agencies ( $265 billion ) , nearly 50% , or $122 billion , has gone to fema .

overall , eight agencies account for 96% of the total appropriation during this time .

during the 113 th congress , p.l .

113-2 , the disaster relief appropriations act , provided $50.3 billion in disaster assistance through numerous federal agencies and entities in response to hurricane sandy .

the bill provided $11.5 billion for the drf , $5.3 billion for the army corps of engineers , and $13.0 billion for the department of transportation .

enacted during the 112 th congress , p.l .

112-77 , the disaster relief appropriations act , 2012 , provided an additional $8.1 billion in disaster assistance including $6.4 billion for the drf and roughly $1.7 billion for the army corps of engineers to repair damages to federal projects resulting from major disasters , operations and expenses , and other projects to prepare for floods , hurricanes , and other natural disasters .

during the 111 th congress , p.l .

111-212 , the disaster relief and summer jobs act of 2010 , provided $5.5 billion for disaster relief .

the bill included $5.1 billion for the drf .

during consideration , the underlying bill ( h.r .

4899 ) became a vehicle for additional non - disaster funding , including $33 billion for the department of defense , and funding for court case relief for veterans , native americans , and minority farmers .

during the 110 th congress , president george w. bush signed into law four measures ( p.l .

110-28 , p.l .

110-116 , p.l .

110-252 , and p.l .

110-329 ) that provided roughly $44.0 billion in supplemental appropriations for disaster relief and recovery ( most of it for the drf ) .

p.l .

110-28 , signed on may 25 , 2007 , included an appropriation of $7.7 billion for disaster assistance , $6.9 billion of which was classified for hurricane katrina recovery .

p.l .

110-116 , signed into law on november 13 , 2007 , provided a total of $6.4 billion for continued recovery efforts related to hurricanes katrina , rita , and wilma , and for other declared major disasters or emergencies .

specifically , $500 million of these funds were included for firefighting expenses related to the 2007 california wildfires .

p.l .

110-252 , signed into law june 30 , 2008 , provided $8.4 billion in disaster assistance , most of which was directed at continuing recovery needs resulting from the 2005 hurricane season .

p.l .

110-329 , signed into law on september 30 , 2008 , included an appropriation for emergency and disaster relief of $21.6 billion this amount included funds for both continued disaster relief from the 2005 hurricane season as well as funds for a string of disasters that occurred in 2008 , including hurricanes gustav and ike , wildfires in california , and the midwest floods .

one of the largest funding components in p.l .

110-329 was designated for the department of housing and urban development's ( hud's ) community development fund , which received $6.5 billion specifically for disaster relief , long - term recovery , and economic revitalization for areas affected by the 2008 disasters .

other funding in the law included $910 million for wildfire suppression , and a $100 million direct appropriation to the american red cross for reimbursement of disaster relief and recovery expenditures associated with emergencies and disasters that took place in 2008 .

there have been some questions raised in congress concerning the rising costs of , and continued reliance on , supplemental appropriations for disaster assistance .

some have argued that the amount of funding provided to states and localities for emergency and disaster assistance should be curtailed primarily given concerns about the federal deficit and debt .

since the 1950s , the level of financial assistance given to states for disaster relief by the federal government has steadily increased .

in light of stated concern with the federal deficit and debt , the increased federal involvement in disaster relief has raised policymaking questions concerning whether the federal government is providing too much assistance to states and localities , or not enough .

to some , the state's fiscal capability to respond to an incident is not being adequately factored or tied into federal disaster assistance .

another concern is whether disaster assistance should be subject to certain thresholds and maximums .

for example , federal law could be changed to require an emergency or major disaster costs to reach a certain level before federal funding is made available .

also , the current system uses a per capita amount in estimated eligible disaster costs to determine that level when federal disaster assistance can be provided .

as another example , the total amount of federal relief for an event could be capped at a certain amount .

after this level has been reached , the state would then be responsible to pay for the rest of recovery .

others oppose all of these policy options .

finally , some have questioned whether federal assistance to states and localities unintentionally creates a disincentive for states and localities to prepare for emergencies and major disasters .

they argue that federal funding for disaster assistance has become entrenched to the point that it has contributed to what is referred to as a "moral hazard," where it is in the interest of states and localities to underfund mitigation measures .

for example , it has been argued that some states do not properly fund mitigation measures because there is a presumption that federal funding is virtually guaranteed should an incident occur .

others claim the function of the federal government is to help states and localities in their time of crisis .

withholding or limiting the amount of funding a state could receive for an incident might not only result in economic hardships for that region and state , but could also have negative consequences for the national economy .

