congress passed the community reinvestment act of 1977 ( cra ; p.l .

95-128 , 12 u.s.c .

§§2901-2908 ) in response to concerns that federally insured banking institutions were not making sufficient credit available in the local areas in which they were chartered and acquiring deposits .

according to some in con gress , the granting of a public bank charter should translate into a continuing obligation for that bank to serve the credit needs of the public where it was chartered .

consequently , the cra was enacted to "re - affirm the obligation of federally chartered or insured financial institutions to serve the convenience and needs of their service areas" and "to help meet the credit needs of the localities in which they are chartered , consistent with the prudent operation of the institution. .

the cra requires federal banking regulators to conduct examinations to assess whether a bank is meeting local credit needs .

the regulators issue cra credits , or points , where banks engage in qualifying activities — such as mortgage , consumer , and business lending ; community investments ; and low - cost services that would benefit low - and moderate - income ( lmi ) areas and entities — that occur within assessment areas ( where institutions have local deposit - taking operations ) .

these credits are then used to issue each bank a performance rating from a four - tiered system of descriptive performance levels ( outstanding , satisfactory , needs to improve , or substantial noncompliance ) .

the cra requires federal banking regulators to take those ratings into account when institutions apply for charters , branches , mergers , and acquisitions , or seek to take other actions that require regulatory approval .

congress became concerned with the geographical mismatch of deposit - taking and lending activities for a variety of reasons .

deposits serve as a primary source of borrowed funds that banks may use to facilitate their lending .

hence , there was concern that banks were using deposits collected from local neighborhoods to fund out - of - state as well as various international lending activities at the expense of addressing the local area's housing , agricultural , and small business credit needs .

another motivation for congressional action was to discourage redlining practices .

one type of redlining can be defined as the refusal of a bank to make credit available to all of the neighborhoods in its immediate locality , including lmi neighborhoods where the bank may have collected deposits .

a second type of redlining is the practice of denying a creditworthy applicant a loan for housing located in a certain neighborhood even though the applicant may qualify for a similar loan in another neighborhood .

this type of redlining pertains to circumstances in which a bank refuses to serve all of the residents in an area , perhaps due to discrimination .

the cra applies to banking institutions with deposits insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , such as national banks , savings associations , and state - chartered commercial and savings banks .

the cra does not apply to credit unions , insurance companies , securities companies , and other nonbank institutions because of the differences in their financial business models .

the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , the federal reserve system , and the fdic administer the cra , which is implemented via regulation bb .

the cra requires federal banking regulatory agencies to evaluate the extent to which regulated institutions are effectively meeting the credit needs within their designated assessment areas , including lmi neighborhoods , in a manner consistent with the federal prudential regulations for safety and soundness .

the cra's impact on lending activity has been publicly debated .

some observers are concerned that the cra may induce banks to forgo more profitable lending opportunities in nontargeted neighborhoods by encouraging a disproportionate amount of lending in lmi communities .

furthermore , some argue that the cra compels banks to make loans to higher - risk borrowers that are more likely to have repayment problems , which may subsequently compromise the financial stability of the banking system .

for example , some researchers have attributed the increase in risky lending prior to the 2007-2009 recession to banks attempting to comply with cra objectives .

others are concerned that enforcement of cra objectives has not been stringent enough to compel banks to increase financial services in lmi areas .

almost all banks receive satisfactory or better performance ratings ( discussed in more detail below ) on their cra examinations , which some may consider indicative of weak enforcement .

this report informs the congressional debate concerning the cra's effectiveness in incentivizing bank lending and investment activity to lmi customers .

it begins with a description of bank cra examinations , including how a bank delineates its assessment area ; the activities that may qualify for points under the three tests ( i.e. , lending , investment , and service ) that collectively make up the cra examination ; and how the composite cra rating is calculated .

next , the report analyzes the difficulty in attributing bank lending decisions to cra incentives .

for example , the cra does not specify the quality and quantity of cra - qualifying activities , meaning that cra compliance does not require adherence to lending quotas or benchmarks .

without explicit benchmarks , linking the composition of banks' loan portfolios to either too strong or too weak cra enforcement is difficult .

banks are also unlikely to get cra credit for all of the loans they make to lmi customers .

specifically , higher - risk loans that banking regulators explicitly discourage are unlikely to be eligible for cra consideration .

furthermore , greater mobility of lending and deposit - taking activity across regional boundaries due to various financial market innovations has complicated the ability to geographically link various financial activities .

hence , many banks' financial activities occurring in a designated assessment area that are eligible for cra consideration may simply be profitable , meaning they may have occurred without the cra incentive .

finally , this report summarizes recent policy discussions regarding modernization of the cra .

as noted above , the federal banking regulators conduct regular examinations of banks to assess whether they meet local credit needs in designated assessment areas .

the regulators issue cra credits , or points , when banks engage in qualifying activities — such as mortgage , consumer , and business lending ; community investments ; and low - cost services that would benefit lmi areas and entities — that occur within assessment areas .

given that the cra is not a federal assistance program and that several regulators implement it separately , no single federal agency is responsible for evaluating its overall effectiveness .

in 2000 , congress directed the federal reserve to study the cra's effectiveness .

the federal reserve's study reported that lending to lmi families had increased since the cra's enactment but found it was not possible to directly attribute all of that increase to the cra .

for example , advancements in underwriting over the past several decades have enabled lenders to better predict and price borrower default risk , thus making credit available to borrowers that might have been rejected prior to such technological advances .

this section examines the difficulty linking bank lending outcomes directly to the cra , considering questions raised about the subjectivity of the cra examination itself , whether prudential regulators use cra to encourage banks to engage in high - risk lending , and whether the increased lending to lmi borrowers since cra's enactment can be attributed to other profit - incentives that exist apart from the cra .

on april 3 , 2018 , the u.s. department of treasury ( treasury ) released recommendations to modernize cra in a memorandum to the federal banking regulators ( occ , fcic , and the fed ) .

treasury highlighted four of its recommendations , summarized below .

when the cra was enacted in 1977 , banks received deposits and made loans primarily through geographical branches .

assessment areas defined geographically arguably may not fully reflect the community served by a bank because of technology developments , such as the internet and mobile phone banking , prompting treasury to call for revisiting the approach for determining banks' assessment areas .

in 2016 , the banking regulators issued interagency questions and answers ( q&as ) to provide banks guidance pertaining to cra - eligible activities ; however , treasury noted that each regulator provides its examiners with additional guidance .

also , the interagency q&as illustrate past cra - qualifying activities , but treasury noted that no formal process currently exists to help determine whether potential ( complex , innovative , or innovative ) activities would qualify for cra credit .

treasury recommends establishing clearer standards for cra - qualifying activities and flexibility ( expanding the types of loans , investments , and services that qualify for cra credit ) , which may encourage banks to venture beyond activities that typically receive cra credit .

treasury reports that each bank regulator follows a different examination schedule ; the examinations are lengthy ; and delays associated with the release of performance evaluations may limit the time banks can react to recommendations before their next cra examination .

treasury recommends increasing the timeliness of the cra examination process .

treasury recommends incorporating performance incentives that might result in more efficient lending activities .

for example , cra - qualifying loans may receive credit in the year of origination , but equity investments may receive credit each year that the investment is held .

treasury recommends consistent treatment of loans and investments , which may encourage banks to make more long - term loans ( rather than sequences of short - term loans for the sake of being awarded cra credits at each cra examination ) .

on august , 28 , 2018 , the occ released an advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) to seek comments on ways to modernize the cra framework .

the anpr solicited comments on the issues raised by treasury among other things .

the occ's anpr does not propose specific changes , but its content and the questions posed suggest that the occ is exploring the possibility of adopting a quantitative metric - based approach to cra performance evaluation , changing how assessment areas are defined , expanding cra - qualifying activities , and reducing the complexity , ambiguity , and burden of the regulations on the bank industry .

when the comment period closed on november 19 , 2018 , the occ had received 1584 comments .

the federal reserve and the fdic did not join the occ in releasing the anpr .

the federal reserve system , however , did host research symposiums around the country to gather comments pertaining to cra reform .

as reported by the federal reserve , some banking industry comments suggested , among other things , the need for consistency of the cra examinations to facilitate cra compliance .

yet some tailoring may still be necessary with respect to determining assessment areas that better reflect each bank's business models , particularly for models that use technology to deliver products and services .

the regulators also heard from community and consumer groups .

while expressing the need to retain focus on the historical context of the cra , these groups highlighted the need to address issues pertaining to banking deserts in underserved communities .

community development investments ( cdis ) that meet public welfare investment ( pwi ) requirements are those that promote the public welfare , primarily resulting in economic benefits for low - and moderate - income ( lmi ) individuals .

this appendix provides examples of cdi activities that would qualify for consideration under the cra investment test .

in many cases , covered banks are more likely to take advantage of these optional vehicles to obtain cra credits if they perceive the underlying investment opportunities to have profit potential .

loan participations banks and credit unions often use participation ( syndicated ) loans to jointly provide credit .

when a financial firm ( eg , bank , credit union ) originates a loan for a customer , it may decide to structure loan participation arrangements with other institutions .

the loan originator often retains a larger portion of the loan and sells smaller portions to other financial institutions willing to participate .

suppose a financial firm originates a business or mortgage loan in a lmi neighborhood .

a bank may receive cra investment credit consideration by purchasing a participation , thus becoming a joint lender to the lmi borrower .

an advantage of loan participations is that the default risk is divided and shared among the participating banks ( as opposed to one financial firm retaining all of the risk ) .

cra consideration is possible if the activity occurs within the designated assessment area .

for all participating banks to receive credit , some overlap in their designated assessment areas must exist .

an exception is made for participations made to benefit designated disaster areas , in which all participating banks would receive cra consideration regardless of location .

state and local government bonds state and local governments issue municipal bonds , and the proceeds are used to fund public projects , community development activities , and other qualifying activities .

the interest that nonbank municipal bondholders receive is exempt from federal income taxes to encourage investment in hospitals , schools , infrastructure , and community development projects that require state and local funding .

legislative actions during the 1980s eliminated the tax - exempt status of interest earned from holdings of municipal bonds for banks .

although banks no longer have a tax incentive to purchase municipal bonds , they still consider the profitability of holding these loans , as they do with all lending opportunities .

furthermore , banks receive cra investment consideration when purchasing state and local municipal bonds that fund public and community development projects in their designated assessment areas .

cra - targeted secondary market instruments secondary market financial products have been developed to facilitate the ability of banks to participate in lending activities eligible for cra consideration , such as purchasing mortgage - backed securities ( mbss ) or shares of real estate investment trusts ( reits ) .

a mbs is a pool of mortgage loans secured by residential properties ; a multifamily mbs is a pool of mortgage loans secured by multifamily properties , consisting of structures designed for five or more residential units , such as apartment buildings , hospitals , nursing homes , and manufactured homes .

cra - mbss are mbss consisting of loans that originated in specific geographic assessment areas , thereby allowing bank purchases into these pools to be eligible for cra consideration under the investment test .

similarly , reits may also pool mortgages , mortgage mbss , and real estate investments ( eg , real property , apartments , office buildings , shopping malls , hotels ) .

investors purchase shares in reit pools and defer the taxes .

banks may only invest in mortgage reits and mbs reits .

similar to the cra - mbss , the reits must consist of mortgages and mbss that would be eligible for cra consideration .

the community development trust reit is an example of a reit that serves as a cra - qualified investment for banks .

community development financial institutions and equity equivalent investments the community development financial institutions ( cdfi ) fund was created by the riegle community development regulatory improvement act of 1994 ( the riegle act ; p.l .

103-325 ) .

the cdfi fund was established to promote economic development for distressed urban and rural communities .

the cdfi fund , currently located within the u.s. department of the treasury , is authorized to certify banks , credit unions , nonprofit loan funds , and ( for - profit and nonprofit ) venture capital funds as designated cdfis .

in other words , a bank may satisfy the requirements to become a cdfi , but not all cdfis are banks .

the primary focus of institutions with cdfi certification is to serve the financial needs of economically distressed people and places .

the designation also makes these institutions eligible to receive financial awards and other assistance from the cdfi fund .

in contrast to non - cdfi banks , some cdfi banks have greater difficulty borrowing funds and then transforming them into loans for riskier , economically distressed consumers .

the lack of loan level data for most cdfi banks causes creditors to hesitate in making low - cost , short - term loans to these institutions .

specifically , the lack of information on loan defaults and prepayment rates on cdfi banking assets is likely to result in limited ability to sell these loan originations to secondary loan markets .

consequently , the retention of higher - risk loans , combined with limited access to low - cost , short - term funding , makes cdfi banks more vulnerable to liquidity shortages .

hence , cdfis rely primarily on funding their loans ( assets ) with net assets , which are proceeds analogous to the equity of a traditional bank or net worth of a credit union .

cdfi net assets are often acquired in the form of awards or grants from the cdfi fund or for - profit banks .

funding assets with net assets is less expensive for cdfis than funding with longer - term borrowings .

banks may obtain cra investment credit consideration by making investments to cdfis , which provides cdfis with net assets ( equity ) .

under pwi authority , banks are allowed to make equity investments in specialized financial institutions , such as cdfis , as long as they are considered by their safety and soundness regulator to be at least adequately capitalized .

furthermore , the final basel iii notification of proposed regulation ( npr ) allows for preferential capital treatment for equity investments made under pwi authority , meaning equity investments to designated cdfis may receive more favorable capital treatment .

consequently , banks often provide funds to cdfis through equity equivalent investments ( eq2s ) , which are debt instruments issued by cdfis with a continuous rolling ( indeterminate ) maturity .

eq2s , from a bank's perspective , are analogous to holding convertible preferred stock with a regularly scheduled repayment .

hence , banks may view eq2s as a potentially profitable opportunity to invest in other specialized financial institutions and receive cra consideration , particularly when the funds are subsequently used by cdfis to originate loans in the banks' assessment areas .

small business investment companies the small business administration ( sba ) was established in 1953 by the small business act of 1953 ( p.l .

83-163 ) to support small businesses' access to capital in a variety of ways .

although issuing loan guarantees for small businesses is a significant component of its operations , the sba also has the authority to facilitate the equity financing of small business ventures through its small business investment company ( sbic ) program , which was established by the small business investment act of 1958 ( p.l .

85-699 ) .

sbics that are licensed and regulated by the sba may provide debt and equity financing and , although not a program requirement , educational ( management consulting ) resources for businesses that meet certain sba size requirements .

banks may act as limited partners if they choose to provide funds to sbics , which act as general partners .

banks may establish their own sbics , jointly establish sbics ( with other banks ) , or provide funds to existing sbics .

sbics subsequently use bank funding to invest in the long - term debt and equity securities of small , independent ( sba - eligible ) businesses , and banks may receive cra investment consideration if the activities benefit their assessment areas .

community banks invest in sbics because of the profit potential as well as the opportunity to establish long - term relationships with business clients during their infancy stages .

banks that are considered by their regulators to be adequately capitalized are allowed to invest in these specialized financial institutions under pwi authority , but the investments still receive risk - based capital treatment .

sbic assets , similar to cdfis , are illiquid given the difficulty to obtain credit ratings for sbic investments ; thus , they cannot be sold in secondary markets .

because banks risk losing the principal of their equity investments , they are required to perform the proper due diligence associated with prudent underwriting .

tax credits the low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) program was created by the tax reform act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-514 ) to encourage the development and rehabilitation of affordable rental housing .

generally speaking , government ( federal or state ) issued tax credits may be bought and , in many cases , sold like any other financial asset ( eg , stocks and bonds ) .

owners of tax credits may reduce their tax liabilities either by the amount of the credits or by using the formulas specified on those credits , assuming the owners have participated in the specified activities that the government wants to encourage .

for lihtcs , banks may use a formula to reduce their federal tax liabilities when they provide either credit or equity contributions ( grants ) for the construction and rehabilitation of affordable housing .

if a bank also owns a lihtc , then a percentage of the equity grant may be tax deductible if the cdfi uses the funds from the grant to finance affordable rental housing .

furthermore , banks may receive consideration for cra - qualified investment credits .

after a domestic corporation or partnership receives designation as a community development entity ( cde ) from the cfdi fund , it may apply for new markets tax credits ( nmtcs ) .

encouraging capital investments in lmi communities is the primary mission of cdes , and cdfis and sbics automatically qualify as cdes .

only cdes are eligible to compete for nmtcs , which are allocated by the cdfi fund via a competitive process .

once awarded an allocation of nmtcs , the cde must obtain equity investments in exchange for the credits .

then , the equity proceeds raised must either be used to provide loans or technical assistance or deployed in eligible community investment activities .

only for - profit cdes , however , may provide nmtcs to their investors in exchange for equity investments .

investors making for - profit cde equity investments can use the nmtcs to reduce their tax liabilities by a certain amount over a period of years .

as previously discussed , a bank may receive cra credit for making equity investments in nonprofit cdes and for - profit subsidiaries , particularly if the investment occurs within the bank's assessment area .

furthermore , banks may be able to reduce their tax liabilities if they can obtain nmtcs from the cdes in which their investments were made .

