congress has been deeply involved for decades in setting policy , providing funding , and supporting or rejecting programs for the nuclear weapons enterprise .

for example , it established the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , a semi - autonomous component of the department of energy ( doe ) that manages the nuclear weapons program ; established the nuclear weapons council , a joint nnsa - department of defense ( dod ) agency that coordinates nuclear weapons programs ; rejected a major facility to manufacture a key nuclear weapon component ; initiated and later rejected the reliable replacement warhead ; and directed nnsa , the government accountability office , and others to conduct studies on nuclear weapon issues .

one issue of long - standing concern to congress is the production of "pits. .

a pit is a nuclear weapon component , a hollow plutonium shell that is imploded with conventional explosives to create a nuclear explosion that triggers the rest of the weapon .

while u.s. policy is not to build new - design nuclear weapons for new missions , some argue that the capacity to manufacture new pits may be needed to extend the service life of certain existing weapons , to replace pits in deployed weapons that develop pit problems unexpectedly , and to hedge against possible geopolitical surprises .

during the cold war , the rocky flats plant ( co ) manufactured as many as 2,000 pits per year ( ppy ) .

on june 6 , 1989 , armed agents from the federal bureau of investigation and the environmental protection agency raided rocky flats to investigate suspected environmental crimes .

as a result , doe first suspended pit production at rocky flats later that year , subsequently halted it permanently , and eventually dismantled the plant and remediated the site .

with rocky flats closed , congress and the administration searched for many years for a way to make pits .

nnsa proposed a two - track strategy .

in one track , plutonium facility 4 ( pf - 4 ) , the main plutonium building at los alamos national laboratory ( lanl ) ( nm ) , would house a pilot plant to develop pit production processes and manufacture a small number of pits .

it took until 2007 for lanl to make its first "war reserve" pits , i.e. , those certified for use in the stockpile .

in that year , lanl made 11 such pits , the highest number since 1989 .

the second track involved a facility with the capacity to make pits on an industrial scale , on the order of 100 or more ppy .

several facilities were proposed , as described in "a sisyphean history: failed efforts to construct a building to restore pit production," in crs report r43406 , u.s. nuclear weapon "pit" production options for congress .

none came to fruition .

for example , in the fy2006 budget cycle , congress eliminated funding for the modern pit facility , which was to have a capacity between 125 and 450 ppy , and in its fy2013 budget request the administration "deferred" a facility that would have conducted operations in support of pit production "for at least five years. .

that facility appears unlikely to proceed .

indeed , pf - 4 , which opened for operations in 1978 , is the last u.s. plutonium processing building to come online .

as of june 2014 , nnsa had the capacity to manufacture about 10 non - war reserve pits per year in pf - 4 .

 ( war reserve ( wr ) pits are those judged acceptable for use in the nuclear stockpile .

other pits are manufactured for such purposes as development or process qualification. ) .

however , with most work at pf - 4 halted in june 2013 , the actual manufacturing rate in june 2014 was zero for pits of any type ; work is resuming at the end of june 2014 .

further , the capacity to manufacture wr pits was zero: since there was no requirement to manufacture wr pits , some processes needed to certify pits as wr had been suspended after the previous wr build of w88 pits was completed in fy2011 .

nnsa anticipates manufacturing a few pits a year in the near future to prepare to manufacture wr pits .

the schedule for ramping up pit production is uncertain .

a department of defense ( dod ) official stated in 2013 that "there is no daylight between the department of energy and the department of defense on the need for both a near - term pit manufacturing capacity of 10 to 20 and then 30 by 2021 , and then in the longer term for a capacity of 50 to 80 per year. .

also in 2013 , a national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) document stated , "preliminary plans call for pit production of potentially up to 80 pits per year starting as early as fy 2030. .

in 2014 , an nnsa document changed the date for achieving a 30-ppy capacity to "by 2026," and a 2014 department of energy ( doe ) document stated , "current plans call for pit production capability of 50-80 pits per year by fy 2030. .

also , section 3114 of the fy2015 defense authorization bill , h.r .

4435 , as passed by the house , would require nnsa to produce 30 wr pits per year during 2023 , at least 50 during 2026 , and to demonstrate for at least 90 days during 2027 the ability to manufacture wr pits at a rate of 80 per year .

some favor a capacity of greater than 80 ppy , while others argue that a lower number would suffice .

that debate is beyond the scope of this report , which focuses on how to achieve a capacity of 80 ppy because that is the high end of dod's range .

while 80 ppy has been beyond reach for a quarter - century , the debate over that capacity would take on added salience to the extent that it moves within the realm of feasibility .

congress remains deeply involved in efforts to increase pit production capacity .

as noted above , section 3114 of h.r .

4435 , the fy2015 defense authorization bill as passed by the house , sets a schedule for production of wr pits .

section 3133 directs nnsa to submit "a report containing an analysis of using or modifying existing facilities across the nuclear security enterprise" to support nnsa's plutonium strategy .

in its report on s. 2410 , the fy2015 defense authorization bill , the senate armed services committee directed nnsa to include construction of modules ( described later ) , which would support an exit from a 1950s - era plutonium building at lanl by 2019 , as a separate line item in the fy2016 budget "to add additional visibility into the process. .

the house appropriations committee recommended a substantial increase in funding "for a robust experimental effort in fiscal year 2015 to better understand the properties of plutonium and ensure the nnsa can support certification requirements for pit reuse as an option for future [nuclear weapon life extension programs]. .

use of retired pits in life extension programs would reduce the number of new pits that would have to be manufactured .

the committee also recommended $35.7 million for moving certain activities out of the chemistry and metallurgy research building ( described below ) , which became operational in 1952 .

while dod has a requirement for up to 80 ppy , some key questions about how to manufacture at that rate remain not only unanswered but also unasked .

these questions involve details about the facilities at lanl and perhaps elsewhere that would fabricate pits and perform supporting tasks .

without answers to these questions , congress cannot know whether existing buildings , without modifications , could manufacture 80 ppy ; or if modest upgrades would suffice ; or if major construction would be needed to augment capacity .

this report provides a framework for analyzing requirements for manufacturing , details key questions , and raises the possibility that congress may choose to direct nnsa to generate the data needed to answer them .

specifically , regardless of what capacity is needed , and when , congress and the administration will need to decide among options .

this report presents three key decisions and an approach to help structure them .

it focuses on two metrics: the amount of two facility resources ( laboratory floor space and material at risk ( mar ) , discussed next ) available for pit manufacturing .

it shows that it is not known whether available amounts suffice .

while nnsa has extrapolated space and mar requirements for manufacturing 80 ppy from much lower numbers , extrapolations set an upper bound and would overstate requirements .

as such , they are of questionable value for decisionmaking .

space and mar requirements for manufacturing 80 ppy have never been calculated rigorously , though they could be .

comparing space and mar required vs. available would show whether there is enough space and mar at the moment .

over time , however , various factors will affect availability and requirements .

while few of these factors can be predicted , this report discusses ways to offset any adverse effects from them .

in addition , decisions will be needed regarding analytical chemistry , which supports pit manufacturing .

for background , see crs report r43406 , u.s. nuclear weapon "pit" production options for congress ; crs report r43428 , u.s. nuclear weapon "pit" production: background and options in brief , is a condensed version .

the floor layout to manufacture 30 ppy would fully consume the space , and most of the mar allowance , currently available in pf - 4 .

as a result , manufacturing 80 ppy would require more space and mar than are currently available for that task in pf - 4 .

further , updated seismic modeling results raised concerns that an earthquake might collapse or otherwise compromise the building , forcing a reduction in pf - 4 mar from 2,600 kg pe to 1,800 kg pe .

however , lanl is undertaking several projects that would increase the mar permitted in pf - 4 .

various projects to increase seismic robustness have been underway for years ; see the section " increasing mar margin without major construction . .

they proceed on an open - ended basis guided by results of continuing analyses .

once some additional upgrades are completed , pf - 4's mar allowance may revert to 2,600 kg or perhaps some other number .

this analysis assumes a mar allowance of 2,600 kg pe and , as noted in the sidebar , uses space data from 2012 .

lanl points out that pf - 4 , as the only u.s. building that is currently able to make pits , is essential to the entire nuclear weapons enterprise: no pf - 4 , no pits , no leps that require new pits .

pf - 4 is limited in space and mar .

the mar limit is somewhat flexible , as various measures can increase it .

similarly , space within pf - 4 may be shifted from one purpose to another , and lanl is undertaking such projects , eg , decontaminating some rooms in pf - 4 that are no longer in use and "repurposing" them to make them available for pit manufacture or other uses .

however , the space limit is absolute: 60,000 sf of laboratory space .

if manufacturing 80 ppy requires more space than is available in pf - 4 , nnsa would need to find alternatives , whether building modules , moving some tasks to other sites , or reducing capacity to whatever the available space could accommodate .

it would be difficult for congress to decide how to obtain the space and mar for manufacturing 80 ppy without knowing whether there will be sufficient mar and space margins for 80 ppy .

this section considers options that might make the needed space and mar available .

note that while margin must always be greater than zero , the amount of available space and mar needed to maintain margin could expand or contract depending on whether required space and mar expand or contract .

for example , mar insufficient for 80 ppy might suffice for 40 ppy .

unlike pit manufacturing , ac involves little mar because it uses tiny samples , such as a few milligrams of plutonium dissolved in a small amount of acid , as figure 6 shows .

but ac involves much more space per unit mar than does pit fabrication because each laboratory instrument is housed in a glovebox or hood that might occupy a dozen square feet of space .

many analyses must be performed for each individual pit , and the number of instruments and their housing increase in tandem with manufacturing capacity .

producing 80 ppy would require increasing ac capacity .

this requirement comes from two sources .

first , at lanl , most pit - related ac is performed in the cmr building ; as noted , nnsa plans to halt programmatic operations there "in approximately 2019. .

given nnsa's plan to achieve a 30-ppy capacity by fy2026 , work currently done in cmr would have to be performed elsewhere .

second , producing 80 ppy would require additional ac , as ac must be performed on multiple samples for each pit , and increasing manufacturing capacity would require more equipment , more space , and more mar for ac .

finding enough space and mar for ac should be simpler than for pit manufacture because more options are readily available to meet requirements for ac than for pit manufacture .

according to dod , "at the height of the cold war , the department of energy's rocky flats plant produced between 1,000 and 2,000 pits per year. .

the plutonium for each pit required ac .

because currently - anticipated rates do not approach that level , the nuclear weapons complex has a considerable amount of excess space and mar suitable for ac .

this capacity resides at several buildings in the complex , including building 332 at lawrence livermore national laboratory ( llnl ) , f / h laboratory and building 773-a at srs , and the radiological laboratory - utility - office building ( rluob ) at lanl .

each of these facilities would apparently have enough floor space and mar allowance to conduct the ac needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy , pf - 4 might perform some additional ac for higher - mar work , such as sample preparation ( which takes several - gram samples from larger pieces of plutonium ) and certain analyses .

figure 7 shows these options .

in addition , r&d may reduce mar requirements .

for example , lanl is validating an ac system that may require a sample size of 1.5 mg of wgpu instead of 225 mg. at issue are whether all ac should be done at lanl and , if not , how much ac should be done there and how much at another site .

not at issue is that lanl would need the capability to perform all ac tasks even if it did not have the capacity to perform ac for 80 ppy .

the case for having a second site perform some of the ac needed for 80 ppy while maintaining the full suite of ac capabilities at lanl is: lanl is primarily a laboratory , and ac for 80 ppy would be on an industrial scale .

lanl would gain little if any technical competence by conducting ac for 80 ppy vs. , say , 40 .

it may be difficult to provide enough mar and floor space at lanl for the ac for 80 ppy , especially with rluob's current mar limit of 26 grams wgpu .

lanl and a second site could cross - check the accuracy of each other's ac measurements and processes from time to time .

lanl and llnl have for decades , since before the end of nuclear testing , held that peer review is essential in developing or maintaining weapons and leads each lab to probe for flaws in the other lab's analyses , thus increasing confidence in the results .

a similar argument could apply to peer review of ac .

a second site could accommodate a surge in ac needs or provide a backup in case ac operations at lanl were suspended or disrupted .

a second site would provide another source of technicians trained for plutonium ac .

several factors argue for keeping all the ac at lanl .

it might cost more to perform ac at two sites rather than one , though it is impossible to know without the data .

a second site would necessitate shipping many plutonium samples per year from lanl to another site , which would increase the risk of an accident and could cause public concern .

it might be beneficial to have all plutonium ac technicians at one site so they would have the same training and operate according to the same formal and informal procedures .

concentrating as much plutonium work as possible at lanl would strengthen its position as the nation's plutonium center .

while srs and llnl could both do this work , their facilities presumably have different capacities and would require different upgrades to support whatever level of ac was required .

data on the mar and space requirements , and the cost of the lanl , llnl , and srs options , would be needed to provide a basis for decision .

the foregoing discussion shows how much additional space and mar various construction options would make available for pit manufacturing , and points out that various non - construction options would also increase space and mar margins .

lanl has provided data from which this report calculated how much mar and space various options would make available .

the data , however , cannot indicate which options , if any , would provide enough margin because data on space and mar requirements are also needed to calculate margin .

it might turn out that once seismic improvements are made , pf 4 would have enough space and mar margin for 80 ppy , or that moving pu - 238 programs to a module might free up enough mar but not enough space for 80 ppy , or that moving pu - 238 programs to another site would suffice .

 ( other factors may enter into feasibility as well , such as the condition of a building. ) .

but without data for space and mar needed to manufacture 80 ppy , one cannot know which options are infeasible , which provide excess capacity and thus entail excess cost , and which are "just right. .

regarding ac , the discussion shows that there are multiple options to provide ac capacity , and highlights the issue of whether all ac should be done at lanl and , if not , how much ac should be done there and how much at another site .

but without data on such matters as building condition and cost for any required upgrades and equipment , it is not possible to determine the relative merits of the options .

figure 8 shows a notional decision sequence for downselecting pit manufacturing options .

after defining options meriting consideration , the first question is , which options are feasible ? .

it would be simple to compare data on the required mar and space , once they become available , against the amount of mar and space released by each option to see which options provide a positive margin .

non - feasible options would not merit further consideration .

the next step would be to estimate the cost of the feasible options and decide which are affordable .

these data are needed to eliminate unaffordable options , which is important before planning begins because high cost has caused the demise of several nuclear weapons complex projects .

finally , having downselected to options that are feasible and affordable , one would compare those options against other possible criteria in order to make a final choice .

not shown in the figure is that mar and space margins may change over time , as figure 1 shows ; such changes may make currently - feasible options infeasible , and vice versa .

congress would need data on mar margin , space margin , and cost for various pit manufacturing options in order to best determine which options are feasible and affordable .

the following questions highlight how these data could support decisionmaking .

in deciding how to proceed on pit manufacture , congress would likely want to know if there is enough space margin and mar margin for 80 ppy .

margin , the available resource ( space or mar ) minus the required resource , must be greater than zero .

available space and mar are known , as of certain dates , as this report shows .

but space and mar required for 80 ppy have not been rigorously calculated .

congress may choose to direct nnsa to provide these two numbers .

once these numbers become available , congress would face three decisions: for pit manufacturing , is there currently enough margin for space and mar in pf - 4 ? .

if not , what can be done to provide it ? .

once enough margin for space and margin for mar are provided for pit manufacturing , what steps can be taken to maintain these margins over decades in the face of uncertainties ? .

space and mar margins are not at issue for analytical chemistry because considerable excess space and mar exist at other sites in the nuclear weapons complex .

at issue: how much ac should be done at lanl , what is needed to make the space and mar at lanl sufficient to support that amount of ac , and how much , if any , ac should be done at other sites ? .

this appendix explains the tasks included in the diagrams of pf - 4 and , in so doing , explains what pf - 4 does .

analytical chemistry ( ac ) analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its manufacture .

ac measures the isotopic composition of the plutonium and the amount of alloying materials and impurities a sample contains .

ac typically uses samples on the order of milligrams .

certification: before a pit type can be accepted into the stockpile , it must be certified as acceptable for war reserve use .

this involves validating weapons codes , among other things .

validation , in turn , draws on experimental data .

pf - 4 supports some of these experiments , such as by preparing samples for analytical chemistry and materials characterization and preparing test items for experiments at the nevada national security site that do not produce a nuclear yield .

materials characterization ( mc ) : mc measures bulk properties of plutonium , such as tensile strength , magnetic susceptibility , grain structure , and surface characteristics .

such properties must be determined in order to certify pit design , maintain process control , address process anomalies , and examine the condition of newly - manufactured pits and pits from the stockpile .

mc typically uses samples on the order of a fraction of a gram to tens of grams .

materials recycle and recovery ( mr&r ) : mr&r examines containers of plutonium in pf - 4 that are to be sent to wipp for permanent disposition .

if the containers have deteriorated , mr&r repackages the plutonium in new containers .

pit disassembly and conversion: this area of pf - 4 houses aries ( advanced recovery and integrated extraction system ) , which converts excess pits to plutonium oxide ( a powder ) and places it in special containers for long - term storage .

pit fabrication involves , among other things , casting "hemishells" ( half - pits ) of plutonium , machining the cast hemishells to remove excess material , welding two together to form a pit , and inspecting the finished pit with x - ray imaging , physical measurements , etc. , to ensure it meets specifications .

pit surveillance: ever since the beginning of the nuclear weapons program , nnsa and its predecessor organizations have monitored the condition of nuclear weapons using a variety of techniques .

pits are monitored at pantex plant ( tx ) and pf - 4 .

pf - 4 monitoring techniques include taking physical measurements , checking for release of gases that may indicate deterioration of the pit , examining pits for corrosion , and taking pits apart to perform ac and mc on samples of the plutonium .

while pantex can perform some of these tasks , pits can be disassembled only at pf - 4 .

plutonium - 238 ( pu - 238 ) programs: pu - 238 is the heat source for radioisotope power systems ( rps ) for space probes , and has military applications as well .

it is manufactured by bombarding rods of neptunium - 237 with neutrons in a nuclear reactor .

it undergoes radioactive decay much more rapidly than does pu - 239 , producing uranium and other impurities .

as a result , old pu - 238 must be purified before it can be used .

pf - 4 receives pu - 238 , removes the impurities through chemical processes , and makes plutonium oxide , which it presses into capsules .

it mates some capsules with other equipment to make rpss for military applications , and sends other capsules to idaho national laboratory , which does the same to make rpss for space probes .

plutonium recycle and purification ( pr&p ) : this area recovers plutonium from scrap plutonium ( such as from lathe turnings , pits scrapped for not meeting standards , or retired pits ) for use in weapons and other programs .

the scraps are dissolved in acid .

plutonium is then precipitated out of solution as plutonium oxalate , and is then roasted to produce plutonium oxide .

a further process removes plutonium that remains in the acid .

this area also recovers and purifies plutonium using high - temperature chemical processes .

readiness in technical base and facilities ( rtbf ) : rtbf is nnsa's program for operating the nuclear weapons complex and maintaining its infrastructure .

within pf - 4 , rtbf space is used for functions that support multiple programs , such as shipping and receiving , waste management , and material control and accountability .

