the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides an array of benefits to veterans and to certain members of their families .

these benefits include disability compensation and pensions , education benefits , survivor benefits , medical treatment , life insurance , vocational rehabilitation , and burial and memorial benefits .

in order to apply for these benefits , in most circumstances , the claimant will send an application to his or her local va regional office or apply online .

the va has a "duty to assist" the claimant throughout the claim process .

this duty includes obligations to ensure that a claimant's file is complete , to seek evidence and records substantiating the claim , and to provide medical examinations under certain circumstances .

furthermore , the va , when adjudicating any claim for benefits , is obligated to give the claimant the "benefit of the doubt" when there is "an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding" any claim , and must also consider legal theories that a claimant fails to raise if it would help substantiate a claim for benefits .

this duty to assist and the benefit of the doubt standard are unique among the federal government's benefits programs .

for example , the united states department of agriculture is under no similar obligation to assist applicants in obtaining evidence of eligibility for supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) benefits ; the social security administration does not give "the benefit of the doubt" to applicants for social security benefits .

these requirements have the effect of making the va claims adjudication system "strongly and uniquely pro - claimant. .

this report will analyze the va's duty to assist claimants and the pro - claimant standard of proof used during the adjudicatory process for veterans' benefits .

the va is required to assist veterans by considering all possible legal theories that would support a claim , even if the veteran does not raise the particular issue in his application for benefits .

va regulations require the va to assist the claimant "in developing the facts pertinent to the claim and to render a decision that grants every benefit that can be supported in law while protecting the interests of the government. .

this requirement , again , is a unique feature of the va benefits system and illustrates the non - adversarial nature of benefits proceedings .

however , although courts have enforced the regulation to require the va to take into consideration legal theories not raised by a claimant that could be used to substantiate a claim , the courts do not require the va to consider every possible argument that a claimant presumably could make .

instead , the va is obligated only to consider legal theories that the claimant failed to argue if the record of evidence "fairly raise[s]" those issues .

the va must consider those arguments even if the claimant is unaware of the potential claim .

the cavc has stated the following: [w]e conclude that the board is not required sua sponte to raise and reject all possible theories of entitlement in order to render a valid opinion .

the board commits error only in failing to discuss a theory of entitlement that was raised either by the appellant or by the evidence of record .

this standard is generous to veterans but respects the reality that the secretary does not have the resources to investigate sua sponte every conceivable unsupported theory of entitlement .

another unique aspect of the va benefits system is that the standard of proof is pro - claimant .

the claimant need not show by a preponderance of the evidence that he is entitled to benefits — instead , the law provides that "[w]hen there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination , the va shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. .

regulations provide that when reasonable doubt arises , such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant .

therefore , if a claimant provides medical evidence that shows that it is as likely as not that there is a connection between an in - service injury and the claimant's current disability , the va shall award the claimant the benefits sought .

thus , the va can deny the claim only if the preponderance of the evidence is against the claimant .

the cavc described the standard of proof in donnellan v. shinseki : the standard of proof refers to the evidentiary threshold a litigant must satisfy in order to prevail on his claim .

[t]his court [has] recognized that a unique standard of proof – the "benefit of the doubt" – applies in decisions involving claims for veteran's benefits .

the "benefit of the doubt" standard , which is at the farthest end of the spectrum of the various standards of proof in american legal jurisprudence , was enacted by congress in keeping with the high esteem in which our nation holds those who have served in the armed serves .

the "benefit of the doubt" standard applies when the positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of a veteran's claim for benefits are in approximate balance .

when such equipoise exists , the veteran must prevail on the merits of his claim .

therefore , a veteran need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of evidence in order to prevail on his claim .

a claim for veterans benefits may only be denied when the preponderance of evidence is against a claim .

