the discovery of new sources of domestic natural gas from shale has given rise to new interest in using natural gas more extensively in transportation .

this could occur in a number of ways .

natural gas ( methane ) can be burned directly in conventional diesel and gasoline engines that have been modified or retrofitted .

natural gas liquids such as propane and butane can also replace gasoline .

as a petrochemical feedstock , methane can be used to produce synthetic diesel fuel and gasoline substitutes such as ethanol , methanol , and butanol .

a reformation process can convert methane to hydrogen for fuel cell - powered vehicles .

in addition , natural gas can be burned to generate electricity for charging electric vehicles .

as natural gas supplies have increased and prices have dropped , automakers and truck manufacturers have begun taking steps to introduce new vehicle lines fueled by natural gas , principally compressed natural gas ( cng ) and liquefied natural gas ( lng ) .

several factors have contributed to this interest: price differential .

on an energy - equivalent basis , oil has been more expensive than natural gas in recent years .

moreover , while oil prices are set in a global market , u.s. natural gas prices are largely determined domestically , and the discovery of large domestic reserves suggests that prices may remain relatively low .

environmental preference .

natural gas , while also a fossil fuel , generally produces lower emissions per vehicle mile than diesel and heavier oil .

energy diversity and security .

increased use of domestic natural gas for transportation may mean that less oil will be imported .

the united states might be more insulated from global petroleum price volatility if more forms of transportation were based on natural gas .

growth potential .

only 2.9% of u.s , natural gas production is currently used in transportation , mainly to move gas through the pipelines , and expanded use of natural gas vehicles would likely lead to increased demand for natural gas .

technology improvements such as hydraulic fracturing and directional drilling have led to massive growth in natural gas production from shale formations .

annual natural gas production in the united states has increased by roughly one - fourth since 2006 ( figure 1 ) .

oil - based gasoline and diesel fuel continue to remain the fuels of choice in both the domestic and commercial transportation sectors .

however , u.s. demand for finished petroleum products has fallen 12% from its all - time peak in 2005 , due in part to greater use of natural gas for many purposes .

although natural gas consumption by vehicles grew 26% from 2008 through 2013 , natural gas still represents less than 1% of the fuels used in the transportation sector .

among the key factors determining the attractiveness of natural gas as a transportation fuel is its price relative to diesel fuel .

the energy content of a given volume of natural gas in compressed or liquefied form differs from that of refined petroleum products .

for example , one gallon of lng has 82,644 british thermal units ( btu ) of energy compared to 139,000 btu per gallon of diesel fuel and 114,000 btu per gallon of gasoline .

prices can be compared by converting natural gas to its gasoline gallon equivalent ( gge ) or diesel gallon equivalent ( dge ) .

measured by btus , a barrel of oil has historically cost several times as much as a comparable unit of natural gas ( figure 2 ) .

u.s. natural gas prices fell by half between 2008 and 2014 as increasing supplies from shale formations became available .

the competitive price advantage that natural gas now demonstrates could be eroded if crude oil prices fall or natural gas prices rise .

several different technologies can be used to harness natural gas as a vehicle fuel .

some of them require pressurized systems to burn the fuel in a gaseous state , and others convert natural gas to a liquid .

still others process natural gas into a variety of liquid fuels suitable for powering internal - combustion engines .

the increased use of natural gas as a transportation fuel in any form would require substantial changes in vehicles and fueling infrastructure .

new vehicles would need to be developed on a large scale , in some cases requiring new technologies .

new fueling stations would be required to make fuel widely available .

vehicle manufacturers , fleet owners , vehicle buyers , and service station operators would all need to make significant investments .

the required investments differ with the type of technology employed .

future consumer and commercial interest in natural gas vehicles hinges on the relative price of petroleum to natural gas , refueling infrastructure , environmental concerns , federal and state incentives , and the price of natural gas vehicles relative to traditional gasoline vehicles .

perhaps the most important one is the long - term relationship of gasoline and diesel prices to fuels using natural gas .

the success of all alternative fuel vehicles — whether electric , ethanol , natural gas , or hydrogen — is premised on rising prices for gasoline and other vehicular petroleum products .

methanol and ethanol flex - fuel vehicles are to some extent casualties of falling petroleum prices in the 1990s and later .

if vehicle buyers believe that the cost of gasoline and diesel fuel in future years will be low relative to the cost of natural gas , the hurdle for natural gas vehicles will be high .

as the availability of domestic natural gas supplies has increased , so too has congressional interest in finding ways to use more natural gas in the transportation sector .

the federal government's tax , regulatory , and research and development policies are viewed as possible incentives for expanding production and use of natural gas vehicles .

legislation to promote natural gas as a vehicle fuel has been introduced in the 113 th congress ( and in previous years ) , including proposals that would change the taxation of alternative fuels and vehicles , modify the regulation of natural gas vehicles under federal cafe standards , increase the weight limit for natural gas trucks on interstate highways , provide loans and grants for deployment of alternative fuel vehicles and recharging stations , and raise federal agency use of alternative fuel vehicles .

one proposal affecting natural gas vehicles has passed thus far in the 113 th congress .

an amendment ( h.amdt .

93 ) offered by representative eliot engel was added to the military construction and veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations act of 2014 ( h.r .

2216 ) , prohibiting the departments of defense and veterans affairs from purchasing new light - duty vehicles unless they are alternate fuel vehicles such as hybrid , electric , natural gas , or biofuel .

the house agreed by voice vote to this amendment , which representative engel noted in his floor remarks was in line with requirements in the may 24 , 2011 , memorandum on federal fleet performance issued by president obama .

the engel amendment was included in the enacted legislation .

a broad energy efficiency bill ( s. 761 ) reported out of the senate energy and natural resources committee on june 3 , 2013 , includes a provision ( section 403 ) amending the national energy conservation policy act to authorize the use of energy savings performance contracts and utility energy service contracts for projects that support the use of natural gas and electric vehicles or the related fueling or charging infrastructure .

the bill , the energy savings and industrial competitiveness act of 2013 , has not come to the senate floor .

s. 2260 , the extension of alternative fuel excise and infrastructure tax credits act of 2014 , would extend many expiring tax provisions , including the incentive for alternative fuels , the alternative fuel refueling property credit , and the credit for new fuel cell motor vehicles .

the bill was reported from the senate finance committee on april 28 , 2014 , but has not yet received a senate vote .

a similar bill extending fuel and infrastructure credits is h.r .

5559 , the bridge to a clean energy act of 2014 , but it has not been acted on by the ways and means committee .

s. 1486 , the postal reform act of 2014 , among other provisions , would require the postmaster general to submit a report to congress on the feasibility of a pilot program to use natural gas and propane in u.s .

postal service long - haul trucks .

the bill was reported from the senate homeland security and governmental affairs on july 31 , 2014 .

several bills have been introduced to change the motor fuels excise tax so that lng would be taxed on an energy - equivalent basis instead of a volume basis .

as 1.7 gallons of lng equates to one gallon of diesel on an energy - equivalent basis , transportation users of lng pay more tax than users of an equal amount of energy from diesel .

the federal excise tax on cng is already assessed on an energy content basis .

the senate finance committee included this tax change in the preserving america's transit and highways act ( path act ) , but the senate adopted the house highway and transportation and funding act ( h.r .

5021 ) , which did not include the lng tax provision .

in the recent past , federal tax policy has supported the production and sale of alternative fuels and vehicles , including those powered by natural gas ( table 1 ) .

however , many of those provisions have expired .

other pending legislation affecting natural gas vehicles includes: s. 2065 , alternative fuel vehicle act ( originally introduced as s. 1355 ) , seeks to provide parity for dual - fuel natural gas vehicles with electric vehicles and dedicated natural gas vehicles under the federal cafe standards and greenhouse gas regulations .

current law provides limited incentives for dual - fuel natural gas vehicles .

the sponsors would like to spur the use of dual - fuel natural gas vehicles by expanding the definition of dedicated natural gas vehicles to include models with a reserve gasoline tank for incidental or emergency use .

s. 2065 would also amend cafe standards to alter the treatment of natural gas vehicles and provide natural gas vehicles with access to high - occupancy vehicle lanes .

h.r .

1027 and s. 488 , advanced vehicle technology act of 2013 , would authorize a doe program of research , development , demonstration , and commercial application of passenger and commercial vehicle technologies to reduce or eliminate petroleum use .

h.r .

1364 , new alternative transportation to give americans solutions act of 2013 , would allow an excise tax credit through 2018 for alternative fuels and fuel mixtures involving cng or lng , establish an income tax credit for cng and lnc vehicles , and extend through 2018 the tax credit for alternative fuel vehicle refueling property .

it would also require doe to provide grants to improve the performance and efficiency of natural gas vehicles and urge epa to provide incentives to encourage and reward manufacturers who produce natural gas vehicles .

h.r .

2242 , state and local fleet efficiency act , would recognize the authority of state and local governments to require their fleets to acquire only new vehicles that use natural gas as a fuel or are flexible fuel vehicles that operate on gasoline , e85 , and m85 .

h.r .

2493 , open fuel standard act of 2013 , would promote the production of alternative fuel light vehicles .

 ( qualified vehicles include natural gas , hydrogen , biodiesel , e85 , m85 , and plug - in electric drive. ) .

it would require u.s. automakers to produce at least 30% qualified vehicles in my2016 and 50% qualified vehicles in my2017 and each subsequent years .

h.r .

3937 would direct the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) to prepare an economic and environmental assessment of using natural gas as a fuel source in long - haul trucks .

h.r .

3938 would require dot to designate natural gas fueling corridors for long - haul trucking .

h.r .

3940 and s. 2721 , natural gas long haul truck competitiveness act of 2014 , would require dot to issue regulations to allow natural gas vehicles to exceed federal weight limitations to operate on u.s. interstate highways by an amount equal to the weight of the vehicle's natural gas tank and fueling system , less the weight of comparable diesel tanks and fueling systems .

h.r .

4753 , impact act of 2014 would extend tax credits for qualified plug - in electric drive motor vehicles , heavy natural gas vehicles , and alternative fuel vehicle refueling property and provide for tax - exempt financing for refueling property for such vehicles .

h.r .

4956 , american energy opportunity act of 2014 would extend through 2019 the tax credit for fuel cell motor vehicles , advanced lean burn technology ( diesel ) motor vehicles , hybrid motor vehicles , alternative fuel motor vehicles , plug - in electric drive motor vehicles , and plug - in conversions .

it would create a new tax credit for the purchase of a motor vehicle identified by epa as the most efficient vehicle in its class and establish an excise tax credit through 2019 for alternative fuels and fuel mixtures involving cng , lng , or lpg .

in addition , it would establish benchmarks for the increasing electrification of the federal fleet and establish a doe grant program to assist local governments in the installation of electric vehicle recharging facilities .

h.r .

5107 , fuel choice for american prosperity and security act of 2014 , would revise the calculation for average fuel economy for alternative fuel vehicles , including those powered by natural gas , hydrogen , propane , biodiesel , fuel cells , and plug - in electricity .

s. 1230 , alternative fueled vehicles competitiveness and energy security act of 2013 , would expand categories of vehicle technologies that are eligible for doe loans and direct doe to provide technical assistance and grants to for the deployment of alternative fuel vehicles and infrastructure .

in addition , it would require doe to identify barriers and remedies in pipeline transmission and distribution systems to the distribution of alternative fuels and the deployment of alternative fuel recharging and refueling capability .

among other provisions , it calls for an interagency council for the development and procurement of alternative fuel vehicles by federal agencies .

