u.s. corporations face a "growing and persistent threat" by individuals , rival companies , and foreign governments that seek to steal some of their most valuable intangible assets — their trade secrets .

the tools , tactics , and methods used by such perpetrators vary widely but increasingly have involved the use of cyberspace and sophisticated technologies that "mak[e] it possible for malicious actors , whether they are corrupted insiders or foreign intelligence services ( fis ) , to quickly steal and transfer massive quantities of data while remaining anonymous and hard to detect. .

as former attorney general eric holder once opined , there are only two categories of companies affected by trade - secret theft: those that know they've been compromised and those that don't know yet .

... a hacker in china can acquire source code from a software company in virginia without leaving his or her desk .

globalization has been cited as a major contributor to the increased incidents of trade secret theft: in many ways , trade - secret theft is a foreseeable outgrowth of expanding international markets .

when large multinational companies expand their overseas operations , they almost inevitably face challenges related to supply accountability and protection against such theft .

their foreign manufacturing operations and joint - venture partners require customer lists , internal standards , manufacturing processes , information on sources of goods , recipes , and production and sales strategies in order to carry out their operational responsibilities .

each new piece of information that is sent overseas opens a company's supply chain and puts its valuable [intellectual property] at risk .

there is significant congressional interest in reducing the problems of trade secret theft and economic espionage that u.s. businesses currently face , as demonstrated by significant legislative activity in the 114 th congress and hearings held in the 114 th and 113 th congresses .

this report provides an overview of existing federal , state , and international laws governing trade secret protection , describes the limitations of these legal regimes , and reviews pending legislation , the defend trade secrets act ( s. 1890 ) , that is intended to address such deficiencies .

unlike other forms of intellectual property that can trace their origins back several hundreds of years , trade secret law is a creation of state court opinions from the middle of the 19 th century .

as noted by one legal scholar , the principles of trade secret law evolved out of a series of related common law torts: breach of confidence , breach of confidential relationship , common law misappropriation , unfair competition , unjust enrichment , and torts related to trespass or unauthorized access to a plaintiff's property .

it also evolved out of a series of legal rules — contract and common law — governing the employment relationship .

in 1939 , the american law institute ( ali ) , a group of lawyers , judges , and legal scholars , published a treatise titled the "restatement of torts," which was an effort to provide a "clear formulation[]of common law and its statutory elements or variations and reflect the law as it presently stands or might plausibly be stated by a court. .

the restatement of torts included two sections dealing with the law of trade secrets .

section 757 explained the subject matter of trade secrets , while section 758 spelled out the elements of a trade secret misappropriation cause of action .

the ali later addressed trade secrets in sections 39-45 of its 1993 "restatement ( third ) of unfair competition. .

in addition , the national conference of commissioners on uniform state law ( nccusl ) issued the uniform trade secrets act ( utsa ) in 1979 , which represents "the first comprehensive effort to codify the law of trade secrets protection , incorporating the major common law principles while filling gaps left by the courts. .

the nccusl consists of a group of academics , attorneys , and judges who draft statutes addressing a variety of issues , and then propose that each state enact them .

however , the nccusl lacks direct legislative authority itself .

its uniform acts become law only to the extent that state legislatures choose to adopt them .

the federal government did not take steps to provide national trade secret protection until the mid - 1990s , when congress enacted the economic espionage act of 1996 .

this federal criminal law is described in detail in the following section .

it has been argued that "federal law has not kept pace with the technological innovation that has enabled increased trade secret theft. .

the lack of a federal civil cause of action for trade secret misappropriation is perhaps the most widely cited deficiency in u.s. trade secret law .

as one legal practitioner has argued , unfortunately the eea has not deterred trade secret theft and foreign economic espionage .

the computer crime and intellectual property section of the united states department of justice has done an excellent job , but the burden on the government is too great .

without a federal civil cause of action , u.s. companies cannot adequately protect u.s. trade secret assets in a worldwide economy that now crosses international boundaries .

another problem companies have encountered in having only federal criminal statutes protecting trade secrets is that "criminal law punishes the defendant , but the process for compensating the victim is unwieldy , particularly when compared to relief available under civil law. .

others have highlighted the limitations of the eea's extraterritorial application , noting that "prosecutors lack enforcement and proper service mechanisms against individuals and entities located outside the united states .. .

prosecutors cannot charge alleged violators of the eea until they cross u.s .

borders. .

reportedly , since the enactment of the eea in 1996 , there have been relatively few cases prosecuted under the law: approximately 125 indictments and 10 convictions .

two bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress related to trade secret misappropriation , s. 1890 and h.r .

3326 ( the defend trade secrets act ( dtsa ) of 2015 ) .

as introduced on july 29 , 2015 by senator hatch and representative doug collins , respectively , the bills are substantively identical .

s. 1890 has seen all the legislative activity to date .

on january 28 , 2016 , the senate judiciary committee , by a unanimous voice vote , reported s. 1890 with an amendment in the nature of a substitute .

senator grassley filed a written report on march 7 , 2016 .

the senate passed s. 1890 by a vote of 87-0 on april 4 , 2016 .

on april 20 , the house judiciary committee unanimously approved s. 1890 by voice vote .

the following summarizes the key provisions of the dtsa ( s. 1890 ) , as passed by the senate and the house judiciary committee .

the dtsa would create a private cause of action in federal courts for trade secret owners to sue misappropriators .

the dtsa would establish this new private right by adding a subsection entitled "private civil actions" to the provision of the eea that currently authorizes the attorney general to bring a civil action to obtain "appropriate injunctive relief" against any violation of the eea , codified at 18 u.s.c .

section 1836 .

the dtsa would allow an owner of a trade secret that is misappropriated to bring a civil action if the trade secret is related to a product or service used in , or intended to be used in , interstate or foreign commerce .

the legislation would amend the eea's definition section ( 18 u.s.c .

section 1839 ) to include definitions of the terms "misappropriation" and "improper means" that largely mirror the definitions in the uniform trade secrets act .

the dtsa would provide a court with the power to issue civil ex parte orders , "only in extraordinary circumstances," for the "seizure of property necessary to prevent the propagation or dissemination of the trade secret that is the subject of the action. .

according to the senate judiciary committee report , "[t]he ex parte seizure provision is expected to be used in instances in which a defendant is seeking to flee the country or planning to disclose the trade secret to a third party immediately or is otherwise not amenable to the enforcement of the court's orders. .

to avoid potential abuse of these seizure orders , the dtsa includes several detailed requirements that the court must follow before granting a seizure order , including ( 1 ) a finding that immediate and irreparable injury will occur if the seizure is not ordered ; ( 2 ) the applicant for the seizure order is likely to succeed in showing that the information is a trade secret and that the person to whom the seizure is ordered misappropriated it by improper means ; ( 3 ) the harm to the applicant in denying the order outweighs the harm to the legitimate interests of the party against whom the seizure is ordered and substantially outweighs the harm to any third parties ; and ( 4 ) the matter to be seized would be destroyed , moved , hidden , or otherwise rendered inaccessible if the party in possession of such property were given advance notice .

in addition , the dtsa requires that any seizure order must contain several elements , including 1. findings of fact and conclusions of law required for the order ; 2. the narrowest seizure of property necessary to protect the trade secret ; 3. a direction that the seizure be conducted in a manner that minimizes any interruption of the business operations of third parties and , to the extent possible , does not interrupt the legitimate business operations of the person accused of misappropriating the trade secret ; 4. a date for a hearing regarding the seizure order at the earliest possible time , but not later than seven days after the order has issued ( unless the parties involved consent to another date ) ; 5. a requirement that the applicant provide a security that the court finds is adequate for the payment of damages that any person may be entitled to recover as a result of a wrongful or excessive seizure .

the dtsa would require the court to take custody of any seized materials and secure it from physical and electronic access .

the dtsa provides a cause of action for any person who suffers damage by reason of a wrongful or excessive seizure ; the person is entitled to the same relief that is provided by the trademark act of 1946 ( 15 u.s.c .

section 1116 ( d ) ( 11 ) ) concerning the wrongful seizure of goods and counterfeit trademarks ( including damages for lost profits , cost of materials , loss of good will , punitive damages , and reasonable attorney's fees ) .

the dtsa would empower a court to offer civil remedies for trade secret misappropriation , including injunctive relief , damages ( for actual loss and any unjust enrichment caused by the misappropriation of the trade secret , or in lieu of damages measured by any other method , an award of a reasonable royalty ) , punitive damages of up to two times the amount of damages ( if the trade secret is willfully and maliciously misappropriated ) , and reasonable attorney's fees ( if the claim of misappropriation is made in bad faith , there is willful and malicious misappropriation , or a motion to terminate an injunction is made or opposed in bad faith ) .

the dtsa would require evidence of actual or threatened misappropriation before a court may issue an injunction to prevent it .

however , such an order for injunctive relief may not "prevent a person from entering into an employment relationship" or "otherwise conflict with an applicable state law prohibiting restraints on the practice of a lawful profession , trade , or business. .

in addition , "conditions placed on such employment shall be based on evidence of threatened misappropriation and not merely on the information the person knows. .

the dtsa would establish a three - year statute of limitations period for the misappropriation of trade secret civil action , which is similar to that provided by the uniform trade secrets act and under most state laws .

finally , the dtsa includes a "rule of construction" provision that declares that nothing in the dtsa shall be construed ( 1 ) to preempt any other provision of law or ( 2 ) to modify the eea's existing rule of construction ( codified at 18 u.s.c .

section 1838 ) stating that the eea does not preempt or displace any civil or criminal remedies provided by federal or state law for the misappropriation of a trade secret .

