the federal trade commission act ( ftc act ) established the federal trade commission ( ftc or commission ) in 1914 .

its creation was prompted by efforts to "bust the trusts," which were late 19 th century monopolistic corporations that frequently engaged in unethical commercial practices and stifled competition .

the protection of consumers from anticompetitive , deceptive , or unfair business practices is at the core of the ftc's mission .

as part of that mission , the ftc has been at the forefront of the federal government's efforts to protect sensitive consumer information from data breaches , and to regulate cybersecurity .

data breaches occur when there is a loss or theft of , or other unauthorized access to , sensitive personally identifiable information ( pii ) that could result in the potential compromise of the confidentiality or integrity of data .

as the number of data breaches continues to soar , so too do the number of ftc investigations into lax data security .

data breaches have become almost ubiquitous in every sector of the economy .

businesses , financial and insurance services , retailers and merchants , educational institutions , government and military agencies , healthcare entities , and non - profit organizations have suffered cyber intrusions into their computer networks .

cybercriminals have targeted the payment systems of several of the nation's largest retailers in order to obtain credit and debit card information to conduct fraudulent transactions .

in the last year alone , large scale hacks were disclosed by target , neiman marcus , michaels , and home depot .

since 2002 , the ftc has investigated the data security practices of many companies , and brought enforcement actions against 50 companies that have engaged in "unfair or deceptive" practices that put consumers' personal data at unreasonable risk in violation of the ftc act .

section 5 of the ftc act prohibits unfair or deceptive acts or practices .

the ftc's authority to regulate data security under section 5 of ftc act is being challenged in two pending cases .

in ftc v. wyndham worldwide corp. , a federal district court judge denied a motion to dismiss , thereby effectively lending support to the ftc's position that it possesses jurisdiction to regulate data security under its unfair or deceptive practices authority .

in another data security case , in the matter of labmd , the commission rejected a motion to dismiss in an administrative enforcement action brought against a medical diagnostics laboratory .

both decisions are currently being appealed .

the wyndham district court granted the hotel chain's motion for immediate appeal of the ruling to the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit ( third circuit ) to consider the commission's authority to bring data security cases .

the ftc's administrative action against labmd was stayed by the commission pending a congressional hearing investigating the firm , triversa , a key player in the ftc's case .

separately , labmd has asked the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit ( eleventh circuit ) for the third time to dismiss the administrative action .

both cases are the subject of a great deal of interest from congress , businesses , trade groups , corporate law firms , and legal scholars .

outside of government , there has been an academic debate over the scope of the ftc's authority respecting data security .

some scholars have argued that specific legislation is needed to give the ftc express authority to take action , under well - defined regulations against companies that experience data security breaches .

other information privacy law scholars counter that the "ftc enforcement has certainly changed over the course of the past fifteen years , but the trajectory of development has followed a predictable set of patterns .

these patterns are those of common law development. .

this report will discuss the ftc's legal authority under section 5 of the ftc act in relation to data security , and the two aforementioned cases .

ftc v. wyndham worldwide corp .

is widely viewed as an important case to test the authority of the ftc to respond to data breaches , and it could have far - reaching implications for the liability of companies whose computer systems suffer a data breach .

after a data breach occurred involving the personal information of wyndham hotels and resorts' customers in 2012 , the ftc filed suit against the hotel chain and three of its subsidiaries , alleging that wyndham's privacy policy misrepresented the security of customer information and that its failure to safeguard personal information caused substantial consumer injury .

specifically , the ftc alleged that wrongly configured software , weak passwords , and insecure computer servers led to three data breaches by at wyndham hotels from 2008 to 2010 , compromising more than 619,000 payment card accounts and transfer of customers' payment card account numbers to russia .

the ftc alleged that the computer intrusions led to more than $10.6 million in fraud losses .

the agency ultimately alleged that wyndham's security practices were "unfair and deceptive" in violation of section 5 of the ftc act .

rather than settle the case as other companies facing ftc complaints have done , wyndham contested the allegations and argued , among other things , that the ftc had exceeded its statutory authority to assert an unfairness claim in the data security context .

wyndham relied on the supreme court's ruling in food and drug administration v. brown & williamson tobacco corp. , which held that the food and drug administration ( fda ) could not utilize its general authorities with respect to drugs to mandate disclaimers on tobacco packaging because of the lack of explicit legal authority over tobacco products .

the brown & williamson court reached such a conclusion because , among other reasons , ( 1 ) the agency had disclaimed authority over tobacco products in the past ; ( 2 ) the fda's authorizing statute did not clearly indicate the agency had such authority ; ( 3 ) congress had already passed tobacco - specific legislation in the past without giving the fda such authority ; and ( 4 ) it appeared unlikely that congress would delegate a policy decision of such economic and political magnitude to the fda through its general authority to regulate drugs .

in wyndham , the hotel chain , relying on brown & williamson , argued that just as congress did not grant the fda through its general authority to regulate drugs the specific authority to regulate tobacco products , congress likewise did not give the ftc the necessary authority to regulate data security through the ftc's general authority to regulate unfair or deceptive trade practices .

in making this argument , wyndham noted the ftc's lack of clear statutory authority over data security ; that the ftc had previously disclaimed its authority over data security ; and , that congress has enacted narrowly tailored data security legislation in fcra , glba , and coppa without providing the ftc with any broader authority .

moreover , wyndham argued that it was unlikely that congress would delegate a policy decision of such economic and political magnitude as setting data security standards through so general a delegation as the ftc's unfairness authority .

in addition , wyndham cited the obama administration's recent release of a cybersecurity framework by the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) as evidence that congress did not provide the ftc with authority to regulate data security .

the ftc , in response , made several arguments .

first , the agency argued that brown & williamson was distinguishable because here the agency's assertion of authority would not result in any statutory inconsistencies .

the agency explained that the ftc act provided the agency with a baseline authority to act in unfairness cases where it can prove substantial harm to consumers and asserted that regulating data security was consistent with that broad authority .

second , the ftc contended that specific data security laws like fcra or hippa do not displace the ftc's authority , but instead supplement the ftc's section 5 authority ; grant the ftc additional powers ; and affirmatively compel the ftc to use its consumer protection authority in specified ways , unlike the fda's earlier disclaimer of authority to regulate tobacco .

the ftc also argued that it had never disclaimed its "unfairness" authority over data security .

finally , the ftc claimed that any question about the ftc's authority in the data security context was put to rest by the recent decision in the ftc's administrative action against labmd ( discussed below ) .

on april 7 , 2014 , a federal district court judge in new jersey , in ftc v. wyndham worldwide corp. , denied wyndham's motion to dismiss the case , rejecting wyndham's position that the ftc lacked statutory authority to regulate data security .

although the judicial opinion did not address the merits of whether wyndham's security policies were inadequate , the judge did undertake , in a 42-page opinion , an in - depth analysis of the authority of the ftc to regulate data security .

the district court in wyndham began by noting that it was not ruling on a finding of liability , but only on the validity of ftc's legal theory of liability .

the district court also cautioned that it was not handing the ftc a "blank check" to go after every company that suffers a data breach .

as to wyndham's claim that the ftc's unfairness authority does not include data security , the district court distinguished wyndham from the brown & williamson reasoning .

the court noted that in brown & williamson congress had clearly intended to exclude tobacco products from fda enforcement , whereas the case before it the court found no such congressional intent to create a data security carve out from the ftc's unfairness authority under section 5 of the ftc act .

in fact , the court recognized that data security was a rapidly evolving area , and that nothing in congress's several specific data security enactments ( eg , the fcra , glba , and the coppa ) contradict or are otherwise incompatible with holding that the ftc possesses authority to enforce data security as an unfair trade practice under the ftc act .

wyndham moved for and was granted permission to appeal the district court's ruling .

it is uncertain when a decision from the third circuit can be expected .

in the matter of labmd involves another challenge to the authority of the ftc to regulate data security breaches as unfair trade practices under the ftc act .

as was the case in wyndham , the ftc's authority to bring enforcement actions for data security breaches was challenged , and in this instance , the commission found that the ftc had authority to bring such enforcement actions .

however , unlike in wyndham , the administrative hearing resulted in something sought by a defendant company: an order issued by the alj compelling the ftc to explicitly disclose what kinds of data security measures it expected the company to take and rejecting the agency ' s argument that its existing general guidance was sufficient .

in the matter of labmd began in 2013 when the ftc filed a complaint , through its administrative process , against a georgia medical cancer diagnostics company , labmd , inc .

under the ftc act , the ftc is authorized to initiate enforcement action s either through administrative or judicial processes .

the administrative complaint against labmd alleged that the company failed to reasonably protect the security of 10,000 consumers' personal data , including medical information ; that these practices harmed consumers ; and that consequently labmd engaged in unfair practices in violation of the ftc act .

labmd argued in a motion to dismiss that the ftc has no authority to address private companies' data security practices as unfair practices because the lab is a health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) covered entity .

in january 2014 , four commissioners , on behalf of the ftc , unanimously denied labmd's motion to dismiss and concluded that the ftc act's prohibition of unfair practices applies to a company's failure to implement reasonable and appropriate data security measures .

according to the order denying labmd's motion , the commission's authority to regulate data security practices to determine which practices are unfair was consistent with the ftc act and its legislative history , other statutes , and extensive case law .

the commission further asserted that legislative history of the ftc act demonstrated that congress decided to delegate broad authority to the commission to determine what practices were unfair .

the commission likewise rejected labmd's contention that congress , by enacting more specific data security statutes , implicitly repealed the ftc's preexisting authority to enforce section 5 of the ftc act in the field of data security .

the commission , noting that "[t] he cardinal rule is that repeals by implication are not favored," found nothing in hipaa or any of the other cited statutes that reflected a "clear and manifest" intent of congress to restrict the commission's authority over allegedly "unfair" data security practices .

the commission also rejected labmd's argument that the ftc's decision to proceed through adjudication without first conducting a rulemaking violates labmd's constitutional due process rights .

according to the ruling , administrative agencies must enforce the statutes that congress has directed them to implement regardless of whether they have issued regulations addressing the specific conduct .

the ftc ultimately found the three - part statutory standard governing whether an act or practice is "unfair" sufficient to provide fair notice of what conduct is prohibited .

in reaching that conclusion , the commission noted that given the difficulty of drafting generally applicable regulations in this rapidly changing area , questions relating to data security practices in an online environment are particularly well - suited to case - by - case development in enforcement proceedings .

after the ftc c ommissioners affirmed the agency ' s authority to sue , the case 's focus shifted to whether the ftc must disclose the data security standards it uses to determine whether a company's efforts to protect consumers' information could be considered reasonable .

in the same proceeding , labmd accused the ftc of holding the company to data security standards that do not exist officially at the federal level .

in response , the ftc argued that it should not be required to disclose the standards it uses to determine whether a company's data security practices are unfair under the ftc act because of legal privileges .

in may 2014 , the ftc's chief administrative law judge ruled that the ftc can be compelled to disclose the data security standards it uses to determine whether a company has reasonable security measures .

the administrative law judge ultimately held that the company has the right to know what data security standards the commission uses when pursuing enforcement actions .

the judge ordered the ftc to provide deposition testimony as to what data security standards , if any , have been published by the ftc which it intends to rely on at trial .

the ftc's testimony will present companies with the first opportunity to obtain more specificity from the agency about the data security standards driving the ftc's data breach enforcement actions .

as part of efforts to enact cyber and data security legislation , several bills before congress include provisions that would provide the ftc with enhanced enforcement authority by , for example , explicitly authorizing the ftc to promulgate rules to implement data security standards and to assess civil penalties .

in recent ftc testimony before congress , the agency has called for federal legislation that would ( 1 ) strengthen its existing authority governing data security standards on companies and ( 2 ) require companies to provide notification to consumers where there is a data security breach .

in both of those areas the ftc seeks the ability to impose civil penalties and the authority to issue administrative rules .

several bills have been introduced in the senate in the 113 th congress that could , in varying ways , impact the ftc's powers .

s. 1193 ( senator toomey ) , s. 1897 ( senator leahy ) , s. 1927 ( senator carper and senator blunt ) , s. 1976 ( senator rockefeller ) , and s. 1995 ( senator blumenthal ) would expressly give the ftc the power to levy civil penalties with respect to companies that fail to comply with certain data security standards .

s. 1897 would permit the ftc to impose civil penalties for violations for failing to comply with federal cybersecurity standards .

s. 1976 would provide the ftc with explicit authority to promulgate "information security" regulations that could extend to certain non - profits .

the bill would further allow the ftc to enforce violations of these regulations with various civil penalties .

likewise , s. 1995 would give enforcement authority to the ftc .

