all senate committees must adopt rules of procedure , unless exempted from doing so , and publish them in the congressional record by march 1 of the first year of a new congress .

an amendment to a committee's rules during a two - year congress does not take effect until the amendment is published in the congressional record .

if the senate establishes a committee after february 1 of the first year of a new congress , the rules of that committee must be published in the congressional record not later than 60 days after the establishment of the committee .

a committee's rules must be "not inconsistent" with the senate's rules .

 ( rule xxvi , paragraph 2. ) .

a committee typically adopts the rules that were in effect in the previous congress , with any change agreed to by the committee usually being incremental .

a committee's rules develop over time and fit the jurisdiction , practices , and culture of a committee , leaving little reason for major changes , even when control of the senate changes .

a change in a senate rule or standing order might cause committees to reexamine their rules .

many senate rules , standing orders , and other decisions of the senate , such as committee funding , affect committees' conduct of their legislative and executive business .

however , the two principal senate rules related to committees' activities are rule xxv , which contains committees' jurisdictions , and rule xxvi , which details committee procedures .

a number of committees specifically acknowledged the primacy of senate rules in their own rules .

these were the committees on armed services ; energy and natural resources ; foreign relations ; health , education , labor , and pensions ; small business and entrepreneurship ; veterans' affairs ; and indian affairs .

some of these committees' rules also acknowledged the preeminence of senate resolutions and the legislative reorganization acts of 1946 and 1970 .

the foreign relations committee , in addition , made its rule i its jurisdictional statement from rule xxv , paragraph 1 ( j ) .

most committees appended their jurisdictional statements to their rules .

in addition to their rules , some committees have adopted resolutions , manuals , and other guidance that may affect their operations .

the primary legislative function of the standing committees of the u.s. senate is to evaluate the thousands of bills and resolutions that senators introduce in each two - year congress , which are normally referred upon introduction to the appropriate committee , and measures passed by the house .

senate committees also annually evaluate thousands of executive nominations , and the foreign relations committee has jurisdiction over treaties submitted by the president for the advice and consent of the senate .

this report catalogues and compares the rules in the 114 th congress of the 18 senate committees with legislative authority — committees having authority to report legislation to the senate .

the report is organized topically rather than by senate rule or paragraph of a senate rule or by committee .

broad topics based principally on provisions of senate rule xxvi , such as committee meetings , are divided into more specific topics , such as regular meeting days , additional committee meetings , and meetings initiated by committee members .

topics also include nominations , treaties , and related responsibilities covered by committees' rules .

all these topics might be further divided .

for most topics , a summary of the relevant provision or provisions of any senate rule appears first .

this summary is followed by an explanation and a comparison of individual committees' rules , which appear in both text and tables .

relevant provisions of standing orders applicable to all committees or specific committees , which pertain to legislative or executive business , are also cited .

the report is not intended to be read from beginning to end but might be used by chairs , ranking minority members , and committee staff considering amendments to rules , by committee members and their legislative staff seeking to increase their knowledge of committee rules , and by new senators and staff building procedural knowledge .

the principal headings in the report are as follows: " subcommittees " " committee meetings " " quorum requirements " " open and closed meetings " " hearing procedures " " oversight " " referral of legislation " " markup procedures " " voting in committee " " reports " " nominations " " foreign relations committee's treaty procedures " " committees' other , related responsibilities " " committee records .

a large responsibility of senate committees , not shared with house committees , is their consideration of presidential nominations to executive and judicial positions .

under the constitution , the advice and consent authority belongs exclusively to the senate .

the foreign relations committee has the unique responsibility among all congressional committees to review treaties submitted by the president and report on them to the senate .

under the constitution , the senate solely gives its advice and consent to the ratification of treaties .

once the president submits a treaty to the senate , the treaty remains on the committee's calendar , pursuant to committee rule , from congress to congress until action is taken to report the treaty to the senate or to recommend its return to the president or until the senate has discharged the committee from further consideration of the treaty .

proceedings on treaties that were reported to the senate but not acted on terminate at the end of a congress ; they resume at the convening of the next congress as if no proceedings had occurred earlier .

under the committee's rule , the committee should conduct a public hearing as soon as possible after receiving a treaty from the president .

except in extraordinary circumstances , under the committee rules , treaties reported to the senate should be accompanied by a written report .

a senate rule requires that all committee hearings , records , data , charts , and files be kept separate from the congressional office records of the chair .

committee records are the property of the senate , and all committee members and all senators may have access to them .

 ( rule xxvi , paragraph 10 ( a ) . ) .

a rule directs the secretary of the senate to obtain the noncurrent records of each senate committee and transfer them for preservation to the general services administration , subject to orders of the senate .

 ( rule xi , paragraph 2. ) .

 ( see also , above , " confidential and classified testimony and materials ." ) .

senate committees are required to keep a complete record of committee action , including the votes of members on any recorded vote demanded .

the results of recorded votes on a measure and amendments to it must be announced in the committee report on the measure , unless the committee had previously announced the results .

an announcement must report the total votes cast for and against each question and the vote of each committee member present .

the appropriations committee is exempt from this requirement .

 ( rule xxvi , paragraph 7 ( b ) . ) .

the tabulation of a vote to report and the votes of each member on that vote must appear in a committee report .

 ( rule xxvi , paragraph 7 ( c ) . ) .

 ( see also , above , " voting in committee " and " recorded votes ." ) .

the agriculture , nutrition , and forestry ; budget ; and homeland security and governmental affairs committees' rules stated that the clerk of the committee must keep committee polling records .

the banking , housing , and urban affairs committee required that proxy requests be kept with records of roll - call votes .

the energy and natural resources committee's voting rule allowed members who did not vote on a roll - call vote to record a position in the appropriate committee record .

an environment and public works committee rule was similar .

a rule of the health , education , labor , and pensions and veterans' affairs committees required meeting records to include the record of each roll - call vote .

a senate rule directs each committee to keep a transcript or electronic recording "adequate to fully record the proceeding of each meeting or conference. .

this record must also be made and kept for meetings or portions of meetings that are closed .

a majority of a committee's members , however , may vote to forgo a record .

 ( rule xxvi , paragraph 5 ( e ) ( 1 ) . ) .

every committee and subcommittee is to make available on the internet a video or audio recording or a transcript of any meeting that is not closed to the public within 21 days of the meeting's occurrence .

this availability must continue until the end of the congress in which the meeting was held .

a committee or subcommittee may seek a waiver of this requirement from the rules and administration committee based upon its inability to comply for "technical or logistical reasons. .

 ( rule xxvi , paragraph 5 ( e ) ( 2 ) . ) .

committees are authorized to have testimony and exhibits presented at hearings printed and bound .

 ( rule xxvi , paragraph 10 ( a ) . ) .

committees are exhorted to "make every reasonable effort" to have hearings on a measure or matter reported by a standing committee printed and available to senators prior to the senate's consideration of that measure or matter .

 ( rule xvii , paragraph 5. ) .

the agriculture , nutrition , and forestry committee's rules stated that the committee would keep transcripts of meetings and hearings , unless a majority of the committee or subcommittee agreed on another form of permanent record .

the commerce , science , and transportation committee's rule stated that the transcripts could be in either electronic or stenographic form in the committee record .

the rule also required electronic or stenographic records of testimony in open and closed hearings and depositions .

in the instance of a deposition , the individual who administered the oath must certify on the transcript that the witness was sworn in , and the transcriber must certify that the transcription was a true record of the testimony ; the transcript with the certifications must be filed with the committee clerk .

the energy and natural resources committee required that a transcript be kept of each hearing but allowed a majority of the committee to select another form of permanent record than a transcript for a meeting .

the finance committee's rule required a record of all committee markups and allowed an uncorrected transcript , so labeled , to be available to senators , members of the committee , and committee members' staffs .

within 21 days of a meeting , the committee would make available through the internet a video or audio recording or a corrected transcript , committee members having had the opportunity to make grammatical corrections or corrections to "accurately reflect statements. .

in addition , the record of an executive session of the finance committee could be made public only by majority vote of the committee and only after members had the opportunity to correct grammatical errors or to make corrections to "accurately reflect statements made. .

a rule of the foreign relations committee required the committee to keep verbatim transcripts of all committee and subcommittee meetings and for transcripts to remain in the possession of the committee , unless the committee determined otherwise .

transcripts of open hearings must be published , unless the chair , with the concurrence of the ranking minority member , determined otherwise .

another committee rule required the chief clerk to retain a copy of materials submitted to the committee by the executive branch and for those materials to remain in the custody of the committee , subject to committee rules and procedures .

transcripts and materials were to be available to committee members , committee staff , and designated staff of committee members .

 ( see , above , " rules of the foreign relations committee " under " confidential and classified testimony and materials ." ) .

the health , education , labor , and pensions committee's rule required a transcript or electronic recording of every meeting , including conference meetings , whether the meetings were open or closed , unless a majority of members voted to forgo a record .

records must be available for inspection by any committee member .

the homeland security and governmental affairs committee's rule required a transcript or electronic recording of every meeting , whether the meetings were open or closed , unless a majority of members voted to forgo a record .

a committee rule also required an electronic or stenographic record of witnesses' testimony , whether the testimony occurred in an open or closed hearing .

the veterans' affairs committee required a transcript or electronic recording of every meeting , whether or not any part of the meeting was closed .

the indian affairs committee's rule stated that a transcript or electronic recording would be kept of each hearing and meeting , except as otherwise provided in senate rules .

the intelligence committee in its rules directed the committee staff director to keep a "record" of all committee proceedings .

 ( see also , above , " confidential and classified testimony and materials " and " correcting transcripts ." ) .

the armed services committee in its rules directed the committee clerk to maintain a printed calendar of bills introduced and referred to the committee and the status of these bills .

its rules also directed the clerk to update the calendar from "time to time" to provide current information on bill referrals and bill status .

calendars were to be provided to each committee member .

a rule of the intelligence committee was similar .

