during the 113 th congress , the obama administration announced that certain federal agencies would not enforce specific aspects of the affordable care act ( aca ) for a period of time in order to allow the public to further prepare for proper compliance with the law in the future .

this has led to numerous questions regarding how courts treat administrative delays of regulatory programs .

this report will discuss the general legal principles applicable to judicial review of administrative delays in two different contexts: ( 1 ) delays in meeting a specific statutory deadline for implementing rules or completing particular adjudications , and ( 2 ) delays in the enforcement of a provision of law on the public at large .

the report will then address whether the procedures outlined in the administrative procedure act ( apa ) apply to these delays .

the first type of agency delay — delays in meeting a specific statutory deadline for implementing rules or completing particular adjudications — arises when congress has enacted a statute that expressly requires an agency to take a specific action by a specific date .

for example , the aca includes a number of mandatory rulemaking provisions that require agencies to issue certain substantive rules by certain dates .

an agency's failure to meet this type of statutory deadline is generally assessed pursuant to a multi - factor balancing test established in telecommunications research & action center v. fcc , discussed further below .

the second type of delay occurs when an agency delays the enforcement of a statutory prohibition or requirement that congress has imposed on third parties .

an agency generally implements this delay by announcing that , as an enforcement policy , the agency will not pursue or punish non - compliance with the law for a certain period of time .

the underlying law takes legal effect and conduct in violation of that law remains unlawful , but the agency — in an exercise of its enforcement discretion — does not take action in response to violations of the provision until after a certain date .

for example , although a provision in the aca requiring that health plans meet certain minimum coverage requirements became effective in january 2014 , the center for medicaid services has announced that it will not enforce these requirements for certain plans for at least one year .

this type of enforcement delay would generally be assessed , if at all , pursuant to standards established for determining whether non - enforcement decisions are "committed to agency discretion by law" under the apa .

given this framework , it would appear that the context in which an agency delay arises may alter the manner in which the court evaluates the delay .

we now turn to the question of the legal standards to be applied in the two identified scenarios: where an agency delay has resulted in the failure to meet a statutory deadline , and where an agency is relying on enforcement discretion to delay the enforcement of a duly enacted law .

whether an agency must follow notice and comment rulemaking procedures when it declares its intent to delay enforcement of certain provisions of a statute depends on whether the declaration is considered a "rule" for the purposes of section 553 of the apa .

only "legislative rules" are subject to the informal rulemaking procedures outlined in the apa ; an agency may promulgate guidance documents and interpretive rules without having to undergo notice and comment procedures .

a party may challenge an agency's characterization of any action and argue that a particular statement should have been issued pursuant to notice and comment procedures .

however , courts sometimes have difficulty differentiating between general statements of policy , such as guidance documents , and legislative rules .

courts have described a legislative rule to be a rule through which an agency "intends to create a new law , rights or duties," or a rule that is "issued by an agency pursuant to statutory authority and which implement[s] the statute. .

similarly , one court explained that a rule is legislative if "in the absence of the rule there would not be an adequate legislative basis for enforcement action or other agency action to confer benefits or ensure the performance of duties. .

notably , courts distinguish legislative rules from guidance documents because they have a binding effect: "[i]f a statement has a present - day binding effect , it is legislative. .

guidance documents , which are not defined by the apa , generally are considered to be a particular type of agency rule , known as a "general statement of policy. .

the apa provides that an agency may issue these general statements of policy without having to undergo notice and comment rulemaking procedures .

according to the office of management and budget's ( omb's ) final bulletin on agency good guidance practices , the term "guidance document" is defined as "an agency statement of general applicability and future effect , other than a regulatory action … that sets forth a policy on a statutory , regulatory or technical issue or an interpretation of a statutory or regulatory issue. .

similarly , the supreme court has defined the term "general statement of policy" to be a statement "issued by an agency to advise the public prospectively of the manner in which the agency proposes to exercise a discretionary power. .

therefore , guidance documents do not create new legal obligations on the public , but , instead , inform the public on how an agency intends to carry out certain agency functions .

one court notes that a statement cannot be characterized as a guidance document , and is instead a legislative rule , if the pronouncement "narrowly limits administrative discretion or establishes a binding norm. .

although it can be difficult to ascertain whether a court would characterize an agency statement delaying enforcement actions as a guidance document or a legislative rule , the following examples of such agency statements may provide some guidance on this issue .

it appears that , at least in some circumstances , a statement addressing agency enforcement priorities could qualify as a guidance document .

when an agency declares that it will only enforce a particular law at a certain time or under certain circumstances , it is not imposing a new legal obligation on the public .

in fact , the underlying legal obligation technically remains in effect .

instead , the agency has simply informed the public that it will not seek to enforce the provisions of the statute in the enumerated situations .

as addressed in heckler , it seems the agency could be viewed as exercising administrative discretion when it determines that enforcement of the law in a particular situation should not proceed .

because an agency's decision to enforce a statute in a given situation is discretionary , an agency's announcement of its enforcement policy would appear to qualify as a guidance document under the supreme court's decision in lincoln v. vigil , which describes a general statement of policy as a statement "issued by an agency to advise the public prospectively of the manner in which the agency proposes to exercise a discretionary power. .

further , because such a declaration would not appear to impose any new legal obligations on the public , it would seem that a court could determine that such a statement would not require notice and comment procedures prior to promulgation .

for example , on july 3 , 2013 , the internal revenue service ( irs ) issued notice 2013-45 ( notice ) , stating that the irs would not enforce the "employer mandate" of the aca during 2014 in order to allow for "additional time for input from employers" on how the law can be effectively implemented .

the notice further encourages employers to "voluntarily comply with the information reporting provisions. .

the irs promulgated the notice without undergoing notice and comment rulemaking procedures .

however , the irs does not appear to impose a new legal obligation on any parties , but , rather , the irs seems to notify the public of its intent to not enforce these provisions against employers during 2014 .

a court would likely find that such a statement is a guidance document , because it merely notifies the public on how the agency plans to perform a discretionary function — enforcement discretion .

however , in other circumstances , an agency's declaration of a delay or enforcement policy could require notice and comment procedures .

in february 2014 , the irs announced final regulations implementing the employer mandate from the affordable care act .

in those regulations , the irs provided for "transition relief" from the employer mandate tax for certain employers — that is , qualifying employers would not have to pay the tax .

in order to be eligible for transition relief , employers must certify that they have met certain requirements established by the agency .

here , because the irs is requiring employers to conduct a specific activity in order to be eligible for the transition relief — that is , provide certification — the transition relief is imposing a legal obligation on a party in order to qualify for a specific form of tax treatment .

it would appear that an agency taking this approach to delaying a statutory provision would have to use informal rulemaking procedures because the agency would impose a legal obligation on a party , who wanted to benefit from the delay .

under the other form of agency delay — that is , where an agency fails to take a discrete action by a statutory deadline — no rulemaking is required .

often the agency has simply not been able to accomplish the required action within the time provided by congress .

in this type of situation , the agency has not taken any action ; therefore , no rulemaking procedures are required .

however , as mentioned above , an agency may be subject to a suit by a party seeking to compel the agency to take action .

