proposed fy2016 defense authorization and appropriations legislation under consideration in congress as of june 2015 ( h.r .

2685 , h.r .

1735 , s. 1376 ) would not dramatically change the scope , scale , purposes , resources , or terms of the syria train and equip program as it was originally authorized by congress and as it is currently being implemented by the administration .

nevertheless , congress is considering fy2016 proposals that would extend and / or amend existing authorities , modify reporting requirements , and appropriate new funds in ways that illustrate several key policy issues related to the program and to broader debates about u.s. foreign policy and strategy toward the conflict in syria .

for example: proposed reporting and certification requirements in the house and senate versions of the fy2016 national defense authorization act ( ndaa , h.r .

1735 , s. 1376 ) would require the administration to report to congress on the potential provision of u.s. support and protection to program participants upon their return to syria from training locations outside of the country .

some supporters of the program and advocates of a more robust anti - asad strategy for the united states argue that the united states should be prepared and willing to protect u.s. trainees from potential attacks from pro - asad forces and extremist groups through defensive fire , air cover , intelligence and / or resupply .

critics of deeper u.s. involvement in the syria conflict argue that such protection may entail confrontation and armed conflict between u.s. forces and the syrian government or other actors , with unpredictable consequences .

proposed restrictions in the house - enrolled fy2016 ndaa ( h.r .

1735 ) on the provision of u.s. assistance to those found to have misused u.s. assistance reflect some members' concerns for ensuring that u.s. assistance supports only those purposes that congress set out for the program in fy2015 legislation .

specifically , some members of congress seek to ensure that u.s. assistance is used by u.s. - trained syrians to combat the islamic state and not to overthrow the government of bashar al asad or for other purposes .

administration officials insist that trainees and beneficiaries are receiving assistance to enable them first and foremost to protect civilians , opposition - held areas , and themselves from the forces of the islamic state .

administration officials have said that forces misusing or redirecting u.s. assistance for their own purposes would not receive further u.s. support .

nevertheless , some ambiguity exists in the relationship between the stated purposes of authorized u.s. assistance and syrian trainees' intentions toward asad , raising questions among some members of congress about how u.s. assistance might ultimately be used by recipients .

proposed new reporting requirements in the house - enrolled fy2016 ndaa would require the administration to report on the feasibility and potential costs of operations to establish so - called safe zones or no - fly zones in areas of syria .

this proposed change , while not involving the train and equip program directly , may reflect preferences expressed by some syrian opposition activists and their u.s. supporters — including some members of congress — for a broader scope and scale of u.s. assistance under the train and equip program and / or for parallel u.s. military intervention to protect syrian civilians .

however , other syrian groups and u.s. observers may reject deeper u.s. involvement .

the potential effects of various fy2016 proposals are analyzed in more detail below in sections corresponding to current policy questions .

table 1 below reproduces the language enacted in the fy2015 ndaa ( p.l .

113-291 ) and the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) alongside fy2016 defense legislative proposals under congressional consideration as of june 2015 ( h.r .

2685 , h.r .

1735 , s. 1376 ) .

table a - 1 in the appendix reproduces enacted fy2015 ndaa and appropriations language alongside the president's evolving 2014 requests for authority and funds for the program .

members of congress have considered several basic policy and oversight questions in relation to the creation , modification , and funding of the syria train and equip program .

these include: for what purposes , if any , should the united states train and equip syrians ? .

how might the short and long term goals of the united states and those of syrians align or conflict ? .

with what implications for the potential success of any u.s. support program ? .

who should receive such u.s. training and assistance ? .

who should not ? .

why ? .

with what implications for u.s. policy goals in syria or more broadly ? .

what vetting process has been established that complies with the criteria in the law ? .

how effective is this process ? .

how much and what types of training and equipment will be sufficient to accomplish stated u.s. objectives or achieve the stated purposes of authorizing language ? .

what support or protection , if any , should the united states provide to trainees upon their return to syria ? .

on what terms , on what authority , at what cost , and with what potential implications for u.s. policy toward syria and more broadly ? .

how might the "train and equip" mission expand in size , geographic scope , depending on different scenarios ? .

what risks might such expansion pose ? .

how much might this level of effort cost and how long might it take to reach these goals ? .

how should such a program be funded ? .

through base budget funding or overseas contingency operations funding - designated ( oco ) funds not subject to budget caps ? .

how long should authority for such a program be available and on what terms ? .

what reporting or notification requirements should apply ? .

how might this program affect other defense or foreign assistance priorities ? .

is there sufficient public support for a potentially long - standing commitment ? .

will dod exercise its waiver authority to exempt this program from terrorism , human rights , and other constraints in u.s. law ? .

under what circumstances might waivers of such legislation be necessary ? .

how might the executive branch's use of any waiver provisions provided affect perceptions of u.s. foreign policy abroad or the effectiveness of u.s. assistance in syria and in other places ? .

what assistance should be provided to third countries in relation to a syria train and equip program if any ? .

what contributions should be expected or required of foreign partners if any ? .

what conditions might potential partners and trainees place on participation and support for the program ? .

with what implications for its potential success and for u.s. policy toward syria ? .

how effective have other "train and equip" programs been in other contexts ? .

what lessons learned from those efforts should be applied to a syria - related effort ? .

how should success in the syria case be defined and assessed ? .

programs designed to achieve different purposes may present different potential policy risks and rewards and may entail different material and financial costs .

members of congress , administration officials , syrians , and other observers continue to debate the purposes , scope , scale , costs , and implications of the currently authorized syria train and equip program and proposals for its modification .

proposals that call for syrians civilians and trainees to be defended from attack or for u.s. assist in the stabilization of and provision of essential services in territory under opposition control may be of much broader scope , cost , or duration than the currently authorized program .

as events in syria during 2015 have illustrated , the scope of opposition - held territory may conceivably expand or contract to include more or less of syria than at present , with follow - on effects for potential costs , benefits , risks , or rewards for the united states .

reporting requirements included in p.l .

113-291 require dod to report on program spending totals by authorized purpose and to provide assessments of the effectiveness of trained personnel and activities relative to authorized purposes .

modifications proposed in the house - enrolled fy2016 ndaa h.r .

1735 would require updated reporting on u.s. strategy , new reporting on the integration of u.s. strategy in iraq and syria , and the identification of requirements established to ensure that assistance provided in the syria train and equip program achieves the purposes set out in the fy2015 ndaa .

as in past cases involving the provision of u.s. security assistance , different observers may define "success" and "effectiveness" differently based on their perspectives and priorities about the proper purposes and scope of assistance .

for example , in the current syria case , observers differ over whether a training program should train and equip vetted fighters to offensively attack islamic state forces or pro - asad forces or whether it should focus on enabling syrians to better defend against islamic state or government attacks .

other observers differ over whether u.s. assistance and training , if provided without a guarantee of force protection after the fact , can effectively achieve u.s. objectives .

there are no direct recent analogues to the type of overt and broadly defined "train and equip" program for vetted syrians authorized by congress .

most "train and equip" authorities have been far more limited in scope and funding , and targeted to government security forces .

the train and equip authorities granted in p.l .

113-291 and p.l .

113-235 are unique because , in the view of the obama administration and some in congress , there were no other existing legal authorities that allowed such overt "train and equip" assistance to be provided to non - government actors in syria in the prevailing context .

pre - existing department of defense ( dod ) authorities to provide overt security assistance to u.s. partners abroad required that such assistance be provided on a government - to - government basis .

u.s. sanctions on syria and restrictions on u.s. engagement with terrorist - designated entities fighting in syria also limited the executive branch's ability to provide such assistance .

independent evaluations of some recent u.s. security assistance programs suggest that even when measured against broadly stated purposes and objectives , these types of programs can face significant difficulties in implementation or show questionable results , including the far larger and longer - lasting efforts to train iraq and afghan security forces over the past decade .

programs with some partial similarities in context and content to the syria program include the following: congress debated and imposed limits on the purposes and scope of covert u.s. assistance programs to so - called resistance movements in angola , afghanistan , cambodia , and nicaragua during the 1980s and early 1990s .

while these efforts occurred in similarly complex conflict settings , they were perceived to be part of a global u.s. - soviet confrontation of the cold war .

their relative successes and failures remain the subject of ongoing study and debate .

in 1998 , congress authorized the drawdown of department of defense goods and services for iraqi opposition groups , but did not authorize sustained or direct u.s. training or the transfer of weaponry .

a subsequent department of defense training program for so - called free iraqi forces in early 2003 trained a small number of recruits to facilitate u.s. civil - military operations in iraq .

the sudan peace act ( p.l .

107-245 , october 21 , 2002 ) authorized president george w. bush "to provide increased assistance to the areas of sudan that are not controlled by the government of sudan to prepare the population for peace and democratic governance , including support for civil administration , communications infrastructure , education , health , and agriculture. .

in support of these purposes , the act authorized to be appropriated $100 million in fiscal years 2003 , 2004 , and 2005 "to remain available until expended. .

some recipients of u.s. assistance authorized by the act held both civilian and military leadership positions in the south sudanese opposition .

the u.s. government has provided overt training and equipment to palestinian security forces for strictly defined purposes using foreign affairs authorities and funds , but participants in those programs are members of official palestinian authority security bodies rather than individuals unaffiliated or not currently affiliated with official government institutions .

the obama administration notified congress of a drawdown of up to $25 million in u.s. government goods and services for libyan forces in 2011 , but congress did not act to expressly authorize u.s. military engagement in a "train and equip" program for libyan opposition members .

the provision of overt assistance to non - governmental groups poses particular challenges .

members of congress may wish to consider some of the policy questions that were debated during consideration of these efforts when conducting oversight of the train and equip assistance program for vetted syrians .

in particular , members of congress may wish to consider: the net effects of the introduction of outside arms and training in previous cases on the prospects for conflict settlement , the duration and intensity of violence , u.s. national security goals , and humanitarian conditions ; the potential tradeoffs and dilemmas associated with the pursuit of specific short - term security or counterterrorism objectives alongside longer term political goals and the promotion of human rights and democratic governance ; the relative roles and responsibilities of the department of defense , the department of state , and other u.s. government agencies in carrying out different programs ; the challenges u.s. policymakers have faced in ensuring the reliability and integrity of recipients of u.s. assistance in past cases and the implications of those challenges for efforts to design vetting and oversight measures ; the contributions of past cases to debates about the roles and responsibilities of the executive branch and congress in defining the purposes , terms , scope , and duration of u.s. security assistance abroad ; and , the regional security and global strategic implications of the provision , modulation , and termination of u.s. training and equipment in analogous cases .

debate over the potential provision of support and / or protection to u.s. forces in syria should they come under attack by pro - asad or other forces has raised new questions about u.s. policy and the authorities under which such support or protection might be authorized .

in testimony before the senate foreign relations committee in march 2015 , secretary of defense carter stated that the administration had not made its own legal determination as to whether it believes it has authority to use military force against the syrian government in furtherance of the authorized purposes of the syria train and equip program .

in response to a question from senator bob corker , secretary carter said that he shared the senator's understanding that neither the administration's islamic state aumf proposal nor the 2001 aumf would provide "clear - cut authority" for such a use of force .

the obama administration argues that it already has constitutional and statutory authority for the use of force in iraq and syria for certain purposes ( eg , the president's commander in chief and foreign affairs powers under the constitution , and the 2001 and 2002 authorizations for the use of military force against al qaeda and in iraq , or aumfs ) , but it has committed to engaging congress for additional authorization for the use of force in support of military operations against the islamic state organization in those countries .

the 113 th congress considered some proposals to authorize or restrict the use of military force against the islamic state , and , in early 2015 , the obama administration submitted proposed islamic state aumf language to the 114 th congress for its consideration .

enacted fy2015 legislation relating to the syria train and equip program ( p.l .

113-291 and p.l .

113-235 ) states that nothing in its terms should be construed to constitute a statutory authorization for the introduction of u.s. armed forces into "hostilities" or circumstances that could be considered "hostilities" as defined pursuant to the war powers resolution .

some of the proposed fy2016 defense authorization and appropriations legislation under consideration in congress as of june 2015 would make similar statements relative to syria ( see "statements re: authorization for the use of military force in syria" in table 1 ) .

for further analysis of proposals related to the authorization for the use of military force relative to the islamic state , see crs report r43760 , a new authorization for use of military force against the islamic state: issues and current proposals in brief , by [author name scrubbed] .

the administration requested authority from congress in september 2014 "to provide assistance , including the provision of defense articles and defense services , to appropriately vetted elements of the syrian opposition and other appropriately vetted syrian groups or individuals. .

the enacted fy2015 defense authorization and appropriation acts authorize dod in coordination with the state department to provide "assistance , including training , equipment , supplies , stipends , construction of training and associated facilities , and sustainment , to appropriately vetted elements of the syrian opposition and other appropriately vetted syrian groups and individuals. .

the following table compares the administration's 2014 requests for authority and funding with enacted fy2015 legislation .

