since november 1986 , the commemorative works act ( cwa ) has provided the legal framework for the placement of commemorative works in the district of columbia .

the cwa was enacted to establish a statutory process for ensuring "that future commemorative works in areas administered by the national park service ( nps ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) in the district of columbia and its environs ( 1 ) are appropriately designed , constructed , and located and ( 2 ) reflect a consensus of the lasting significance of the subjects involved. .

since the cwa's enactment , 35 memorials have been authorized for placement in the district of columbia .

this report provides a catalog of the 19 memorials in the district of columbia that have been authorized , completed , and dedicated since the passage of the cwa .

a summary of the work is provided .

the report also provides information — located within text boxes for easy reference — on the statute ( s ) authorizing the work ; the authorized organization ; legislative extensions , if any ; the memorial's location ; and the dedication date .

a picture of each work is also included .

the appendix includes a map showing each memorial's location .

for a further discussion of the placement of memorials in the district of columbia see crs report r41658 , commemorative works in the district of columbia: background and practice , by jacob r. straus and crs report r43744 , monuments and memorials authorized under the commemorative works act in the district of columbia: current development of in - progress and lapsed works , by jacob r. straus .

the cwa divides land under the jurisdiction of the nps and gsa in the district of columbia and its environs into three sections for the placement of memorials: the reserve , area i , and area ii .

for each area , the standards for memorial placement are specified in law , and congressional approval of monument location is required .

property not under the jurisdiction of the nps or gsa is not subject to the cwa .

see figure a - 1 for a map of the commemorative works areas of the district of columbia .

since the passage of the commemorative works act ( cwa ) in 1986 , congress has authorized 35 commemorative works to be placed in the district of columbia or its environs , 19 of which have been completed and dedicated — 16 under the auspices of the cwa and three outside of the cwa process .

the other 16 authorized commemorative works are either in progress or have a lapsed authorization .

table 1 lists the commemorative works authorized and dedicated since 1986 .

since 1986 , 19 commemorative works have been completed within the district of columbia and its environs .

these memorials honored groups of individuals , such as women who have served in the u.s. military ; veterans from world war ii as well as the korean war ; and individuals including george mason , francis scott key , and mahatma gandhi .

for each memorial , a short background and a picture is included .

additionally , a text box is provided that includes information on the authorizing statute ; the sponsor organization ; statutory extensions of the sponsor's authorization , if necessary ; the memorial's location ; and the date of dedication .

since 1986 , three commemorative works have been authorized by congress for placement within the district of columbia , but were either exempted from a portion of the cwa or were ultimately placed outside of the area defined by the act .

the air force memorial was located near the pentagon in arlington , virginia , a plaque to honor vietnam veterans who died as a result of service in the vietnam war was placed at the vietnam memorial , and a plaque to honor senator robert j. dole's contribution to creating the world war ii memorial was placed at the memorial's site .

in december 1993 , congress authorized the air force memorial foundation to establish a memorial to "honor the men and women who have served in the united states air force and its predecessors. .

pursuant to p.l .

107-107 , the air force memorial is located at the arlington naval annex near the pentagon in arlington , virginia .

the united states air force memorial ( figure 17 ) was constructed on land not covered by the commemorative works act and is not managed by the national park service or the general services administration .

in june 2000 , congress authorized the american battle monuments commission to place a plaque at the vietnam veterans memorial "to honor those vietnam veterans who died after their service in the vietnam war , but as a direct result of that service , and whose names are not otherwise eligible for placement on the memorial wall. .

located at the northeast corner of the plaza surrounding the three serviceman statue at the vietnam war memorial , the plaque ( figure 18 ) is in memory of the soldiers who died as a result of their service in the vietnam war , after the war's conclusion .

in october 2009 , in the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act , 2010 , congress authorized the placement of a plaque to honor senator robert j. dole at the world war ii memorial .

the plaque was to "commemorate the extraordinary leadership of senator robert j. dole in making the memorial a reality on the national mall. .

located on the south side of the world war ii memorial , the dole plaque ( figure 19 ) honors the senator for his contributions to the world war ii memorial on the national mall .

 figure a - 1 shows a map with the location of commemorative works authorized and dedicated since 1986 .

