under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 ) there are two principal forms of presidential action to authorize federal supplemental assistance: emergency declarations and major disaster declarations .

emergency declarations are made to protect property and public health and safety and to lessen or avert the threat of a major disaster or catastrophe .

emergency declarations are often made when a threat is recognized ( such as the emergency declarations for hurricane katrina which were made prior to landfall ) and are intended to supplement and coordinate local and state efforts prior to the event such as evacuations and protection of public assets .

in contrast , a major disaster declaration is made as a result of a disaster or catastrophic event and constitutes a broader authority that helps states and local communities , as well as families and individuals , recover from the damage caused by the event .

the differences between the two forms of declarations remain an area of study regarding what events , and specifically what types of incidents may or may not qualify for the respective declarations .

federal disaster assistance has served as the impetus for many supplemental appropriations bills over the last several decades , and has accounted for presidential declarations in every state and territory .

the supplemental funds are placed in the disaster relief fund ( drf ) which is a "no - year" fund managed by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and used only for spending related to presidentially declared disasters .

major disasters can be a dominant story in the mass media that captures attention both for the devastation that results as well as the potential help that is expected .

as one observer noted: disaster assistance is an almost perfect political currency .

it serves humanitarian purposes that only the cynical academic could question .

it is largely funded out of supplemental appropriations and thus does not officially add to the budget deficit .

it promotes the local economy of the area where the building process occurs .

while disaster assistance may be good "political currency," a disaster declaration is generally the result of a tragic and devastating incident that disrupts ( and sometimes takes ) the lives of hundreds or thousands of families and individuals and the communities and states or tribal lands where they reside .

the long - term economic and environmental impact of a disaster can be severe .

the assistance offered from federal and private sources may or may not be commensurate with the damage inflicted by a natural or man - made event .

following a disaster , years of rebuilding and recovery work may lie ahead for communities , tribes , and states .

it is the declaration process that sets the federal recovery help in motion .

the trigger for federal disaster assistance is contained in a relatively short statutory provision .

p.l .

93-288 ( the stafford act ) includes one brief section that establishes the legal requirements for a major disaster declaration which has now been amended to include tribal requests: section 401 .

 ( a ) in general .

procedures for declaration .

all requests for a declaration by the president that a major disaster exists shall be made by the governor of the affected state .

such a request shall be based on a finding that the disaster is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is beyond the capabilities of the state and the affected local governments and that the federal assistance is necessary .

as a part of such request , and as a prerequisite to major disaster assistance under this act , the governor shall take appropriate response action under state law and direct execution of the state's emergency plan .

the governor shall furnish information on the nature and amount of state and local resources which have been or will be committed to alleviating the results of the disaster and shall certify that , for the current disaster , state and local government obligations and expenditures ( of which state commitments must be a significant proportion ) will comply with all applicable cost - sharing requirements of this act .

based on the request of a governor under this section , the president may declare under this act that a major disaster or emergency exists .

 ( b ) indian tribal government requests ( 1 ) in general .

the chief executive of an affected indian tribal government may submit a request for a declaration by the president that a major disaster exists consistent with the requirements of subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) references .

in implementing assistance authorized by the president under this chapter in response to a request of the chief executive of an affected indian tribal government for a major disaster declaration , any reference in this subchapter or subchapter iii ( except sections 5153 and 5165d of this title ) to a state or the governor of a state is deemed to refer to an affected indian tribal government or the chief executive of an affected indian tribal government , as appropriate .

 ( 3 ) savings provision .

nothing in this subsection shall prohibit an indian tribal government from receiving assistance under this subchapter through a declaration made by the president at the request of a state under subsection ( a ) if the president does not make a declaration under this subsection for the same incident .

 ( c ) cost share adjustments for indian tribal governments ( 1 ) in general .

in providing assistance to an indian tribal government under this subchapter , the president may waive or adjust any payment of a non - federal contribution with respect to the assistance if — ( a ) the president has the authority to waive or adjust the payment under another provision of this subchapter ; and ( b ) the president determines that the waiver or adjustment is necessary and appropriate .

 ( 2 ) criteria for making determinations the president shall establish criteria for making determinations under paragraph ( 1 ) ( b ) .

the process for an emergency declaration is also contained in the stafford act .

in part it is similar to a major disaster declaration in finding and process , but the actual authorities are limited .

in addition , section ( b ) provides for a special authority for the president to exercise his discretion for events that have a distinctly federal character: sec .

5191 .

procedure for declaration .

 ( a ) request and declaration .

all requests for a declaration by the president that an emergency exists shall be made by the governor of the affected state .

such a request shall be based on a finding that the situation is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is beyond the capabilities of the state and the affected local governments and that federal assistance is necessary .

as a part of such request , and as a prerequisite to emergency assistance under this chapter , the governor shall take appropriate action under state law and direct execution of the state's emergency plan .

the governor shall furnish information describing the state and local efforts and resources which have been or will be used to alleviate the emergency , and will define the type and extent of federal aid required .

based upon such governor's request , the president may declare that an emergency exists .

 ( b ) certain emergencies involving federal primary responsibility .

the president may exercise any authority vested in him by section 5192 of this title or section 5193 of this title with respect to an emergency when he determines that an emergency exists for which the primary responsibility for response rests with the united states because the emergency involves a subject area for which , under the constitution or laws of the united states , the united states exercises exclusive or preeminent responsibility and authority .

in determining whether or not such an emergency exists , the president shall consult the governor of any affected state , if practicable .

the president's determination may be made without regard to subsection ( a ) of this section .

 ( c ) indian tribal government requests ( 1 ) in general .

the chief executive of an affected indian tribal government may submit a request for a declaration by the president that an emergency exists consistent with the requirements of subsection ( a ) .

 ( 2 ) references .

in implementing assistance authorized by the president under this subchapter in response to a request of the chief executive of an affected indian tribal government for an emergency declaration , any reference in this subchapter or subchapter iii ( except sections 5153 and 5165d of this title ) to a state or the governor of a state is deemed to refer to an affected indian tribal government or the chief executive of an affected indian tribal government , as appropriate .

 ( 3 ) savings provision .

nothing in this subsection shall prohibit an indian tribal government from receiving assistance under this subchapter through a declaration made by the president at the request of a state under subsection ( a ) if the president does not make a declaration under this subsection for the same incident .

the declaration process is elaborated upon in regulations , specifically in subpart b of 44 c.f.r .

206 .

while these regulations have been adjusted through the regulatory process during the past three decades , since 1974 the procedures have undergone little significant change until the inclusion of tribal groups in p.l .

113-2 .

the process itself is representative of the historical progression of federal disaster relief from being of an episodic nature to the current commonplace disaster declaration , now occurring on a weekly basis .

the context in which disaster relief has grown has been in keeping with the growth of government and its concerns .

federal disaster relief has a long history in the u.s. dating back to the last years of the eighteenth century and arguably provided much of the political genesis for the new deal social welfare programs ( landis 1999 ; landis 1998 ; moss 1999 ) .

as michele landis argues , social and political construction of claimants for relief as helpless victims of external forces beyond their control ( "acts of god" ) have exerted an enduring influence on american political discourse , which has manifested itself in heavy reliance on prior political precedents and analogies in constructing responses to current disasters .

policy makers have found it difficult to achieve equity in the treatment of disparate natural disaster events .

the events can vary widely in their type , scope , duration , and impact .

perhaps the greatest variables are the states and tribal groups they affect .

each state or tribe has a different topography , a different history , and different capacities to respond and recover based on their own authorities , resources , and choices in what they will do following a disaster .

given those variations , including social and economic differences as well , it is a daunting task to construct a uniform process that can account for the range of natural and governmental circumstances that are a part of the nation's potential disaster landscape .

the process begins with a decision by the governor or tribal head on whether to conduct a preliminary damage assessment ( pda ) to consider whether a request for supplemental assistance is warranted .

information contained in the pdas , along with the summaries prepared by fema regional offices that accompany gubernatorial requests , were long considered "pre - decisional and deliberative information" by the executive branch because they are part of the package that is developed and sent to the white house for the president's review and ultimate decision .

these materials have generally not been available under the freedom of information act process .

however , during 2008 , at the direction of congress , fema began to list the results of the pdas on its website .

while the summaries of fema recommendations are still not available , the agreed - upon figures from the pdas are now available to the public for review .

the declaration process contains many factors for consideration and , for all but the most catastrophic events , the process moves at a deliberate speed accumulating information from several sources .

while the process is informed by that information and its relationship to potential assistance programs , the information that is gathered at the state and local level does not preclude the exercise of judgment by the tribal leader , governor , or the president .

actions by a governor or tribal leader are a driving constant in this process .

both major disaster and emergency declarations must be triggered by a request to the president from the governor of the affected state or the tribal leader of the lands affected .

the president cannot issue either an emergency or a major disaster declaration without a gubernatorial or tribal request .

the only exception to this rule is the authority given to the president to declare an emergency when "he determines that an emergency exists for which the primary responsibility for response rests with the united states because the emergency involves a subject area for which , under the constitution or laws of the united states , the united states can exercise exclusive or preeminent responsibility and authority. .

the stafford act stipulates several procedural actions a governor or tribal leader must take prior to requesting federal disaster assistance ( including the execution within the state of the state emergency plan and its tribal equivalent , and an agreement to accept cost - share provisions and related information - sharing ) .

still , the process leaves broad discretion with the tribal leader or the governor if he or she determines that a situation is "beyond the capabilities of the state. .

the concession that a state or tribe can no longer respond on its own is difficult to quantify .

it is the governor or tribal leader who makes that assessment , based on his or her knowledge of state or tribal resources and capabilities .

the importance of governors or tribal leaders in the process is not lost on , nor would it likely be diminished by , presidents who were formerly governors .

over the last three decades of stafford act implementation , four of the presidents during this period were former governors who had worked through the disaster declaration process from both the state and the federal level .

also , when considering the declaration process it should also be considered that tribes and state are responding to emergency and disaster events on a daily basis .

figures provided by the national emergency management association ( nema ) show that states responded to 205 gubernatorial emergencies during fy2013 and 250 such events in fy2011 .

those numbers are far in excess of the 62 federal major disaster declarations in 2013 and 99 declarations in 2011 .

having that experience may have left the presidents , and their staffs and appointees , with an appreciation of the discretionary authority inherent in the process .

while there are some established standards in the law , the factors that are to be weighed in considering the impact of a disaster on the need for assistance for families and individuals are general considerations that underscore the judgment required to reach a decision .

as one observer noted of the decision for general , flexible considerations: in other words , congress likes to keep the process imprecise , even if benefits occasionally go to the undeserving .

the absence of objective criteria preserves wide political discretion to the president .

congress also has among its number former governors who have exercised this discretion at the state level .

still , despite the interest some may have in keeping "the process imprecise," some members of congress express disappointment at times with the exercise of the discretion and the general nature of the considerations .

as noted previously in this report , that disappointment has been reflected in hearings that have focused on how the disaster declaration process works in practice .

in the declaration process , fema develops a recommendation that is sent to the white house for action .

however , as implied , it is a recommendation from fema and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the final action , as stated in law and defined in the regulations of the process , is a "presidential determination. .

just as the governor or tribal leader retains the discretion to request federal assistance regardless of thresholds or indicators , the president retains the discretion to make a decision that may be counter to recommendations he receives .

the number of major disaster declarations on average has been increasing over the last several decades .

between 1990 and 1999 there were 460 major disaster declarations .

the next decade , from 2000 to 2009 , the number of declarations increased to 568 .

now , just four years into the next decade there have already been 307 declarations .

it is of interest that even during an era of constant public discussion of climate change and its impact and repercussions , often times the increased number of declarations is attributed to raw politics .

as one expert opined politics appears to make a difference at the margins .

large disasters always receive federal aid , but political interests determine whether smaller states receive federal dollars or have to make due on their own .

for example , in 1994 , bill clinton refused to provide aid for recovery for floods that caused $6.7 million damage on the south side of chicago .

a year later , clinton did provide aid to new orleans , when a flood caused $10 million in damage .

the difference was that illinois was considered a solidly democratic state and therefore not valuable to clinton's re - election efforts , whereas louisiana was deemed a competitive state .

because natural disasters are so frequent , politicians in every part of the country use them to deliver federal aid .

several points are interesting in the assumptions made referenced above .

this assessment of how declarations are made does not include the various factors that are considered for either public assistance or individual assistance .

these factors have been in regulation since 1999 and are discussed in more detail later in this report .

those factors , at base , consider the size and relative capacity of a state and local area .

rather than reviewing regulatory frameworks for disaster recommendations , the default assumption appears to be the primacy of politics .

similar suggestions of political influence have been suggested by others .

two researchers asserted that presidential and congressional influence have an impact on the decisions for declarations and spending .

we find that presidential and congressional influences affect the rate of disaster declaration and allocation of fema disaster expenditures across states .

states politically important to the president have a higher rate of disaster declaration by the president , and disaster expenditures are higher in states having congressional representation on fema oversight committees .

while those findings comported with suspicions or assumptions of political corruption of the disaster declaration process and disaster spending , follow - up studies have questioned those assumptions .

as two other researches have noted: there was no statistical evidence to suggest that gubernatorial and presidential party similarity , u.s. house of representatives and presidential party similarity , fema congressional oversight committee membership , electoral votes , or fema regional office location influenced success in securing emergency or major disaster declarations .

another researcher who has closely followed disaster declaration activity noted the declining rate of turn - downs for governors' requests and concluded: since 1989 , following adoption of the stafford act , the odds that the president will approve a governor's request have risen to about four in five ( 80.3 percent ) chance .

certainly the broader authority to judge what is or is not a disaster under the stafford act has provided presidents since 1988 with more latitude to approve unusual or "marginal" events as disasters or emergencies .

this may be one reason for the higher rate of gubernatorial request approvals since 1988 .

an additional reason for the increase in approvals may also rest with the increasing capacity of states to make effective requests ; states continue to better understand fema's review process , based on regulations in place , and can anticipate what would likely constitute a request that would result in a declaration .

this is in part a testament to the growing maturity and sophistication of the emergency management area as a field of study and profession .

it may also be a reflection of the ongoing relationship between state and tribal emergency management offices and fema regional offices that may provide states and tribes with a better understanding of what may or may not constitute a successful request .

although not explicitly mentioned in the stafford act , preliminary damage assessments ( pdas ) are a crucial part of the process of determining if an event may be declared a major disaster by the president .

the minimal discussion of pdas in the public record stands in inverse proportion to their impact on disaster decisions and subsequent expenditures from the disaster relief fund ( drf ) .

when a pda is conducted after an event it is the "mechanism used to determine the impact and magnitude of damage and the resulting unmet needs of individuals , businesses , the public sector , and the community as a whole. .

the most "preliminary" part of a pda may be an abbreviated one completed only by the state to determine if the situation merits development of a complete pda with federal participation .

based on their previous experience , states may determine that the event will not reach the level where a federal disaster declaration is likely .

however , despite findings that federal aid may not be needed , there may be political considerations that could lead to a gubernatorial request .

as one author points out in his study of the process: governors also feel the heat of media coverage of incidents in their states , and they too appreciate the importance of exhibiting political responsiveness .

governors also appreciate that their future political fortunes may be influenced by how they handle their disaster and emergency incidents .

as a consequence , the hypothesis assumes that governors are the pivotal and decisive players in securing presidential disaster declarations and that they have a tendency to request declarations for even marginal events .

while media and political pressure may have some influence on the outcome of some requests , governors may exercise caution since they are reluctant to be turned down when requesting aid .

though it may be possible , from a denial of assistance , to project on to the federal government a callousness or lack of understanding of the situation there are still negative connotations for governors as well .

a denial of the request could also be perceived by some to reflect adversely on a governor's decision - making skills and judgment under pressure .

unlike the procedures of the federal process , a governor's decision to request a declaration can be a public and often newsworthy action .

regardless of any question regarding motivation , the governor's or tribal officials' first decision is whether the incident is severe enough to assemble a traditional pda team to survey the damaged area .

the traditional pda team includes a state official , representatives from the appropriate fema regional office , a local official familiar with the area , and , in some instances , representatives from the american red cross and / or the small business administration .

the fema representatives have the responsibility of briefing the team on the factors to be considered , the information that will be helpful in the assessment , and how the information should be reported .

one significant improvement in this process is that the regulations now require that the participants reconcile any differences in their findings .

fema also makes available the template that is used in assessing disaster damage .

 ( see the appendix of this report. ) .

another factor is the quality of the pda team and its findings .

pdas are ordered up quickly after an event .

fema's 10 regional offices are often engaged in multiple disasters and have to rely on temporary employees ( albeit , usually experienced ones ) to staff the pda team .

also , given the variables among regions in interpreting policy and guidance , consistency of approach may also be a question .

this became a significant issue during the hurricane season of 2004 in florida , where questions were raised regarding the designations of some counties .

when working openly and with federal and state cooperation , the pda can be an effective and inclusive process .

as former washington state emergency management director jim mullen , and then - fema region x director susan reinertson , explained the process for a survey of flood damage in november of 2006: 'joint pda teams will visit and inspect damaged areas , document damage and talk , as needed , with homeowners and local officials,' said mullen .

'it's a partnership effort designed to provide a clear picture of the extent and locations of damage in counties that have reported the most substantial damage to primary homes and businesses. .

'the pda teams look at the total scope of damage to establish if recovery is beyond the capabilities and resources of the state and local governments .

the pda doesn't determine the total cost of recovery , nor does it guarantee a presidential declaration for individual assistance,' said fema regional director susan reinertson .

pda teams often face challenges in the collection of data .

some information may be observable in a survey of the area , such as the number of bridges damaged or the number of culverts washed out .

but other necessary information , such as the percentage of elderly residents in an area , or the amount of insurance coverage for all homeowners or renters , may be more difficult to obtain quickly .

also , the geographic span of the damage can create complications as the pda team struggles to cover all of the affected area in a limited time .

further complications may then ensue based on how much of the area that the pda teams have visited ( generally counties but other subdivisions may be used ) are included in the governor's or tribal leader's request .

another challenge noted by fema is the tendency of some states to suspend the pda when the state believes they have documented the necessary amount of damage to warrant a declaration .

such a finding may lead to a declaration but also provides an incomplete portrait of the extent of damages and arguably of the types of assistance needed for the response and recovery process .

although pdas are the usual way damages are assessed , there are exceptions to this rule .

some incidents are so massive in their scale and impact that the actual declaration is not in doubt .

this would include events such as hurricanes katrina and sandy , the loma prieta and northridge earthquakes , the mount st. helens volcanic eruption , and the september 11 terrorist attacks .

in these instances , the decision is not whether a declaration will be made , but how broad the coverage will be , both geographic and programmatic .

in such cases the president , in accordance with the regulations , can waive the pda requirement .

but as the regulations note , a pda may still be needed "to determine unmet needs for managerial response purposes. .

this means the pda helps to identify a specific , potential need for certain programs , such as crisis counseling or disaster unemployment assistance during the disaster recovery period .

it is this identification of discrete need that helps the governor decide on which assistance programs will be requested .

the pda is a "bottom up" process as information gradually rises up for decision - makers to consider .

multiple pressure points , including affected citizens , elected officials , and professionals in various fields , may all urge pda team members to reach certain conclusions .

as one author suggests: the president , motivated by the need to appear highly politically responsive , solicits and encourages a gubernatorial request for a presidential disaster declaration .

publicity is a factor in that cnn and other news organizations help to promote nationally what would otherwise be a local incident addressed by subnational authorities .

the president may also be influenced by the electoral importance of the state that experiences the incident .

it is difficult to overstate the importance of the media context as noted above .

depending on the news of the day , the disaster event in question may be the biggest national story and thus create momentum for action that is difficult to assuage with explanations of traditional administrative procedures .

but regardless of the perceptions of political motivation , or intense media scrutiny , there are actual factors listed in regulations for assessing whether a state should receive a major disaster declaration .

public assistance ( pa ) refers to various categories of assistance to state and local governments and non - profit organizations .

principally , pa covers the repairs or replacement of infrastructure ( roads , bridges , public buildings , etc. ) .

but also includes debris removal and emergency protective measures which may cover additional costs for local public safety groups incurred by their actions in responding to the disaster .

in assessing the degree of pa damage , fema considers six general areas: estimated cost of the assistance ; localized impacts ; insurance coverage ; hazard mitigation ; recent multiple disasters ; and programs of other federal assistance .

individual assistance ( ia ) includes various forms of help for families and individuals following a disaster event .

the assistance authorized by the stafford act can include housing assistance , disaster unemployment assistance , crisis counseling , and other programs intended to address the needs of people .

in seeking to assess the impact of a disaster on families and individuals , the factors fema considers include: concentration of damages ; trauma ; special populations ; voluntary agency assistance ; insurance coverage ; and average amount of individual assistance by state .

the sria included specific instructions to fema to update the factors considered for individual assistance .

one significant argument for manda ting such a review of i a factors is that these factors have not been adjusted since they first appeared in regulation in 1999 .

fema is to undertake this review in cooperation with representatives of state , tribal , and local emergency management agencies .

the intent of the section is to speed up the declaration process through this review .

as of this date , fema has noted that it expects to begin the rulemaking process , regarding ia factors , during 2014 .

the disaster declaration process , though subject to inquiry , argument , hearings , studies , and recommendations , has changed very little over time .

it remains a process that can be observed and evaluated as it occurs in the area affected by the disaster , and grows opaque as it moves up through layers of fema and dhs management to the white house .

by making pda information available , fema has begun to lift the veil on the decisions that are made .

congress has demonstrated an interest in this process and has sought to understand its limits and its effectiveness .

"from the government accountability office in 1981 to vice president gore's national performance review in 1994," one student of the process noted , "countless policy critiques have called for more objective criteria for presidential disaster declarations. .

but those calls can be muted when a disaster occurs in a particular place that has particular importance to actors in the process , whether in congress or the executive branch .

while criteria have been established to create a relatively uniform and knowable process , these criteria may not be determinative of the most critical elements considered .

an emphasis on victims of unexpected natural disaster events will likely always have a compelling influence on the disaster declaration process .

but since disaster relief does have a political element , at many levels , precedent arguably can have value in improving the declaration process so that it can be applied broadly and fairly .

but precedent can also be problematic when discussing events of very different size and impact .

during the last congress , attention was directed to the nature of the disaster declaration process .

the 113 th congress has seen legislation introduced that has focused on local impacts over state capacity .

in considering such legislation , congress may choose to engage a broad review of the process that might include the consistency of fema's approach across the nation in making damage assessments , other potential indicators of state capabilities and capacities , and the currency of the factors it employs to evaluate those assessments of disaster damage and the state requests on which they are based .

preliminary damage assessment report ( all of the pda information comes from fema's preliminary damage assessment report to congress , 2013 ) / / / / / / / / / / - / / / incident type / / / fema - / / / / - dr declared month / / , 20 / / on / / / / / / / / / / , governor ( first name , middle initial if applicable , last name / tribal executive title ) requested a major disaster declaration due to / / / / / / / during the period of / / / ( incident date ) or beginning on ( incident date ) , and continuing / / / .

the governor / tribal executive title requested a declaration for / / / ( programs ) for / / / ( number ) counties and / / / / hazard mitigation for the entire state of / / / ( or as it states in the memo / tribe name ) .

during the period of / / / ( date of pda ) / / / / / , joint federal , state ( delete for tribe ) , and local government ( or tribal ) preliminary damage assessments ( pdas ) were conducted in the requested counties / areas ( for tribe ) and are summarized below .

pdas estimate damages immediately after an event and are considered , along with several other factors , in determining whether a disaster is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is beyond the capabilities of the state ( tribe ) and the affected local governments , and that federal assistance is necessary .

on / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / , president obama declared that a major disaster exists in the state of / / / / / / / ( for the tribe name ) .

this declaration made / / / individual assistance if granted / / / / requested by the governor available to affected individuals and households in / / / / / / / / / / / / counties / areas .

this declaration also made / / / public assistance if granted / / / / requested by the governor / tribal executive available to state / the tribe name and eligible local governments / associated lands and certain private nonprofit organizations on a cost - sharing basis for emergency work and the repair or replacement of facilities damaged by the / / incident type / / in / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / counties .

 / / / / if granted / / direct federal assistance was also authorized. / / / finally , this declaration ( or if hm and one other ) / / this declaration also / / made hazard mitigation grant program / / / / if granted / / / / assistance requested by the governor / tribal executive available for hazard mitigation measures / / / statewide or list specific counties / / ( for the tribe name ) .

summary of damage assessment information used in determining whether to declare a major disaster individual assistance - ( not requested ) *delete if requested total number of residences impacted: / / / / / destroyed - / / / major damage - / / / / / minor damage - / / / / / / / / affected - / / / / / / / percentage of insured residences: ( / / / % ) percentage of low income households: ( / / / % ) percentage of elderly households: ( / / / % ) total individual assistance cost estimate:$ / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / public assistance - ( not requested ) *delete if requested primary impact: / / / list primary infrastructure impact / / / total public assistance cost estimate:$ / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / statewide per capita impact: $ / / / / / / / / / ( delete statewide title for tribe ) statewide per capita impact indicator: $1.39 ( delete statewide title for tribe ) countywide per capita impact: / / / / / / / county ( $ / / / / / / ) / / / / / / / / county ( $ / / / / / / ) / / / / / / / / county ( $ / / / / / / ) / / / / / / / / county ( $ / / / / / / ) ( delete for tribe ) countywide per capita impact indicator: $3.50 ( delete for tribe ) .

