congress passed the occupational safety and health act of 1970 ( "osh act" or "act" ) to "assure so far as possible every working man and woman in the nation safe and healthful working conditions and to preserve our human resources …" in the years leading up to the osh act , approximately 14,500 workers died annually from work - related injuries , and the number of americans dying from work - related injuries between 1966 and 1970 exceeded the number of americans killed in the vietnam war during that period .

additionally , work - related injuries disabled approximately 2.2 million americans each year .

congress therefore found existing health and safety standards inadequate at protecting workers and passed the osh act , whereby it sought a "comprehensive , nationwide approach" to occupational health and safety .

the osh act obligated the secretary of labor to protect occupational safety and health as required by the act .

however , the act also created the assistant secretary of labor for occupational safety and health , and thus the occupational safety and health administration ( "osha" ) , to whom the secretary of labor has delegated responsibility for his obligations under the act .

the osh act also created the occupational safety and health review commission ( "oshrc" ) — an adjudicatory agency that is independent of the department of labor and therefore osha — that is tasked with reviewing osha enforcement actions ( i.e. , citations and penalties ) .

the osh act contains express limitations on its applicability .

for example , section 4 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the act provides that the act does not apply "to working conditions of employees with respect to which other federal agencies … exercise statutory authority" over occupational safety and health regulations and standards .

congress apparently intended this language to prevent regulatory inefficiency by precluding osha from duplicating worker safety efforts in areas already regulated by other agencies .

to that end , health and safety regulations of other agencies that apply to a workplace hazard preempt osha's regulations regarding that hazard .

the osh act further expressly limits its applicability by allowing states to control occupational safety and health regulation through state plans .

if osha approves of a state plan , which requires , among other things , that the plan provide health and safety protection that is at least as adequate as the protections provided by osha , then the state plan requirements , and not osha's standards and regulations , will apply .

finally , the osh act applies only to employment performed in u.s. states and territories , generally does not apply to federal , state , or local government employment , and only applies to employers with employees ( i.e. , it does not apply to self - employed people ) .

the osh act contains two primary enforcement provisions , each of which furnishes a unique obligation upon employers .

first , section 5 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the act , the so - called "general duty clause," requires all employers , regardless of industry , to provide workplaces that are free of potentially harmful hazards .

second , the act mandates employer compliance with osha's workplace safety standards , some of which are industry specific .

the general duty clause and osha's workplace safety standards are treated the same for purposes of complaints , inspections , and citations .

that is , employers are equally bound to comply with the general duty clause and applicable osha standards and both are similarly enforced through complaints , inspections , and citations .

osha bears the burden of showing that an employer has violated the general duty clause or an osha standard by a preponderance of the evidence .

additionally , employers cannot be held liable for violations of the general duty clause or an osha standard unless they had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation's existence .

thus , after establishing that an employer has violated the general duty clause or an osha standard by a preponderance of the evidence , osha bears the added burden of proving that the employer did so with actual or constructive knowledge .

the osh act and osha regulations require certain employers to maintain and distribute information .

more specifically , some employers must keep records of workplace injuries and illnesses , some of which they are then required to report to osha .

the osh act and osha regulations further require employers to disseminate certain information to employees via posting requirements .

the osh act grants osha the authority to enter and inspect sites wherein employees perform work for an employer .

the osh act further permits osha to inspect all relevant structures , equipment , and conditions found within such worksites .

however , osha's authority to enter and inspect worksites is limited in two ways .

first , any osha entrance into , and inspection of , a worksite must be "reasonable. .

more specifically , osha can only enter and inspect workplaces at "reasonable times" such as during work hours , "within reasonable limits," and "in a reasonable manner. .

second , the supreme court has held that osha inspections are subject to the fourth amendment , and thus osha needs a warrant to inspect worksites without employer permission .

inspection unreasonableness is an affirmative defense to a citation resulting from that inspection that must be raised and proven by an employer .

to succeed , an employer must point toward unreasonable osha conduct in violation of the osh act .

the employer must also show that osha's unreasonable conduct prejudiced the employer .

the inquiry into whether an osha inspection was unreasonable is factual , varying from case - to - case .

for example , oshrc has found an osha inspection unreasonable when a city building inspector gave an employer 10 days to correct violations of building codes and forwarded the employer's building code violations to osha , which then conducted an inspection before the 10 day correction period expired .

after inspection , osha cited the employer for the same hazards as the city building inspector , which oshrc deemed "inherently unfair and unreasonable. .

if an employer succeeds in establishing that an inspection was unreasonable in violation of the osh act , any evidence obtained through that inspection cannot be used against the employer .

in addition to being limited by the osh act reasonableness restrictions , the supreme court held in sec'y of labor v. barlow's that osha inspections are limited by the fourth amendment , and osha therefore needs a warrant to inspect an employer's worksite over the employer's objections .

in barlow's , when an osha inspector went to the defendant's electrical and plumbing installation business to conduct an inspection , the defendant refused the inspector entry citing his fourth amendment rights .

the court held that the fourth amendment prohibition against unreasonable governmental searches applies to both homes and workplaces .

the court observed that , generally , warrantless governmental searches are presumptively unreasonable under the fourth amendment .

accordingly , despite noting that nothing in the language of the osh act appears to require a warrant or any other process before an osha inspection , osha inspectors generally cannot conduct an inspection without first obtaining a warrant .

however , this warrant requirement does not apply to osha inspections that are conducted with an employer's consent .

if proper authority for an inspection exists ( i.e. , the inspection is reasonable under the osh act and complies with the warrant requirement if the employer objects to inspection ) , osha can conduct both programmed and unprogrammed inspections .

if an inspection shows that an employer has violated the osh act or an osha standard , osha issues the employer citations and , potentially , penalties .

the act prescribes the procedural and substantive requirements for citations and penalties .

the act further provides that penalties vary depending on the type of violation .

after an inspection , osha reviews the report of its inspector to determine whether the inspection uncovered a violation of the osh act or an osha standard .

if , after reviewing the inspection report , osha believes that an employer has violated the osh act or an osha standard , the act requires osha to issue a citation to the employer .

osha must issue this citation "with reasonable promptness" no more than six months after the osh act or osha standard violation .

the osh act requires that citations be in writing , particularly describe the nature of the violation , provide notice of which provision of the osh act or osha standard the employer allegedly violated , and contain an abatement date , or date by which the employer must remedy the violation .

osha may issue a notice of proposed penalty within a reasonable time of an inspection after , or concurrent with , a citation .

osha must send any notice of proposed penalty to an employer by personal service or certified mail .

additionally , a notice of proposed penalty must inform the employer that the proposed penalties will become final unless the employer seeks their appeal within 15 working days of receiving the notification .

under the act , penalties vary depending on the seriousness and type of violation that occurred .

violations fall into one of three levels of seriousness: ( 1 ) serious violations ; ( 2 ) non - serious violations ; and ( 3 ) de minimis violations .

additionally , violations at each level of seriousness can result in increased penalties if the violation is willful , results from a failure to abate harm , or is part of an employer's repeated violation of the act .

employers have 15 working days upon receiving a citation or notice of proposed penalty to notify osha that they intend to contest the notice or citation , which can include protest of the abatement date contained within the citation .

if the employer does not notify osha of his intent to contest the citation or notice of proposed penalty within this 15-working - day window , the citation and notice of proposed penalty are deemed final orders of oshrc and are not subject to agency or judicial review .

employees also have a right to protest , though it is narrower than an employer's right to protest: they can protest only the abatement date of a citation on the basis that the allotted abatement time is unreasonable .

this limited employee right to protest is subject to the same 15-working - day time constraint as employers' right to review .

when an employer or employee notifies osha of its intent to protest a citation or notice of proposed penalty , osha "immediately advise[s]" oshrc of such notification .

oshrc then commences its independent review process .

a protest before oshrc first goes to an oshrc administrative law judge ( alj ) , who hears it .

the alj then issues a written decision .

any party adversely affected by the alj's decision can then petition to oshrc for further review .

additionally , an oshrc commissioner may direct review of an alj's decision on his own motion .

in either circumstance , no party has a right to oshrc review of an alj's decision ; review is discretionary with oshrc .

if oshrc does not order review of an alj's decision within 30 days of the docketing date of the decision , the decision becomes a final order of oshrc .

if oshrc does review an alj's decision , it then issues a final order on the matter .

any person adversely affected by a final oshrc order can seek its appeal in ( 1 ) the u.s. court of appeals wherein the violation allegedly occurred ; ( 2 ) the u.s. court of appeals wherein the employer has its principal office ; or ( 3 ) the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit .

additionally , osha can seek appeal of an oshrc order .

petition for review of an oshrc order , whether by an adversely affected party or osha , must be filed within 60 days of the oshrc order .

filing a petition for review of an oshrc order does not stay the order ; the order remains in effect until a court of appeals vacates it .

on review , the courts of appeal find oshrc's findings of facts conclusive if the facts are supported by substantial evidence .

