the cultivation , distribution , and possession of marijuana are prohibited for any reason other than to engage in federally approved research under the federal controlled substances act of 1970 ( csa ; p.l .

91-513 ) .

yet , 23 states , the district of columbia , and guam have passed legislation or initiatives legalizing qualified sale , possession , manufacture , and distribution of medical marijuana , and 17 states and the district of columbia have decriminalized the possession of marijuana .

in addition , in november 2012 , colorado and washington became the first states to legalize , regulate , and tax small amounts of marijuana for non - medicinal use ( so - called recreational ) by individuals 21 and older .

commercial sales of recreational marijuana became legal in the state of colorado beginning on january 1 , 2014 — the first jurisdiction in the world to do so .

washington's commercial marijuana market opened on july 7 , 2014 .

on november 4 , 2014 , alaska and oregon became the third and fourth states to approve ballot initiatives to legalize , regulate , and tax marijuana for recreational purposes .

that same day , the district columbia approved further measures to legalize the cultivation , possession , and exchange ( but not the commercial sales ) of marijuana .

in addition to state and local movements to decriminalize or legalize the production , sales , or use of marijuana , there has been a general shift in popular sentiment toward marijuana policy .

according to polls conducted by rassmussen , the pew research center , and gallup , a majority of americans favor legalizing marijuana .

the combination of state policies and general sentiment has led to heightened debate over the merits of marijuana legalization at the federal level .

for example , in the 113 th congress , bills have been introduced that would remove marijuana from the list of schedule i drugs prohibited by the controlled substances act and impose a federal excise tax on the production and importation of marijuana .

another bill proposes the establishment of a national commission on federal marijuana policy that would review the potential revenue generated by taxing marijuana , among other things .

overall , the debate concerning marijuana legalization is complex , as it spans across issues ranging from criminal justice to public health and safety .

the revenue - raising potential of a marijuana tax could become a contributing factor in the desirability of legalizing marijuana .

this report focuses solely on one aspect of the economic debate over federal marijuana legalization: imposing an excise tax on legalized marijuana .

first , it provides a brief overview of marijuana production .

second , it presents possible arguments for taxes and , in some cases , estimates the level of tax suggested by that rationale .

third , possible marijuana tax designs are analyzed .

marijuana is a preparation of the plant , c annabis sativa , generally used as a recreational drug or medicine primarily for its psychoactive and physiological effects .

the term marijuana refers to the dried leaves and flowers of the cannabis plant .

the main psychoactive ingredient in marijuana is delta - 9-tetrahydrocannabinol ( thc ) .

thc is the primary cannabinoid responsible for the "high" that users experience when consuming the drug .

still , thc is only one of many "cannabinoid" chemical compounds in marijuana that contribute to the effects of the psychoactive effects of marijuana ( in terms of strength , onset , duration , etc. ) .

consumers could desire different strains of marijuana for the contents of other cannabinoids that do not produce a psychoactive effect .

for example , marijuana strains high in cannabidiol ( cbd ) are often sought to provide relief from anxiety .

depending on its preparation , the potency , or relative concentration , of a particular product derived from marijuana can vary .

the stalks and stems of a marijuana plant have almost no psychoactive content , whereas the leaves and flowers ( buds ) of the plant have increasing concentrations of thc .

the hair - like trichomes on the buds are coated with a translucent resin that contains the highest concentration of thc on the plant .

marijuana plants are also either male or female .

if female plants are grown in controlled environments , separate from pollination of male plants , then the female plants are capable of growing buds that produce more resin .

this process is used to grow sinsemilla ( spanish for without seed ) varieties of marijuana , which typically contain 10% - 18% thc content ( about three times the level of conventional , commercial - grade marijuana derived from pollinated plants ) .

marijuana consumption methods vary .

marijuana is generally consumed by smoking the dried plant matter .

a "joint" is made by rolling marijuana in cigarette paper whereas a "blunt" is made by hollowing some or all of the tobacco from a cigar and replacing it with marijuana .

although smoking habits vary by user , a typical joint contains less than half a gram of marijuana , and each "hit" or drag on the joint contains approximately one - twentieth of a gram of marijuana .

numerous other devices for consuming marijuana exist , ranging from glass pipes to vaporizers ( which heat the chemicals in marijuana , but avoid creating the smoke irritants associated with combustion ) .

cannabis can also be processed into a number of different products , all with their own thc concentration levels and typical methods of consumption .

for example , hashish or "hash" is made by pressing trichomes together into a brick - shaped product with more than 40% thc content .

thc is also capable of being dissolved in fats , oils , and alcohol for use in the creation of "edibles," such as candy or baked goods .

economic analysis as a general rule suggests that excise taxes are less desirable than more general taxes ( such as income or broad based sales taxes ) because they distort prices of different commodities .

this section discusses several possible reasons for imposing an excise tax on marijuana: ( 1 ) reflect external , or spillover , costs to society ; ( 2 ) discourage use , particularly for youth ; ( 3 ) prevent too rapid a fall in price ; ( 4 ) fund related programs ; and ( 5 ) raise revenue .

aside from the general level of the tax , there are a number of design issues for an excise tax discussed in this section .

history suggests that the role of enforcement and administrative efforts could be the difference between a sustainable and unsustainable federal tax regime on marijuana .

the illicit trade and importation of bootleg spirits in the united states continued after prohibition ended in 1934 until cuts in tariff rates on spirit imports were negotiated with trading partners ( thereby lowering the price of legal spirits ) , and until the department of the treasury hired or assigned more than 1,000 agents to work on enforcing alcohol - related laws during the late 1930s .

today , marijuana enforcement efforts would have to deter regular consumers from engaging in illicit transactions with dealers they have presumably built a relationship of trust with in terms of secrecy and product integrity .

additionally , enforcement would have to compel producers to obtain licenses and pay taxes .

without increasing resources for tax - enforcement authorities commensurate with federal - policy change , legalizing and taxing marijuana would likely undermine the long - term viability of any federal tax base .

the uncertainty over many aspects of marijuana creates difficulties in arriving at conclusions about the possible effects of a legalized and taxed marijuana market .

these uncertainties include the post - legalization price of marijuana ( and even the current illicit price ) , the size of the market , and the response of consumers to price changes .

these aspects make the projection of revenues for a particular tax uncertain .

the uncertainty about prices as well as the spillover and health effects of marijuana makes the setting of the level of the tax difficult .

even choosing how to impose the tax is limited by uncertainties as to differential consumer response to potency and price and the compliance costs of taxing for potency .

in terms of revenue - raising potential , it appears that the tax base for legalized marijuana sales is much more limited compared with alcohol or tobacco , at least in the short term .

this outcome is particularly the case if medical marijuana sales are exempt from a federal marijuana tax .

appendix a .

some additional social costs and benefits of marijuana the discussion in the text reported some broader information on the magnitude of the social costs and benefits of marijuana .

this appendix discusses some of the components of those social costs .

relationship between marijuana and alcohol consumption one of the potential determinants of social costs of marijuana legalization is the relationship between marijuana consumption and alcohol consumption .

social costs of alcohol consumption have been well documented in academic studies .

if marijuana is a substitute for alcohol , then arguably marijuana has some positive spillover effects on society because marijuana consumption has fewer social costs than alcohol consumption .

however , if marijuana is consumed with alcohol , then arguably marijuana results in some negative spillover effects on society .

researchers have not reached a consensus on this issue .

many economic studies that measure the relationship between marijuana and other substances ( i.e. , cross - price elasticity of demand ) do not capture long - term effects , could be measuring spurious relationships , or examine individuals who might not be representative of the national population .

marijuana research is highly regulated in the united states .

the national institute on drug abuse , the agency primarily responsible for policy research , has been quoted in media sources that it "does not fund research focused on the potential beneficial medical effects of marijuana. .

additionally , no study captures the effects of commercial and recreational legalization on the scale of colorado or washington because no other jurisdiction in the world has pursued such policies .

this uncertainty surrounding the relationship between alcohol and marijuana use is important because it limits the plausibility that a marijuana tax could be initially levied based on the external costs to society .

for example , marijuana legalization could impose significant external costs or savings on society , even if marijuana consumption has a minor effect on the demand for alcohol due to the relatively large external costs of alcohol consumption .

initiatives at the state levels in colorado and washington could provide researchers with an opportunity to better understand the effects of broader legalization policies .

polydrug use in addition , the social costs of marijuana legalization could vary based on the relationship between the consumption of marijuana and other illicit drugs ( commonly referred to as "polydrug use" ) .

studies indicate that marijuana has a lower risk of addiction and abuse than cocaine , crack , or heroin .

some claim that marijuana is a "gateway drug" to further illicit drug use .

in survey data , about 10% of infrequent marijuana users in the past year report using other illegal drugs whereas the rate for "heavy" marijuana users ( 21-30 days per month ) is slightly more than 25% .

driving under the influence current research on the effects of marijuana use on traffic fatalities is limited by methodological and technological shortcomings .

as noted earlier , some researchers have used controlled experiments to measure the effects of marijuana use on standard driving measurements , such as ability to track driving lanes .

other researchers have studied the extent to which marijuana use has been linked to actual driving fatalities .

among non - alcohol drugs , marijuana is the most frequently detected substance in the general driver population as well as in drivers being involved in crashes .

however , this is not the same as saying that there is a causal link between marijuana use and traffic fatalities .

studies using data from actual crash sites typically measure the driver's blood , urine , or saliva for alcohol and metabolites released by the body in reaction to consumption of various types of drugs ( including marijuana ) .

marijuana testing technology is currently limited in its ability to detect the level of marijuana intoxication at a given time .

in the words of one study , "it is possible for a driver to test positive for cannabinol in the blood up to one week after use .

thus , the prevalence of nonalcoholic drugs ... should be interpreted as an indicator of use , not necessarily a measure of drug impairment. .

for example , more advanced metabolite tests or mouth swabs would need to be developed to distinguish between a positive driving under the influence ( dui ) test of a recent user and a chronic medical marijuana patient that has not been under the psychoactive effects of marijuana .

criminal incarcerations some claim that marijuana legalization could lead to savings in criminal justice spending at the federal , state , and local levels .

some of the estimates cited in media sources have been quite large .

for example , jeffrey miron , a researcher at harvard university , estimated in 2005 that legalizing marijuana would save $7.7 billion per year in total enforcement costs at state and federal levels .

however , subsequent research suggests that estimates could be much smaller .

sevigny and caulkins ( 2004 ) estimated that 8% of state and federal prison inmates serving sentences for drug law violations were marijuana - only offenders .

some prisoners caught trafficking other drugs could have also possessed marijuana , but these individuals would have been incarcerated even if marijuana were legal .

according to the u.s .

sentencing commission , 31.2% of offenders in fy2013 were sentenced to a federal prison for a primary offense related to drugs .

the vast majority of these sentences are for drug trafficking .

of these drug - related offenses , 28.4% of the sentences were related to marijuana ( the highest share among drug - related categories ) .

federal legalization of marijuana would likely not affect federal inmates already serving sentences for marijuana - related charges .

it is unclear how federal legalization of marijuana might impact the future federal prison population .

in state and local jails , drug violations account for about one - fifth of incarcerations and marijuana - only violations account for less than 10% of those charges .

according to these estimates , legalizing marijuana could lead to 2% fewer prisoners in jails over time .

federal legalization would likely not affect state and local inmates already serving sentences for marijuana - related charges , and would not affect future state and local incarcerations in jurisdictions that do not choose to legalize it .

these benefits , large or small , would be related to legalizing marijuana , not taxing it .

if taxes or regulations are so large or onerous that they encourage a continuation of the illicit market , some of these gains would be lost .

marijuana - related crime , violence , and corruption the majority of costs associated with the black market for illicit drugs are related to illegal stimulants and opiates , not marijuana .

this is because the price per pound of these other drugs is typically more than marijuana .

many marijuana exchanges take place indoors among parties ( such as friends and family ) where there is less risk for conflict , whereas many other drug transactions take place outdoors among strangers or in public .

appendix b .

current treatment of the deductibility of expenses for marijuana - related businesses marijuana producers and retailers may not deduct the costs of selling their product ( eg , payroll , rent , and advertising ) for the purposes of the federal tax filings .

the internal revenue code ( irc ) section 280e states that no deduction or credit shall be allowed for any amount paid or incurred during the taxable year in carrying on any trade or business if such trade or business ( or the activities which comprise such trade or business ) consists of trafficking in controlled substances ( within the meaning of schedule i and ii of the controlled substances act ) which is prohibited by federal law or the law of any state in which such trade or business is conducted .

media reports indicate that the internal revenue service ( irs ) has enforced this provision in audits of marijuana - related businesses by refusing to accept these business deductions .

effectively this constitutes an implicit tax on marijuana - related businesses equal to the value of the tax benefit of such deductions if firms engaged in an industry that was legal under federal law .

some businesses have challenged the irs's practices through the courts .

for example , sacramento - based , canna care marijuana dispensary is challenging irs tax penalties of more than $800,000 in a case before the u.s. tax court in san francisco , ca .

media reports indicate that the irs refused to accept $2.6 million in business deductions for employee salaries , rent , and other costs over three years ( although the irs allowed canna care to deduct the cost of the marijuana itself ) .

the discrepancies between federal and state and local tax treatments of marijuana - related businesses create economic incentives to engage in the underground economy .

in addition to the uncertainty of federal tax enforcement procedures ( and costs of any related legal assistance ) , the inability of marijuana businesses to deduct their business expenses is effectively an implicit tax up to 39.6% ( if organized as sole - proprietor or partnership ) or 35% ( if organized as a corporation ) of the cost of these expenses .

these implicit taxes are paid in addition to state and local sales and special excise taxes .

the status quo administration of federal tax laws creates an economic advantage for illicit marijuana sellers , who are not subject to direct taxation of their sales .

in the 113 th congress , the small business tax equity act of 2013 ( h.r .

2240 ) would exempt a business that conducts marijuana sales in compliance with state law from the irc section 280e prohibition against allowing business - related tax credits or deductions for expenditures in connection with trafficking in controlled substances .

appendix c. technical calculations for the estimate of a national marijuana tax base from colorado data an estimate of the total sales volume of a national sales base can be calculated by extrapolating tax collection data from colorado or washington .

data from both states likely underrepresent total demand because licenses for more production and retail businesses are pending .

additionally , it is unknown if the underground market for marijuana significantly declined from the opening of state - licensed stores .

for the purposes of this report , the most recent tax revenue data from colorado are used to calculate an estimate of the state's marijuana tax base ( dollar amount of total sales ) .

the recreational tax base can be calculated using tax collections data from the 10% retail marijuana sales tax or the 2.9% general sales tax ( which provide two measures to derive the total tax base ) , where tax base is equal to tax collections divided by the tax rate .

because each of the two taxes yields slightly different tax bases , the two calculations are averaged to determine a monthly aggregate tax base for recreational sales .

for example , the colorado department of revenue reported that the 10% retail marijuana sales tax collected $2.9 million and the 2.9% sales tax collected $886,915 ( on retail , non - medical marijuana ) in september 2014 .

using the methodology above , this would lead to tax base calculations of $29.4 million and $30.6 million , respectively .

averaging these two numbers leads to an estimate of $30.0 million in recreational marijuana sales in the state of colorado in september 2014 .

the data from colorado can then be extrapolated for each state and the district of columbia to calculate an estimate of the national sales tax base .

the recreational sales tax base averaged from the two data points in colorado can be multiplied by each state's or district's population ( indexed , relative to colorado ) and then multiplied by the marijuana usage rates ( indexed , relative to colorado ) as reported by the national survey of drug use and health ( nsduh ) .

in other words , this simple calculation assumes the primary sources of variation in consumption in each state or district are based on population and usage rates and does not assume major changes in price ( eg , the large - scale production of relatively cheap , unbranded marijuana ; or variations in state tax rates ) that could lead to further supply and demand effects .

using the august 2014 data from colorado , it can be estimated that the national sales tax base for recreational marijuana could be $14.5 billion or $15.4 billion per year .

these estimates could be subject to revision , as recreational tax revenue in colorado has been generally increasing since january 2014 .

a similar process can be used to calculate the medical marijuana tax base in colorado , although there is only one tax levied on medical marijuana in colorado ( the 2.9% general sales tax ) .

based on september 2014 data , medical marijuana sales in colorado were $31.3 million .

from january to september 2014 , monthly medical marijuana sales in colorado have ranged between approximately $31 million and $35 million .

in fy2013 ( ending june 30 , 2013 ) , before the legalization of recreational marijuana , state sales tax collections data from the colorado department of revenue imply an annual medical marijuana tax base of $314.2 million in sales .

it is too early to conclude whether the opening of the recreational marijuana market has affected the demand for medical marijuana in colorado .

however , it is difficult to extrapolate medical marijuana data in colorado to the general u.s. population because of incomplete data in some states .

additionally , the medical marijuana patient data could have a self - selection bias , as some individuals could have been willing to relocate to states permitting medical marijuana use , if they felt that they had few other options to alleviate their condition .

based on colorado's tax collections data , medical marijuana consumption could double marijuana consumption total amounts , if not more .

even if medical marijuana regulations were more tightly enforced , post - legalization , users denied for a medical card could purchase marijuana for recreational purposes .

