legislation aimed at revising the law governing the admission of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers to the united states received attention in both chambers of the 113 th congress .

this workforce is seen by many as a catalyst of u.s. global economic competitiveness and is likewise considered a key element of the legislative options aimed at stimulating economic growth .

the challenge central to the policy debate is facilitating the migration of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers without adversely affecting u.s. workers and u.s. students entering the labor market .

this report provides legislative analyses of the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) , as passed by the senate , and the supplying knowledge - based immigrants and lifting levels of stem visas act ( skills visa act , h.r .

2131 ) , as ordered reported by the house committee on the judiciary .

both bills would substantially revise the law governing the admission of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers to the united states .

the companion report , crs report r43735 , temporary professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers: policy and trends , by [author name scrubbed] , as its name suggests , analyzes the current policy and statistical trends .

currently , there are 24 major nonimmigrant ( i.e. , aliens who the united states admits on a temporary basis ) visa categories , and over 70 specific types of nonimmigrant visas issued .

these visa categories are commonly referred to by the letter and numeral that denote their subsection in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

several visa categories are designated for employment - based temporary admission .

a variety of temporary visas — by their intrinsic nature — allow foreign nationals to be employed in the united states .

over the past two decades , the number of visas issued for temporary employment - based admission has more than doubled from just over 400,000 in fy1994 to over 1 million in fy2013 .

the department of homeland security office of immigration statistics estimated that there were approximately 1.1 million temporary workers and long - term exchange residents living in the united states in january 2012 .

while the data include some unskilled and low - skilled workers as well as accompanying family members , the visas for managerial , skilled , and professional workers dominate the trends .

the admission of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers raises a series of policy options as the united states competes internationally for the most talented workers in the world without putting downward pressures on the wages and working conditions of u.s. workers and u.s. students entering the labor market .

adding to the complexity of the debate is the variety of temporary visa categories that enable employment - based temporary admissions for highly skilled foreign workers .

they perform work that ranges from skilled labor to management and professional positions as well as jobs requiring extraordinary ability in the sciences , arts , education , business , or athletics .

congress has considered several overarching legislative options to reform the system of admitting highly skilled foreign workers , which include the following: streamlining procedures that govern the admission of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers so that the rules are less time consuming and burdensome for employers ; increasing the number of temporary professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers admitted each year ; requiring employers of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers to meet labor markets tests , such as making efforts to recruit u.s. workers and offering wages and benefits that are comparable to similarly employed u.s. workers ; extending labor protections and worker rights to professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers to prevent abuse or exploitation of the worker ; enabling professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers to have "visa portability" so they can change jobs ; and permitting professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers to have "dual intent" ; that is , to apply for lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status while seeking or renewing temporary visas .

in addition to these issues that cross - cut the various temporary employment - based visas , congress has focused in particular on two visa categories: h - 1b visas for professional specialty workers , and l visas for intra - company transferees .

these two nonimmigrant visas epitomize the tensions between the global competition for talent and potential adverse effects on the u.s. workforce .

the 113 th congress has considered legislation that would make extensive revisions to nonimmigrant categories for professional specialty workers ( h - 1b visas ) , intra - company transferees ( l visas ) , and other skilled temporary workers ; and two bills have received action .

they are the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) as passed by the senate , and the supplying knowledge - based immigrants and lifting levels of stem visas act ( skills visa act ; h.r .

2131 ) , as ordered reported by the house committee on the judiciary .

both bills would substantially revise these visa categories , with provisions largely aimed at streamlining procedures , strengthening enforcement , and expanding admissions .

the likelihood of enacting legislation to revise laws on the migration of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers is linked to the competing approaches to immigration reform .

among those who support immigration reform , some favor a package of incremental reform bills and others support one comprehensive immigration reform ( cir ) bill .

while the senate passed a bi - partisan cir bill ( s. 744 ) , the house republican leadership had favored approaching the issues in discreet "chunks" as h.r .

2131 does .

at this point in time , there appears to be a consensus that action on either approach is unlikely .

