under the authorization of the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) , the federal government makes grants to states to support services to improve literacy and other basic skills among adults who are not enrolled in school .

commonly called "adult education," the activities funded by aefla provide educational services to adults at the secondary level and below , as well as english language training .

aefla - supported adult education services are typically provided by local entities .

students include those seeking to develop basic skills , those seeking to obtain a secondary credential , and english language learners of various educational backgrounds .

curricula and other programmatic details vary based on local student needs and objectives .

aefla programs are administered at the federal level by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) through its office of vocational and adult education ( ovae ) .

aefla was originally enacted as title ii of the workforce investment act of 1998 ( wia , p.l .

105-220 ) .

aefla authorized such sums as necessary to carry out its functions from fy1999 through fy20003 .

the general education provisions act ( gepa ) automatically extended aefla authorization through fy2004 .

after this extension expired , the programs authorized by the act continued to be funded through the annual appropriations process .

in july 2014 , aefla was reauthorized as title ii of the workforce innovation and opportunity act of 2014 ( wioa , p.l .

113-128 ) .

wioa authorizes appropriations through fy2020 .

the aefla provisions of wioa are scheduled to be incrementally implemented over the next several years .

this means that , as of this writing , both the federal government and states are operating their adult education programs under the wia provisions of aefla while preparing to implement the wioa provisions .

this report will focus on the wioa provisions of aefla , though it will discuss prior wia provisions as necessary .

note on terminology : both wia and wioa authorized a group of workforce programs .

in each law , title ii was called the adult education and family literacy act .

this report will refer to the prior adult education law as "the aefla provisions of wia" and the 2014 provisions as "the aefla provisions of wioa. .

under the wioa provisions , section 202 of aefla specifies that the purpose of the legislation is to create a partnership between the federal government , states , and localities to provide services to ( 1 ) assist adults to become literate and obtain the knowledge and skills necessary for employment and economic self - sufficiency ; ( 2 ) assist adults who are parents or family members to obtain the education and skills that - ( a ) are necessary to becoming full partners in the educational development of their children ; and ( b ) lead to sustainable improvements in the economic opportunities for their family ; ( 3 ) assist adults in attaining a secondary school diploma and in the transition to postsecondary education and training , including through career pathways ; and ( 4 ) assist immigrants and other individuals who are english language learners in - ( a ) improving their - ( i ) reading , writing , speaking , and comprehension skills in english ; and ( ii ) mathematics skills ; and ( b ) acquiring an understanding of the american system of government , individual freedom , and the responsibilities of citizenship .

these provisions in wioa represent an expansion of the purpose specified in the wia version of aefla .

paragraph ( 3 ) expands the program purpose to include transition to postsecondary education and training .

paragraph ( 4 ) is a new provision in wioa and has no direct counterpart in prior law .

wioa also amended the definition of "adult education" in statute to reflect an increased emphasis on the relationship between aefla - funded services and subsequent transitions to postsecondary education and employment .

under wioa , adult education is defined as: [a]cademic instruction and education services below the postsecondary level that increase an individual's ability to — ( a ) read , write , and speak in english and perform mathematics or other activities necessary for the attainment of a secondary school diploma or its recognized equivalent ; ( b ) transition to postsecondary education and training ; and ( c ) obtain employment .

under wia , the definition of adult education did not include employment or postsecondary education , though other provisions of the bill did mention these outcomes .

under the aefla provisions of wioa , sections 211 and 221 reserve or limit funds for specific purposes or activities .

the collective effects of these provisions , as specified in statute , are summarized below .

total appropriation reservation for national leadership activities ( 2% of total appropriation ) unreserved funds ( 98% of total appropriation ) english literacy and civics education state grants ( 12% of unreserved funds ) adult education state grant funds ( 88% of unreserved funds ) subgrants to local providers ( at least 82.5% of adult education state grant funds ) state leadership activities ( up to 12.5% of adult education state grant funds ) administrative costs ( up to 5% of adult education state grant ) as noted in table 1 , the aefla provisions of wioa repealed two reservations that were enacted in the aefla provisions of wia .

under the aefla provisions of both wia and wioa , statute specifies that the state grant funds that are allotted to the states are the funds that remain after the statutory reservations .

as such , the repeals of two "off - the - top" reservations have the practical effect of increasing the portion of the aefla appropriation that is allotted to the states .

under the aefla provisions of wioa , the 98% of the annual aefla appropriation that is not reserved for national leadership activities is granted to the states via two formula grants .

of the formula grant funds , 12% are reserved for english literacy and civics education state grants ( el - civics ) and allotted to the states via formula .

 ( see the " english literacy and civics education state grants " section later in this report. ) .

the remaining 88% of the unreserved funds is allocated to adult education state grants and allotted to the states using a second formula .

under wioa , 2% of aefla appropriations are reserved for national leadership activities ( nla ) .

section 242 of wioa describes nla as "activities to enhance the quality and outcomes of adult education and literacy activities and program nationwide. .

statute establishes four required activities: providing assistance to help states meet the performance accountability requirements in section 116 of wioa ; upon request by a state , providing assistance to local providers in using performance accountability measures and data systems for the improvement of adult education activities ; carrying out research on and evaluation of adult education activities and estimating the number of adults functioning at the lowest levels of literacy proficiency , which shall be coordinated across relevant federal agencies , including the institute for education sciences ; and carrying out an independent evaluation of the programs and activities under aefla at least once every four years .

statute also specifies a group of allowable activities under nla .

these include using nla funds for technical assistance to states and local providers as well as supporting activities to identify best practices , support networks of providers , increase program effectiveness , and evaluate programs .

appendix a. aefla funding , fy2000-fy2014 under the workforce investment act appendix b .

estimated allotments of state grant funds , fy201 .

