the hundreds of iraqi interpreters who work for the u.s. military conceal their identities in distinctive ways .

one wears a bulletproof kevlar helmet and a black mask .

another wears sunglasses and a balaclava that covers his entire head .

what they share is the extraordinary danger of their job .

targeted for death by insurgents , they also face suspicion from their employers and often lie to relatives for fear that word of their job will get out .

this excerpt from a january 2006 article in a michigan newspaper suggests the dangerous work that iraqi interpreters and translators performed in support of the u.s. war effort .

other sources similarly document the work performed by afghan interpreters and translators and the danger they face .

for example , a former afghan interpreter for the u.s. military , profiled in a january 2017 article , said that it was too dangerous for him to return from the afghan capital to his native province because of the taliban .

according to the interpreter: [taliban] will stop the car and block the road , and say , 'come here , i need you , bro' … then hang me or shoot me .

in january 2006 , the 109 th congress enacted the first in a series of legislative provisions to enable certain iraqi and afghan nationals to become u.s. lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) based on their service to the u.s. government .

section 1059 of the fy2006 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) made certain iraqi and afghan nationals who had worked directly with u.s. armed forces as translators eligible for special immigrant visas ( sivs ) .

special immigrants comprise a category of permanent employment - based admissions under the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .

upon admission to the united states , holders of sivs are granted lpr status .

a house judiciary committee report on a related bill in the 109 th congress to provide special immigrant status for iraqi and afghan translators ( h.r .

2293 ) described the need for the legislation , as follows: a number of alien translators currently working in iraq and afghanistan embedded with units of the u.s. armed forces are providing extremely valuable services .

their cooperation and close identification with the u.s. military have put these individuals and their families in danger .

this danger will only escalate after u.s. forces leave or reduce their strength in iraq and afghanistan .

congress subsequently broadened the special immigrant classification for translators and also authorized a second special immigrant classification for certain iraqi and afghan nationals who had worked for , or on behalf of , the u.s. government in iraq or afghanistan , respectively .

this report analyzes the siv classifications for iraqis and afghans within the context of both the larger ina special immigrant category and selected other permanent admissions categories .

it discusses the legislative changes to the individual iraqi and afghan special immigrant programs since their initial authorization , provides statistics on visa issuances , and considers challenges that have faced the programs .

the term special immigrant is defined in section 101 ( a ) ( 27 ) of the ina .

the definition consists of an enumeration of classifications eligible for this category , such as lprs who are returning from a temporary stay abroad .

most special immigrant classifications are subject to an annual numerical limitation .

the special immigrant category was added to the ina by a 1965 immigration law , known as the 1965 amendments .

the ina , as originally enacted in 1952 , included a predecessor category of nonquota immigrants , immigrants who could be admitted to the united states without regard to numerical limitations .

in the 1952 act , these nonquota immigrants included returning lprs , natives of western hemisphere countries , ministers of religion , and long - serving employees of the u.s. government abroad , among other groups .

the 1965 amendments to the ina redesignated the nonquota immigrants as special immigrants and made some changes to the various classifications .

the immigration act of 1990 further amended the special immigrant provisions in the ina .

it placed the special immigrant category under a revised ina section on permanent employment - based immigration and imposed an overall annual numerical limitation of 10,000 on special immigrants , with exemptions for certain classifications .

in addition , the 1990 act amended the existing special immigrant classifications and added several new ones .

a 1991 immigration act changed the overall annual limitation on special immigrants from 10,000 to 7.1% of the worldwide level of employment - based immigration .

subsequent laws added new special immigrant classifications .

today the special immigrant category encompasses a hodgepodge of classifications , but there are some commonalities among the seemingly disparate groups .

many of the classifications , for example , have a humanitarian element .

in another commonality , some of the classifications are directed at individuals in certain fields of work that have a public service component .

these include classifications for religious workers , graduates of foreign medical schools licensed to practice medicine in the united states , and international broadcasters .

particularly relevant for this report are special immigrant classifications that apply to individuals who have worked for the u.s. government .

these include classifications for 15-year employees or former employees of the u.s. government abroad ; nationals of panama who are 15-year employees or former employees of the u.s. government in the former canal zone ; and individuals who , after lawful enlistment abroad , have served or will serve on active duty in the u.s. armed forces for 12 years .

some of the classifications based on u.s. government employment apply to individuals who are placed in danger because of their work .

for example , there is a special immigrant classification for individuals who were employees of the panama canal company or canal zone government on april 1 , 1979 , who provided faithful service for at least five years , and "whose personal safety , or the personal safety of whose spouse or children , as a direct result of such treaty , is reasonably placed in danger because of the special nature of any of that employment. .

as discussed in the next section , the two special immigrant classifications for iraqis and afghans similarly apply to individuals who performed u.s. government - related service , with one requiring the presence of a serious threat to the individual as a result of that u.s. government employment .

there are two special immigrant classifications specifically for nationals of iraq and afghanistan: one for individuals who worked as translators or interpreters and one for individuals who were employed by , or on behalf of , the u.s. government in iraq or by , or on behalf of , the u.s. government or by the international security assistance force in afghanistan .

these classifications , in their current form , are the product of a series of legislative enactments , which initially established the classifications and then amended them ( see table 1 for a comparison of the main features of the programs within these classifications ) .

a prospective iraqi or afghan special immigrant must submit a petition for classification ; be otherwis e eligible to receive an immigrant visa ; and be otherwise admissible to the united states , as specified .

regarding this last requirement , in order to gain admission to the united states , an individual must be admissible under the ina .

the ina sets forth various grounds of inadmissibility , which include health - related grounds , security - related grounds , and public charge ( i.e. , indigence ) .

the public charge ground does not apply to applicants under the special immigrant programs for iraqis and afghans ; thus , these applicants are not required to demonstrate economic self - sufficiency .

the process of applying for an iraqi or afghan special immigrant visa has multiple steps .

the application process described in this section is for iraqis and afghans who are abroad , who represent the vast majority of applicants .

 ( an applicant in the united states whose petition for classification as a special immigrant is approved under the process described below could then submit an application to adjust status along with supporting documentation ; applicants in the united states do not go through the visa process. ) .

the first step under the programs for iraqis and afghans who worked for or on behalf of the united states is to apply for chief of mission approval .

to apply , the principal applicant must submit documentation to the department of state ( dos ) , including , among other required information , a letter from the applicant's employer confirming employment ; a letter of recommendation from the applicant's direct u.s. citizen supervisor ; and a statement from the applicant describing the threats he or she received as a result of his or her u.s. government employment .

if approval is granted , the applicant receives a chief of mission approval letter .

the next step for applicants under the special immigrant programs for iraqis and afghans who worked for , or on behalf of , the united states — and the first step for applicants under the program for translators and interpreters — is to file a petition with the department of homeland security's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( dhs / uscis ) along with accompanying documents .

in the case of the program for those who worked for , or on behalf of , the united states , the required documents include copies of the chief of mission approval letter and of the letter of recommendation from the direct supervisor .

in the case of the program for translators or interpreters , the required documents include evidence of qualifying employment , a letter of recommendation from the chief of mission or a general or flag officer in the relevant u.s. armed forces unit , and evidence of a background check and screening by the chief of mission or the u.s. armed forces .

a petition for classification as an iraqi or afghan special immigrant that is approved by uscis is forwarded to dos's national visa center ( nvc ) , which contacts the applicant to advise him or her to begin collecting required documents .

the applicant must submit forms and documents for all family members applying for visas to the nvc .

in addition to the immigrant visa application , these materials include copies of passport biodata pages , birth certificates , and civil documents ; police certificates , if applicable ; and a refugee benefits election form , indicating whether the applicant , if approved to receive a special immigrant visa , would like to participate in dos's reception and placement program and receive associated benefits ( see " resettlement assistance and federal public benefits " ) .

the nvc schedules an in - person visa interview for the principal applicant and any family members at a u.s. embassy or consulate abroad .

the interview is required to determine eligibility for a visa .

applicants' fingerprints are taken at the time of the interview .

applicants are also required to have a medical examination at their own cost .

after the interview , the consular office informs the applicant about any missing documentation and about any problems with the case that may prevent issuance of a visa .

many cases require additional "administrative processing" after the interview .

applicants who are issued visas and who have elected to participate in dos's resettlement program must have their travel to the united states arranged by the international organization for migration .

visa recipients who have elected not to participate in dos's resettlement program are responsible for making their own travel arrangements .

upon admission to the united states , siv recipients obtain lpr status .

special immigrant classifications have been established to provide for the permanent admission to the united states of specific populations .

as noted , special immigrants comprise a subcategory of permanent employment - based immigrants in the ina , although they are not , in fact , admitted for employment purposes .

while the special immigrant category is unique , it does bear similarities to other admission categories that are authorized by other sections of the ina .

through the end of fy2018 , more than 79,000 individuals had been issued special immigrant visas abroad , or been adjusted to lpr status in the united states , under the special immigrant classifications for iraqi and afghan nationals .

principal applicants accounted for about 26,000 of the total ; dependent spouses and children accounted for the remaining 53,000 .

table 2 provides data on the special immigrant classification for iraqi and afghan translators and interpreters .

table 3 provides data on the special immigrant classification for iraqis and afghans who were employed by , or on behalf of , the u.s. government in iraq or afghanistan , respectively .

as shown in table 3 and as discussed in the next section , there was a significant drop in visa issuances from fy2017 to fy2018 .

the tables are mutually exclusive ; an individual appears in only one table .

 ( the appendix contains separate tables for iraqis and afghans for each special immigrant classification. ) .

there is a fundamental tension in the administration of the iraqi and afghan siv programs between a sense of urgency to issue visas in a timely fashion to eligible individuals and a need to conduct appropriate security screening .

this tension is quite sharp because on the one hand these programs are aimed at individuals who assisted the united states and face danger because of it , and on the other hand there are serious concerns that this population may pose security threats .

overlaying this dynamic is the structure of the siv programs themselves , with statutory timeframes and numerical limitations .

there seems to be broad agreement that the united states should admit for permanent residence iraqis and afghans who assisted the u.s. government overseas , provided that they do not pose security risks .

yet implementing the siv programs intended to accomplish this policy goal has proven difficult .

given the seeming consensus that the u.s. government should assist its iraqi and afghan employees in need , an ongoing question for congress is whether the existing siv provisions are sufficient to accomplish this , or whether further extensions of the temporary siv programs for iraqis and afghans who worked for , or on behalf of , the u.s. government , or other changes to the siv provisions are warranted .

iraqi and afghan translators and interpreters table 2 in the main body of the report provides data on visa issuances to iraqis and afghans ( combined ) under the special immigrant program for translators and interpreters .

the tables here present visa issuance data under this program for iraqis and afghans separately .

table a - 1 provides data on iraqi nationals who were issued special immigrant visas , or who adjusted to lpr status in the united states , under the special immigrant program for translators and interpreters .

table a - 2 provides comparable data for afghan nationals .

both table a - 1 and table a - 2 exclude certain dependents that are included in table 2 .

these are dependents ( 27 in total ) who received a special immigrant visa or adjusted status under the translator / interpreter program and are iraqi or afghan nationals but were born in a third country .

these 27 dependents account for the discrepancy between these tables and table 2 .

the significant decreases in table a - 1 and table a - 2 after fy2008 reflect changes in the numerical limitations on this classification ( see " aliens who worked as translators or interpreters " ) .

iraqis and afghans who worked for the u.s. government table 3 in the main body of the report provides data on visa issuances to iraqis and afghans ( combined ) under the special immigrant programs for iraqis and afghans who worked for the u.s. government .

the tables here present visa issuance data under these programs for iraqis and afghans separately .

table a - 3 provides data on iraqi nationals who were issued special immigrant visas , or who adjusted to lpr status in the united states , under the special immigrant program for iraqis who were employed in iraq by , or on behalf of , the u.s. government .

table a - 4 provides comparable data for afghan nationals under the special immigrant program for afghans who were employed in afghanistan by , or on behalf of , the u.s. government or by the international security assistance force .

both table a - 3 and table a - 4 exclude certain dependents that are included in table 3 .

these are dependents ( 477 in total ) who received a special immigrant visa or adjusted status under these programs and are iraqi or afghan nationals but were born in a third country .

these 477 dependents account for the discrepancy between these tables and table 3 .

