the defense production act of 1950 , as amended ( dpa ) , provides the president a broad set of authorities to ensure that domestic industry can meet national defense requirements .

in the dpa , congress has found that "the security of the united states is dependent on the ability of the domestic industrial base to supply materials and services for the national defense and to prepare for and respond to military conflicts , natural or man - caused disasters , or acts of terrorism within the united states. .

through the dpa , the president can , among other activities , prioritize government contracts for goods and services over competing customers , and offer incentives within the domestic market to enhance the production and supply of critical materials and technologies when necessary for national defense .

since 1950 , the dpa has been reauthorized over 50 times by congress , most recently in 2018 ( sec .

791 of p.l .

115-232 ) .

the majority of dpa authorities will expire on september 30 , 2025 , unless reauthorized .

this report examines some of the extensive history of the dpa , focusing primarily on its creation and most recent legislative reauthorization .

this report also discusses the foremost active authorities of the dpa .

nevertheless , this report is not intended to evaluate all authorities of the dpa comprehensively .

for example , though significant authorities for the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) are included in the dpa , cfius is generally considered separate and distinct from the dpa and this report defers to other crs reports for in - depth discussion on that issue .

this report also identifies relevant delegations of the president's dpa authorities made in executive order ( e.o. ) .

13603 , national defense resources preparedness .

finally , this report provides a brief overview of issues congress may consider in its oversight of executive branch use of dpa authorities , as well as the implementation of changes made in the most recent reauthorization .

the report also discusses congressional considerations for expanding , restricting , or otherwise modifying the authorities provided by the dpa through new legislation .

as appendices to this report , several supplementary tables provide: additional resources related to various dpa subjects ; a tabled analysis of key provisions of the dpa and related portions of e.o .

13603 and in regulations ; the delegation of title i priorities and allocations authority to cabinet secretaries in e.o .

13603 ; and a chronology of laws reauthorizing dpa authorities since first enactment .

there is also an appendix discussing how dpa authorities changed as a result of the last major reauthorization of the law that included reforms ( p.l .

113-172 , to reauthorize the defense production act , to improve the defense production act committee , and for other purposes ) .

this section provides summaries of the major authorities granted to the president in the three remaining active titles of the dpa .

each summary describes how the dpa authorities are delegated to cabinet officials or other offices of the u.s. government in the issued executive order ( e.o. ) .

13603 , national defense resource preparedness .

it is not intended to comprehensively evaluate all authorities in the dpa .

the information provided below is reviewed in table a - 2 for select provisions of the dpa .

table a - 1 also provides a list of additional materials , information , and resources on various topics of the dpa that may be of use to congress .

congress may consider whether to add more extensive notification and reporting requirements on the use of all or specific authorities in the dpa .

these reporting or notification requirements could be added to the existing law , or could be included in conference or committee reports accompanying germane legislation , such as appropriations bills or the national defense authorization act .

additional reporting or notification requirements could involve formal notification of congress prior to or after the use of certain authorities under specific circumstances .

for example , congress may consider whether to require the president to notify congress ( or the oversight committees ) when the priorities and allocations authority is used on a contract valued above a threshold dollar amount .

congress might also consider expanding the existing reporting requirements of the dpac , to include semi - annual updates on the recent use of authorities or explanations about controversial determinations made by the president .

existing requirements could also be expanded from notifying / reporting to the committees of jurisdiction to the congress as a whole , or to include other interested committees , such as the house and senate armed services committees .

congress may consider reviewing the agencies' compliance with existing rulemaking requirements .

a rulemaking requirement exists for the voluntary agreement authority in title vii that has been completed by dhs , but it has not been updated since 1981 and may be in need of an update given changes to the authority and government reorganizations since that date .

one of the agencies responsible for issuing a rulemaking on the use of title i authorities has yet to do so .

congress may also consider potentially expanding regulatory requirements for other authorities included in the dpa .

for example , congress may consider whether the president should promulgate rules establishing standards and procedures for the use of all or certain title iii authorities .

in addition to formalizing the executive branch's policies and procedures for using dpa authorities , these regulations could also serve an important function by offering an opportunity for private citizens and industry to comment on and understand the impact of dpa authorities on their personal interests .

since its enactment , the house committee on financial services , the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , and their predecessors have exercised legislative oversight of the defense production act .

the statutory authorities granted in the various titles have been vested in the president , who has delegated some of these authorities to various agency officials through e.o .

13603 .

as an example of the scope of delegations , the membership of the defense production act committee ( dpac ) , created in 2009 and amended in 2014 , includes the secretaries of agriculture , commerce , defense , energy , labor , health and human services , homeland security , the interior , transportation , the treasury , and state ; the attorney general ; the administrators of the national aeronautics and space administration and of general services , the chair of the council of economic advisers ; and the directors of the central intelligence agency and national intelligence .

in order to complement existing oversight , given the number of agencies that currently use or could potentially use the array of dpa authorities to support national defense missions , congress may consider reestablishing a select committee with a purpose similar to the former joint committee on defense production .

as an alternative to the creation of a new committee , congress may consider formally broadening dpa oversight responsibilities to include all relevant standing committees when developing its committee oversight plan .

should dpa oversight be broadened , congress might consider ways to enhance inter - committee communication and coordination of its related activities .

this coordination could include periodic meetings to prepare for oversight hearings or ensuring that dpa - related communications from agencies are shared appropriately .

finally , because the dpa was enacted at a time when the organization and rules of both chambers were markedly different to current practice , congress may consider the joint referral of proposed dpa - related legislation to the appropriate oversight committees .

while the act in its current form may remain in force until september 30 , 2025 , the legislature could amend the dpa at any time to extend , expand , restrict , or otherwise clarify the powers it grants to the president .

for example , congress could eliminate certain authorities altogether .

likewise , congress could expand the dpa to include new authorities to address novel threats to the national defense .

for example , congress may consider creating new authorities to address specific concerns relating to production and security of emerging technologies necessary for the national defense .

the "declaration of policy" in the dpa describes the general intentions of congress in granting the authorities conferred on the president .

congress may amend this section of the statute in order to expand , restrict , or clarify the overall purpose of the authorities .

for instance , given the wide variety of circumstances in which dpa authorities have been employed , congress could include an expanded discussion of the specific conditions in which it would find dpa authorities appropriate for use by the president .

though this section serves as a guide for the overall use of dpa authorities , changes to the declaration of policy may not fully endow or deny the president's authorities covered in the titles of the dpa without also amending the dpa's other provisions .

congress may amend the definitions of key terms found in the dpa to shape the scope and use of the authorities , especially the definition of national defense .

as an example , congress could amend the definition of national defense to remove space from the definition , thus weakening the president's ability to support space - related projects through the use of dpa authorities .

on the other hand , for example , congress could amend the definition of national defense to specifically include counter - narcotics , cybersecurity , or organized crime .

doing so would more explicitly enable the use of dpa authorities to address these homeland security and national defense concerns .

congress may consider limiting the use of certain dpa authorities to specific agencies .

to do so , congress could amend the president's delegation of dpa authorities , superseding those made in e.o .

13603 , by amending the statute to assign specific authorities to individual cabinet secretaries rather than the president .

further , congress could expand the use of the legislative clause "on a nondelegable basis" to ensure that the authority is not delegated beyond the person identified in the statute .

in considering these options , congress may determine that the use of some authorities by certain agencies is appropriate and necessary for the national defense , but not for others .

congress could adjust future appropriations to the dpa fund in order to manage the scope of title iii projects initiated by the president ( see table 1 for appropriations to the dpa fund since fy2010 ) .

the use of the dpa fund , however , is specific to title iii .

therefore , adjusting appropriations to the dpa fund is unlikely to have an effect on the president's ability to exercise authorities under the other titles of the dpa , unless congress drafts legislation changing the nature of the fund itself or authorizing its use beyond a specific title .

congress may also reintroduce a separate provision in section 711 of the dpa authorizing only certain appropriation amounts over a given time period for title iii or other dpa authorities .

likewise , congress may direct the use of such funds more specifically , such as has been done in relation to past title iii projects .

congress may also consider including specific restrictions or reporting requirements related to the dpa in the appropriations made to other accounts that could be used to pay for title i activities , such as the disaster relief fund managed by fema .

