the pacific alliance is a regional integration initiative comprised of chile , colombia , mexico , and peru .

costa rica and panama are candidates for becoming full members .

the alliance was created on april 28 , 2011 , in lima , peru , when the heads of state of chile , colombia , mexico , and peru signed a presidential declaration for the pacific alliance , now known as the lima declaration , to facilitate the free flow of goods , services , capital , and people .

the united states officially joined the alliance as an observer on july 18 , 2013 .

the project was an initiative of then - peruvian president alan garcia , who extended the invitation to his counterparts in chile , colombia , and mexico , with the purpose of deepening the integration of these economies .

the initiative was developed as a way to supplement existing trade agreements among the four countries .

the goal is for the four countries to act as a unified economic bloc to negotiate and trade with other countries .

the alliance is making efforts to liberalize trade in goods and services , open foreign investment , integrate securities markets , and allow the free movement of people among member countries .

it has shared values in regard to the respect for rule of law , democracy , and protection of human rights , though the current focus is on liberalizing and increasing trade and investment .

member governments have committed to open markets , free trade policies , fiscal stability , openness to foreign investment , and strengthening trade relations with the asia - pacific region .

pacific alliance members are aiming to form deeper integration that boosts economic growth , development , and competitiveness of their economies by progressively seeking free movement of goods , services , capital , and people .

another key goal is for the alliance to become a platform for economic and trade integration with a clear focus on the asia - pacific region .

the stated objectives of the pacific alliance consist of the following: build , in a participatory and consensual manner , an area of deep economic integration and to move gradually toward the free circulation of goods , services , capital , and people .

promote the growth , development and competitiveness of the parties' economies , aiming at achieving greater welfare , overcoming socioeconomic inequalities , and achieving greater social inclusion of their residents .

become a platform for political articulation , and economic and trade integration , while projecting these strengths to the rest of the world , particularly the asia - pacific region .

the alliance was formally established in a framework agreement on june 6 , 2012 , during a presidential summit in antofagasta , chile .

this agreement is the legal instrument that creates the institutional basis of the regional integration initiative .

it also defines the objectives of the alliance and establishes the requirements for the future participation of other countries .

the four members already have in place bilateral free trade agreements amongst each other and have agreed to coordinate efforts regarding development agencies , electronic trade , services , and tourism .

the pacific alliance is the first major trade integration effort in the region since the creation of the southern common market ( mercosur ) over 20 years ago .

the framework agreement contains the parameters , institutional architecture , and rules that govern the alliance .

it establishes certain requirements for a country to be a member of the alliance .

these requirements state that alliance members must be democracies ; practice the separation of the powers of state ; and protect , promote , and guarantee human rights and fundamental liberties .

a key requirement is that member countries must have existing bilateral trade agreements with all other member countries .

leaders of the member countries of the pacific alliance have held numerous presidential summits .

these include the following: 1 .

lima , peru , april 28 , 2011 .

the heads of state of chile , colombia , mexico , and peru agreed on the declaration of lima establishing the pacific alliance with the goal of advancing towards the free flow of goods , service , capital , and people .

panama was invited to participate in the process as an observer .

2 .

merida , mexico , december 4 , 2011 .

the presidents of the four pacific alliance countries agreed to sign a pacific alliance treaty within six months .

3 .

cartagena , colombia , march 15 , 2012 ( vía teleconference ) .

during this conference , costa rica was included as an observer .

4 .

antofagasta , chile , june 6 , 2012 .

the four countries formally entered into a framework agreement establishing the pacific alliance .

the framework agreement is a legal instrument creating the institutional basis of the initiative , defining its objectives , and establishing the requirements for future negotiations and participation of other countries in the region .

5 .

cádiz , spain , november 17 , 2012 .

mexico announced the exemption of visa requirements for colombians and peruvians for up to 180 days .

australia , canada , spain , new zealand and uruguay were welcomed as observers .

6 .

santiago , chile , january 26 , 2013 .

the four heads of state agreed that the negotiations that were underway at the time would be concluded by june 30 , 2013 .

7 .

cali , colombia , may 23 , 2013 .

the four countries invited costa rica to become the alliance's first new member .

the alliance also announced an agreement to remove tariffs on 90% of the goods traded within the bloc and completed negotiations on trade facilitation and customs cooperation provisions .

over 450 business representatives from 14 countries attended the summit .

8 .

cartagena , colombia , february 10 , 2014 .

presidents of pacific alliance countries signed the additional protocol of the framework agreement for the pacific alliance .

the additional protocol immediately eliminated 92% of tariffs between members , and gradually will phase out the remaining 8% of tariffs over a seven - year period .

9 .

punta mita , mexico , june 19 - 20 , 2014 .

the four presidents signed the declaration of punta mita , by which they seek to strengthen the objectives and guidelines of the alliance , including the free movement of goods and services , capital and people .

they announced the approval to incorporate the mexican stock exchange into the common stock exchange , the latin american integrated market , or the mercado integrado latinoamericano ( mila ) , which is expected in the fourth quarter of 2014 .

other highlights of the summit included the signing of an inter - institutional agreement for a work and holiday program , the launch of a scholarship program , and the announcement of a plan for promoting small businesses through financing , investment , and support networks .

two new countries were admitted as observers: belgium and trinidad and tobago .

10 .

paracas , peru , july 1-3 , 2015 .

mexico handed over the pro tempore presidency of the pacific alliance to peru .

the four presidents reaffirmed their commitment to the principles included in the framework agreement and to continuing their cooperative efforts to achieve higher economic growth , promote economic development , increase competitiveness , and diversify trade flows to the asia - pacific region .

they also expressed their willingness to continue strengthening cooperation with observer states .

during this summit 10 new countries were admitted as observers: austria , denmark , georgia , greece , haiti , hungary , indonesia , poland , sweden and thailand .

the four countries have taken numerous steps to accomplish their objectives .

in addition to eliminating tariffs between member countries , they are organizing trade promotion activities ; facilitating the movement of tourists and business people among member countries ; liberalizing services trade ; integrating their stock markets ; and opening joint embassies in various countries .

up until 2013 , pacific alliance members had some of the fastest - growing economies in the region .

in 2013 , peru had the highest percentage change in real gdp at 5.7% , compared to 2.9% for the entire latin american region .

in 2015 , gdp growth was 0.0% for all of latin america and less than 3% for each of the pacific alliance countries ( see table 1 ) .

the four latin american countries account for 37% of latin america's population , 35% of latin america's nominal gdp , 46% of exports and 50% of total imports .

mexico , however , accounts for much of the economic strength of the group .

it represents 57% of the alliance's population , 61% of the gdp , and 70% of exports as shown in table 1 .

in 2014 , foreign direct investment ( fdi ) flows into latin america and the caribbean ( lac ) fell by about 16% to $158.8 billion .

inflows to pacific alliance countries also decreased , by 23% to $68.5 billion ( see table 2 ) .

in 2013 , inflows reached a record high of $190.0 billion .

this was 4% above the 2012 level and continued an upward trend beginning in 2009 .

the recent decline in fdi inflows and outflows were likely driven by the decline of prices in export commodities and the economic slowdown in the region .

fdi remains important for the four economies .

pacific alliance countries have accounted for over 40% of fdi flows to lac countries since 2009 as shown in table 2 .

a key difference between the pacific alliance and other latin american regional integration initiatives is its overt , outward - oriented focus , whereas historically , latin american trade pacts have been more inward - oriented , such as the south american trading bloc mercosur .

some analysts see the pacific alliance as a potential rival to mercosur , the common market of the south , which has not yet achieved its goal of a common market .

if the alliance proves successful , it could put pressure on brazil and other mercosur countries to adopt more outward - looking and open trade policies .

some observers view the pacific alliance as a "convergence experiment" within a complex web of free trade agreements in latin america .

it is different from other initiatives because it represents a more pragmatic approach to build upon existing ftas for further economic integration and to serve as an export platform to the asia - pacific region .

major strengths of the alliance are the shared values among member countries , the high level of expertise among the negotiators , and the experience of all four countries in negotiating free trade agreements .

all four countries have experienced negotiators who worked on past agreements and are part of the institutions that have been created thus far as part of the alliance .

businesses are expressing much interest in the alliance .

they are actively participating in the numerous trade events organized by the alliance and look upon its numerous accomplishments that have been achieved in such a short period of time as positive signals for trade and investment opportunities .

the u.s. chamber of commerce supports the establishment of trade ties with pacific alliance countries .

on october 10 , 2013 , it hosted a forum with pacific alliance finance ministers in washington , dc .

many u.s. businesses have participated in the two matchmaking forums organized by the alliance .

as the four countries deepen their efforts and add new members to the group , they may face challenges in sustaining the current dynamism and focus .

one of the major challenges is that trade among the partner countries is low and the countries are a long way from exporting goods entirely made within the region .

member countries may have to make considerable efforts and heavily involve the private sector to create supply chains .

they may have to focus on developing the appropriate policies to create conditions within the region that would allow for the development of supply chains .

there also may be challenges in increasing trade linkages with asian countries .

attempts to expand trade liberalization measures with other countries may prove difficult because of the potential complexities in coordinating and managing these efforts .

although the alliance has drawn much international attention , the future of the regional trade initiative is uncertain .

according to one latin america policy expert , there may be a "disconnect to some extent between some of the great projections and expectations and the real continuing deficiencies in key areas like infrastructure. .

one of the major strengths of the initiative is that member countries share similar economic goals .

these similarities can provide the pragmatic flexibility to move forward together on their objectives .

as long as member countries focus on trade and investment , and not politics , the likelihood for deeper integration may be greater .

some observers believe that the pacific alliance can serve as a "hub for knitting together ftas with latin american partners and linking up to the proposed trans - pacific partnership and transatlantic trade and investment partnership. .

other observers contend that the alliance may fall victim to past patterns of regional initiatives and lose its momentum .

the government of chilean president michelle bachelet expressed concerns about moving ahead with the pacific alliance if it meant leaving other countries in the region behind .

in june 2014 , chile's former president ricardo lagos and brazil's former president luiz inacio lula da silva expressed their view that the alliance would be more effective in achieving its goals by first deepening the trade relationship with argentina and brazil .

these views may have prompted the alliance to reach out to representatives from south america's big trade bloc mercosur .

three of the four pacific alliance members ( chile , mexico , and peru ) are parties to the trans - pacific partnership agreement , a proposed fta among 12 countries , including the united states , which aims to liberalize trade in goods and services , remove barriers to foreign investment , and enhance trade rules and disciplines on a range of issues .

while the pacific alliance has a larger scope than the proposed tpp since it involves the free movement of business people for certain time periods and an integration of the stock markets of member countries , numerous observers have noted that the two could be complementary agreements .

