the number of children coming to the united states who are not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian is raising a host of policy questions .

while much of the congressional interest initially focused directly on immigration policy , the implications for other areas , including education , are now arising as well .

under federal law , states and leas are required to provide all children with equal access to a public elementary and secondary education , regardless of their immigration status .

upon arrival in the united states , unaccompanied alien children generally are initially served through programs operated by the department of health and human services' ( hhs's ) office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) .

while in these programs , children are provided with basic education services and activities and are not enrolled in local school systems .

however , once an unaccompanied alien child is released to an appropriate sponsor ( eg , parent , other family member , or other adult ) , the child has the right to enroll in a local school , just like any other child living in that area , even while awaiting immigration proceedings .

in response to congressional interest in these issues , this report addresses possible sources of federal support for schools and local educational agencies that have enrolled unaccompanied alien children .

it is not intended to provide a comprehensive review of all programs that could potentially serve these children .

rather , the first part of this report includes a discussion of three federal elementary and secondary education programs administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) : ( 1 ) title i - a grants to local educational agencies ( leas ) authorized by the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , ( 2 ) english language acquisition grants ( title iii - a ) authorized by the esea , and ( 3 ) part b grants to states authorized by the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) with an emphasis on how these programs could currently serve unaccompanied alien children or possibly be modified to increase support for these children .

the second part of the report examines two programs that were previously administered by ed but are no longer funded .

the first is the emergency immigrant education act ( eiea ) , which preceded the english language acquisition program .

the second is the temporary emergency impact aid for displaced students program , which was enacted following hurricanes katrina and rita to provide aid to states that enrolled elementary and secondary students who were displaced as a result of the storms .

this program has been of particular interest to congress because it provided aid on a short - term basis to schools and leas that experienced an unexpected influx of students .

the next section of the report provides an overview of the refugee school impact aid program administered by orr , which funds activities aimed at the effective integration and education of refugee children .

the last section of the report addresses the challenge of providing funds to leas and schools that are absorbing newly arriving unaccompanied children in light of the lack of local area data on the number of unaccompanied alien children that have been released from orr custody .

this section of the report includes orr data on the number of unaccompanied alien children that have been released from orr custody by county and state .

there are several existing federal education programs administered by ed that could be used by leas to support the education of unaccompanied alien children upon their arrival and in subsequent years .

the three largest programs that are most relevant to serving this student population include title i - a grants to leas authorized under the esea , english language acquisition grants authorized under title iii - a of the esea , and part b grants to states authorized under the idea .

these are not the only programs from which unaccompanied alien children could benefit or may be served , but they are some of the largest federal elementary and secondary programs , and given their aims , they may receive consideration as vehicles to provide assistance to schools and leas absorbing unaccompanied alien children .

an overview of each program is provided below with a brief explanation of how the program is particularly relevant to unaccompanied alien children .

in addition to the current federal education programs that may be useful in assisting leas in meeting the needs of recent immigrant students , there are other federal education programs administered by ed that are no longer funded that either focused on immigrant students ( emergency immigrant education act ) or have been used in the past to assist schools and leas experiencing an unexpected influx of students in elementary and secondary school ( temporary emergency impact aid for displaced students ) .

there is one smaller program — not part of those funded by the u.s. department of education — that provides current funding for a portion of the unaccompanied alien children .

unaccompanied alien children who receive asylum are eligible for assistance through the refugee school impact aid program .

in 1980 , congress enacted the refugee education assistance act ( p.l .

96-422 ) only a few months after passing the landmark refugee act of 1980 established the orr .

among other features , p.l .

96-422 authorized special impact aid to leas for the education of cuban , haitian , and indochinese children who had sought refuge in the united states .

the vestige of the refugee education assistance act exists today in orr's refugee school impact aid program , which funds activities aimed at the effective integration and education of refugee children .

the most current report from orr indicates this program provided grants totaling $15 million in fy2012 to state governments and nonprofit groups to assist local school systems impacted by significant numbers of refugee children .

unaccompanied alien children who have received asylum in the united states number 108 children through the third quarter of fy2014 .

only two of these approved cases were for unaccompanied children apprehended in fy2014 .

all of the other approved cases were for unaccompanied children apprehended in prior years .

as a consequence , the orr's refugee school impact aid program would not be a major source of funding unless congress amended the law to include all , or additional classes of , unaccompanied alien children among those eligible for the assistance .

much as congress specified in the law that the cuban and haitian entrant children who were not deemed as refugees or asylees under the immigration and nationality act were eligible for the refugee education assistance act , so too congress might consider amending the provision to include unaccompanied alien children that orr has temporarily released to a parent or sponsor .

one of the principal challenges of providing funds to leas that are absorbing newly arriving unaccompanied children is the lack of local area data .

the best available data from the orr are county - level totals that do not indicate the age of the child .

as many leas do not conform to county boundaries , any formula distributions would be approximate at best .

information on the specific schools that may be receiving the recent influx of unaccompanied children does not exist .

orr has begun releasing state - level data of unaccompanied alien children released to sponsors , and the most complete data available are from january 1 , 2014 , to july 31 , 2014 .

a total of 37,477 unaccompanied alien children were released during this seven - month period .

the data do not provide information on the child's country of birth or other demographic details .

as figure 1 shows , four states dominate among host homes for unaccompanied alien children: texas , new york , california , and florida .

table 1 presents the data that orr has made publically available , beginning in january 1 , 2014 .

six counties have received over 1,000 unaccompanied alien children during the period january 1 to july 31 , 2014: harris , tx ; los angeles , ca ; suffolk , ny ; miami - dade , fl ; nassau , ny ; and fairfax , va .

