medicaid is a federal - state entitlement program that pays for health care and related services on behalf of certain low - income individuals .

all states participate in medicaid , but participation is not required .

if states participate , then under federal medicaid law they are required to provide health service benefits to certain individuals — mandatory eligibility groups — but states have the option of covering other groups too .

similarly , states must cover certain services for mandatory eligibility groups , but they have the option to cover fewer services for other eligibility groups .

in general , medicaid health benefits are broad for mandatory eligibility groups , but more restricted for other eligibility groups .

prescription drugs are an optional medicaid benefit , but all states cover outpatient drugs .

states may create formularies , lists of preferred drugs , but federal rules tend to result in comprehensive coverage , even for beneficiaries enrolled in medicaid managed care plans .

since 1990 , pharmaceutical manufacturers who voluntarily agree to participate in medicaid are required to rebate a portion of drug payments back to states .

when a manufacturer participates in medicaid , states must make most of their drugs available to medicaid beneficiaries .

states share the rebates they receive from drug manufacturers with the federal government .

the drug rebates required under federal law help the state and federal medicaid program receive manufacturers' lowest or best price .

beginning in 2010 , drug manufacturers also were required to pay rebates on drugs provided to medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in managed care .

medicaid drug pricing and policy is complex , in part because prescription drug markets are dynamic .

drug manufacturers and wholesalers adapt to policy and statutory changes by creating new products and new marketing approaches that sometimes circumvent medicaid pricing rules .

drug companies and health insurers operate in private markets in which they are seeking private advantages to earn revenue and profits .

medicaid pricing policies are , in part , based on competitive market transactions .

even though medicaid buys drugs through the same markets as other payers , federal law requires drug companies , operating through wholesalers and distributors , to sell drugs to medicaid at discounted prices .

medicaid's drug discounts vary depending on whether drugs are available from one manufacturer — single source — or are available from two or more manufacturers — multiple source .

single source drug discounts are greater than multiple source drug discounts .

in 2010 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that total single source medicaid drug rebates averaged approximately 57% of manufacturers' average prices .

this report discusses how medicaid pays for drugs , including statutory requirements on manufacturers and states as well as a number of regulations and policies that help to administer the program .

medicaid beneficiaries are dispensed drugs at retail pharmacies , but states pay most of the cost of those drugs .

states then receive discounts from drug manufacturers in the form of rebate payments , which states share with the federal government through a credit against states' future medicaid payments .

since 2006 , the amount states and the federal government have spent on drugs for beneficiaries enrolled in fee - for - service ( ffs ) medicaid has decreased whereas the amount states have collected from rebates has increased .

the focus of this report is on ffs prescription drug pricing and policy .

ffs drug spending accounted for the vast majority of medicaid drug purchases in 2010 , with cbo estimating that prescription drug purchases on behalf of medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in managed care contracts represented approximately 10% of medicaid drug expenditures .

however , medicaid managed care contracts including prescription drug coverage have grown very rapidly since fy2010 .

data for medicaid managed care drug expenditures are not as readily available as those for ffs drug spending because those expenditures are not separately reported on medicaid financial reporting forms .

nonetheless , when possible or appropriate , information on managed care prescription drug spending and utilization is included in the discussion in this report , but in general managed care drug expenditures and utilization are outside its scope .

there is considerable medicaid and related health expenditure data present throughout this report .

these data are nominal and have not been inflation adjusted .

this report will be revised as new data and information become available .

a number of medicaid drug pricing terms are commonly abbreviated .

table 1 displays many of the medicaid drug - related acronyms and abbreviations that appear in this report .

in addition , table 2 displays a list of public laws referenced throughout the report , and table e - 1 in appendix e is a glossary of selected medicaid drug terms .

medicaid is a federal - state entitlement program that pays for medical services on behalf of certain low - income individuals .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) administers the medicaid program under authority delegated by the secretary of the department of health and human services ( the secretary ) .

estimated fy2013 federal expenditures for medicaid benefits and administration were approximately $262 billion ; state expenditures were estimated to be an additional $192 billion , for a total program cost of approximately $454 billion .

state medicaid programs are administered and designed by the states under broad federal guidelines .

all states elect to participate in medicaid , so they are required to provide benefits to certain low - income individuals and optionally may cover other individuals .

similarly , states must cover certain basic services , but may also cover additional services .

states set their provider payment rates for medical and related services , subject to limitations and federal approval .

there is considerable variation across states , with some programs being relatively limited and others more generous in terms of eligible populations , covered benefits , and service payments .

medicaid is a means - tested program .

enrollees' income and other resources must be within program financial standards .

these standards vary among states and among different population groups within a state .

with some exceptions , medicaid is available only to very low income individuals — most medicaid enrollees have incomes below the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

until recently , medicaid was primarily available only to children , adult members of families with children , pregnant women , and aged , blind , or disabled individuals .

people outside those categories — such as single adults and childless couples — generally did not qualify for medicaid regardless of their income level .

aca permitted states to expand medicaid coverage to single adults up to age 65 provided their income did not exceed 133% of fpl and required states to cover mandatory eligibility groups up to 133% of fpl .

historically , medicaid eligibility groups were divided into two basic classes , the categorically needy and the medically needy .

these classes differentiated between beneficiaries who were eligible for medicaid because their income was low ( categorically needy ) and those who were eligible because they had high medical expenses ( medically needy ) .

categorically needy medicaid beneficiaries received cash - assistance payments ( welfare ) , so their eligibility was considered welfare - related .

categorically needy beneficiaries represent the majority of medicaid beneficiaries .

although their income may have exceeded states' medicaid income eligibility threshold , medically needy beneficiaries were eligible for medicaid because a high percentage of that income was used to pay medical expenses , which left only a small amount of income for other living expenses .

in 2009 , 33 states covered medically needy individuals and these individuals accounted for approximately 5% of national medicaid enrollment , and 11% of medicaid expenditures ( about $37 billion ) .

over time , more categorically needy eligibility groups were added .

as a result , distinctions between categorically and medically needy eligibility became less useful in identifying which groups qualified for mandatory or optional benefits .

nonetheless , the distinctions are useful when considering certain benefits .

most benefits are considered mandatory only for categorically needy individuals ; that is , states must cover those benefits for the categorically needy but they are an option for medically needy individuals .

other benefits , including outpatient prescription drugs , are optional for both groups of beneficiaries .

some states provide those optional benefits only to categorically needy individuals whereas other states provide optional benefits to one or more medically needy groups as well .

coverage of outpatient prescription drugs is optional for state medicaid programs .

all states cover outpatient prescription drugs for mandatory ( categorically needy ) eligibility groups , but they may not cover drugs for optional groups ( including medically needy ) and drug coverage for expansion populations may be limited to either benchmark plan coverage or a particular set of drugs .

 , most states cover outpatient drugs because these drugs are considered a lower - cost alternative to other medical care .

prescription drugs may help keep enrollees healthier and potentially prevent more serious and more costly medical interventions .

in general , medicaid ffs and managed care outpatient drug benefits are broad , encompassing most prescription drugs and many non - prescription , over - the - counter ( otc ) , drugs .

medicaid prescription drug coverage is broad because medicaid law requires states to cover most drugs offered by manufacturers that have rebate agreements in effect .

in addition , federal law permits states to use formularies to direct beneficiaries to equivalent lower - cost drugs , but there also must be a process by which health care providers may request covered drugs not on the formulary if the provider determines those drugs are medically necessary .

when states contract with managed care plans and drug coverage is included , the plans may use their own formularies but also must have a process by which health care providers can prescribe non - formulary drugs that they determine are medically necessary .

state medicaid agencies do not purchase drugs directly from manufacturers .

instead , they most commonly reimburse retail pharmacies for covered drugs dispensed to medicaid beneficiaries .

this section discusses ffs medicaid pharmacy reimbursement issues .

in 1990 , congress amended the social security act ( ssa ) to add the medicaid drug rebate ( mdr ) program to medicaid law .

under the mdr program , drug manufacturers that want to sell their drugs to state medicaid agencies must enter into rebate agreements with the secretary on behalf of states .

the mdr agreements require drug manufacturers to provide state medicaid programs with rebates on drugs purchased for medicaid beneficiaries to ensure that medicaid receives the lowest or best price for which the manufacturer sold the drug during the previous quarter .

in exchange for receiving the best price , medicaid programs must cover all drugs marketed by those manufacturers with certain exceptions .

for instance , drugs provided in hospitals and sometimes in physicians' or dentists' offices , or similar settings are exempt from rebates .

drug manufacturers must pay rebates on prescription drugs provided to medicaid beneficiaries who receive their care through ffs as well as managed care plans .

drug manufacturers also must pay rebates on some nonprescription , otc items , such as aspirin , when they are dispensed to a medicaid beneficiary and covered under the state's medicaid plan .

in 2014 , cms reported there were approximately 610 drug manufacturers participating in the medicaid drug rebate program .

in fy2013 , the medicaid ( state and federal ) ffs rebates — basic , inflation , and supplemental — were approximately $12.4 billion ( see table 6 ) .

medicaid rebates are shared between the states and the federal government according to state federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) .

a state's fmap determines the rate at which the federal government matches states' medicaid expenditures .

drug manufacturers compute the drug rebate amount owed each quarter based on utilization information supplied by states .

states collect manufacturers' rebates and then subtract ( offset ) the federal share from the federal matching funds they would receive for medicaid medical benefits .

for rebates purposes , federal law distinguishes between two major drug categories , single source drugs and multiple source drugs .

multiple source drugs include innovator multiple source drugs — drugs once covered by patents — and non - innovator multiple source drugs — generic drugs and all other drugs , including drugs developed before fda approval was required and otc drugs .

in addition to the two major drug types , aca added several additional single source and innovator multiple source drug types that are treated differently for rebates .

these drug types include line extensions , clotting ( blood ) factors , and drugs approved by the fda for pediatric indications .

the basic and additional rebate formulas for these new aca drug types as well as single source , innovator multiple source , and non - innovator multiple source are summarized in table 4 .

 table 6 displays fy2013 medicaid ffs outpatient drug expenditures and total rebates for each state and all states .

in fy2013 , total medicaid ffs outpatient prescription drug expenditures , before rebates , were about $19.8 billion ( federal and state shares , table 6 ) .

also in fy2013 , states reported collecting approximately $12.4 billion in ffs drug rebates from drug manufacturers which includes approximately $726 million in supplemental rebates not required under federal medicaid law ( table 6 ) and $11.7 billion in required rebates .

net fy2013 medicaid drug expenditures ( after all rebates ) were approximately $7.4 billion ( table 7 ) .

the table 6 data may overstate medicaid ffs rebates .

aca increased the basic rebate percentage and extended manufacturers' additional rebate obligations to line extensions .

these aca changes were retroactive to january 1 , 2010 .

implementation and accounting for the aca rebate changes may have lagged behind so that states reported rebates attributable to fy2010-fy2012 utilization in the fy2013 cms financial reports .

in addition , beginning in 2010 with the added authority for states to collect rebates on drugs purchased for full - risk medicaid managed care beneficiaries , there may have been delays in identifying transactions that were subject to the managed care rebate .

table 7 displays the total amount of sra rebates collected by states for fy1997-fy2013 .

in fy2013 , 42 states collected a total of $726 million in supplemental ffs rebates ( $403 million federal share ) .

in fy2013 , california accounted for 23% of the reported supplemental rebates ( federal and state shares ) .

some data seem to suggest that medicaid ffs drug expenditures have decreased dramatically since fy2006 , but net spending changes are attributable at least in part to policy changes that have shifted drug spending from medicaid to medicare , increased rebates , and shifted drug coverage from ffs to managed care plans .

this section discusses recent medicaid ffs drug expenditures and patterns .

in fy1997 , states reported total ffs outpatient prescription drug expenditures , net of all rebates — federal and state shares — of about $10.2 billion , or 6.3% of total program spending .

in fy2005 , total ffs outpatient prescription drug expenditures , net of all rebates — federal and state shares — were $30.7 billion , accounting for about 10.2% of medicaid benefit expenditures .

by fy2013 , net medicaid ffs outpatient drug expenditures had decreased to about $16.2 billion and accounted for less than 4% of benefit expenditures .

table 8 displays a summary of medicaid benefit and outpatient prescription drug expenditures for fy1997-fy2013 .

the variation in prescription drug expenditures and year - to - year percentage changes shown in table 8 were attributable to a number of factors .

some of these factors are trends affecting the prescription drug industry and health care markets in general , such as the expiration of prescription drug patents sometimes called the patent - cliff and increasing managed care enrollment .

other policy changes attributable to federal law may be more important than industry trends in explaining medicaid prescription drug expenditure changes .

the amendments to medicaid drug law helped to reduce outpatient medicaid prescription drug expenditures .

figure 1 displays the recent history of medicaid ffs outpatient prescription drug expenditures .

there are several changes shown in figure 1 that coincide with implementation of major legislative changes .

prior to mma , drug expenditures were steadily increasing , rising from approximately $10.2 billion in 1997 to about $30.7 billion in 2005 , even though federal and state ( but particularly state ) rebates also were increasing .

in 2006 , there was a substantial decrease ( of approximately $7.6 billion ) in medicaid drug expenditures to $23.1 billion when dual eligible drug expenditures were moved to medicare part d. in 2010 , adjusted medicaid drug expenditures dipped again to $19.7 billion .

this change was in part attributable to the fiscal relief provided to states in the form of arra's temporary fmap increase , which reduced state drug expenditures because it was applied to states' phased - down state contribution ( psc ) payments .

 , psc payments declined from $7.8 billion in fy2009 to $3.8 billion in fy2010 .

the psc decrease shifted a portion of prescription drug costs from state and federal medicaid matching funds to federal economic recovery funding , thus reducing federal and state medicaid drug expenditures .

although this also increased federal funding , it shifted that funding from medicaid to another source .

net ffs drug expenditures returned to approximately the fy2009 level in fy2011 after deducting all rebates but adding in the psc amount that states would have paid for dual eligible drug expenditures to make comparison with earlier periods consistent .

in fy2011 , the increased rebate percentages and other aca changes were just beginning to take effect .

these changes boosted federal and state rebates , but drug expenditures increased considerably to $23.1 billion from $19.7 billion in fy2010 .

the fy2011 increase was probably attributable to reporting delays of the aca's rebate increases .

in fy2012 and fy2013 , medicaid outpatient drug expenditures ( after rebates and other adjustments ) were substantially reduced , falling from about $23.1 billion in fy2011 to about $18.4 billion in fy2012 and $16.2 billion in fy2013 .

the fy2012 and fy2013 decreases were somewhat due to modest aca rebate increases and the rapid movement of medicaid beneficiaries to managed care coverage that included prescription drugs .

as previously discussed , these changes did not reduce prescription drug expenditures , but shifted drug expenditures to other reports .

however , looking at state medicaid drug utilization reports , as shown in table 9 , estimated ( unadjusted , before all rebates and psc ) total medicaid expenditures for ffs and managed care were higher and consistent with historic drug spending patterns .

although medicaid drug expenditures for both managed care and ffs appear to be close to their historic levels , expenditures did decline between fy2012 and fy2013 in similar ways for both managed care and ffs drug spending .

the decrease could be attributable to different data sources as well as the previously mentioned reporting lags and the patent cliff .

additional data from medicaid financial reports can provide insight into how medicaid ffs drug expenditures only have changed over time ( not managed care ) .

it is possible to estimate a new ffs drug expenditure by aggregating drug expenditures and rebates and by adjusting for the medicaid drug expenditures that were moved to medicare part d. the net ffs drug expenditure data can then be compared with earlier periods ( before 2006 ) to help identify changes .

as shown in table 10 , the net ffs drug spending decrease between fy2012 and fy2013 was primarily due to decreased prescription drug expenditures , rather than increased rebate collections .

fy2012 and fy2013 ffs drug expenditures fell by 20% and 12% respectively from the previous year .

the fy2012 and fy2013 decreases in medicaid ffs drug expenditures may have been caused by several factors , including the rapid growth of medicaid managed care enrollment that included prescription drug coverage .

in fy2012 and fy2013 , total medicaid ffs drug rebate collections also decreased .

the decrease in ffs drug rebates was due to reduced ffs drug expenditures — fewer drugs purchased translates to lower rebate collections .

medicaid law permits states to use other techniques in addition to fuls and formularies to help monitor and control overall drug expenditures and utilization .

some techniques to control drug spending involve encouraging the use of lower cost , but generically or therapeutically equivalent products , and other techniques involve establishing limits that encourage appropriate utilization .

the discussion in this section is primarily applicable to the administration of medicaid ffs drug benefits , but policies to help control drug spending are widely used by all insurers that provide prescription drug coverage , including the private sector and managed care plans under contract to state medicaid programs .

all states use all or most of these policies in some form , although there is considerable variation in the degree to which states use these policies .

for instance , all states have prior authorization , but many states only require prior authorization for certain drugs .

in addition , some states allow managed care plans to establish their own prior authorization procedures and policies .

one common cost and utilization process is prior authorization and the use of preferred drug lists ( pdls ) .

pdls identify pharmaceutical products that have been approved in advance by a committee because they were determined to be clinically effective , but lower cost than other alternative products .

providers may readily prescribe these products to medicaid beneficiaries .

other non - pdl drugs also are covered but may only be available when they are specifically requested and approved or authorized by the medicaid agency .

non - pdl drugs must be prior authorized or approved .

when providers want to prescribe non - pdl drugs to beneficiaries , the providers ( either the physician or the pharmacist ) must request permission from the state medicaid program or the program's contractor to dispense the drug .

states may establish prior authorization programs under medicaid for all drugs or for certain classes of drugs , as long as these programs meet the following two criteria: 1. they must respond within 24 hours to a request for approval , and 2. they must dispense at least a 72-hour supply of a covered drug in emergency situations without prior authorization .

states also may restrict the quantity of prescription drugs available to beneficiaries .

such prescribing and dispensing limits are common .

the most prevalent constraint is on the drug quantity that may be dispensed for each prescription .

a number of states routinely limit the amount of certain drugs dispensed to a 30-day to 34-day supply .

in addition , states also sometimes limit the number of prescriptions a beneficiary can have without special approval , particularly for single source products .

in 2010 , 14 states limited the total number of prescriptions ( single and multiple source ) per beneficiary and four states capped the monthly number of prescriptions per beneficiary .

the remaining 32 states , which accounted for about 40% of medicaid's 2010 ffs drug expenditures , did not cap the number of monthly prescriptions .

the medicaid rebate program was authorized by omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( obra90 , p.l .

101-508 ) , then amended in 1992 by the veterans health care act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-585 ) .

after 1992 , there were few federal statutory changes to medicaid prescription drug pricing until 2003 , when the medicare prescription drug improvement and modernization act of 2003 ( mma , p.l .

108-173 ) was passed .

mma was the first of five laws that reshaped medicaid drug pricing policy .

these changes had a number of goals , such as increasing the amount of rebates collected by states and the federal government and strengthening the ability of states and federal policy makers to monitor and enforce compliance .

a number of recent changes were made to improve or revise earlier amendments that did not achieve the desired results .

prescription drug policies are complicated in part because it is hard to isolate the effects of changes in a dynamic market with many private purchasers and sellers .

for medicaid , prescription drug rebates and pricing changes are further complicated because each state has some discretion in how changes are implemented and enforced .

this section provides a discussion of major legislative changes to medicaid prescription drug pricing and rebates .

table 16 displays a summary of major laws with medicaid drug pricing provisions .

this section discusses the following two medicaid prescription drug issues: ( 1 ) new drug prices and ( 2 ) the pending final rule implementing aca changes .

in general , ffs rebates have been effective in helping to control medicaid ffs drug expenditures .

overall , ffs outpatient drug expenditures have decreased and medicaid is able to buy drugs for lower prices than medicare part d plans and most other federal programs .

congress has been instrumental in establishing medicaid drug authority to ensure medicaid pays some of the lowest prescription drug prices .

congress authorized creation of the infrastructure to manage , monitor , and enforce prescription drug pricing .

congress also extended authority for medicaid to receive rebates on drugs provided to beneficiaries in managed care , and this has resulted in the rapid movement of prescription drug coverage from ffs medicaid to medicaid managed care .

the percentage of ffs prescription drug claims has fallen from approximately 10% in 2010 to less than 50% in 2013 .

the movement of prescription drug coverage from ffs to managed care plans could make oversight of the medicaid prescription drug benefit more difficult .

states will be able to collect rebates under managed care contracts , although it is unclear how state supplemental rebates will align with managed care plan ( or , more likely , pbm ) negotiations with drug wholesalers and manufacturers .

under managed care contracts , states generally delegate some or all dur and program integrity oversight to managed care plans .

will states be able to conduct dur and appropriate monitoring comparable to ffs drug benefits ? .

if states and the federal government already procure drugs at some of the best prices , will it be possible for managed care plans and their subcontractor pbms to reduce costs further ? .

or will savings come from creating obstacles to beneficiaries receiving covered drugs through utilization controls ? .

appendix a. fy2012 state ffs drug claims appendix b. fy2012 ffs drug paymemt appendix c. medicaid ffs prescription drug claims appendix d. state generic prescribing rates appendix e. glossary: medicaid drug term .

