aviation war risk insurance provides coverage for hostile acts of violence against airlines , such as terrorism , hijackings , and sabotage .

airlines generally cannot operate without war risk insurance , as aircraft loan and lease agreements typically require airlines to obtain and maintain such insurance .

additionally , some foreign countries require that airlines have war risk insurance as a condition to operate in their airspace or at their airports .

aside from some degree of self - insurance , airlines generally rely on the private insurance markets to provide catastrophic coverage ( see text box ) .

following the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , airlines were affected by a worldwide cancellation of third - party liability war risk coverage in the commercial market and significant increases in the costs of other war risk insurance .

the u.s. government stepped in and expanded the federal aviation war risk insurance program to guarantee that u.s. air carriers could receive insurance coverage that was not being supplied by the commercial insurance market .

the commercial insurance market has since stabilized , and a number of air carriers are again purchasing war risk coverage from private insurers .

according to a 2012 european union study , private coverage is readily available for loss or damage to passengers and aircraft hulls in the event of a terrorist attack , but insurers have limited the level of coverage available for third - party damage caused by war or terrorism .

liability and hull risk are typically covered in a single policy with the same insurers covering both .

the study found airline insurance to be a relatively small percentage of the total operating costs of airlines , citing an industry estimate that all airlines combined paid approximately $2.3 billion for basic airline insurance in 2011 .

this translates into about $60 per flight or $0.80 cents per passenger .

the price of insurance varies significantly from airline to airline , depending on the location of the airline , its size , fleet age and maintenance , safety record , the geographical spread of its network , and the level of deductible .

the study concluded that while the capacity of the private market for aviation risk insurance seemed adequate , this could change in the case of a major terrorist incident .

according to the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , commercial insurers currently provide the vast majority of the world's airlines with war risk coverage and are willing to provide coverage to u.s. air carriers as well .

the market for aviation coverage outside of war risk has been relatively soft over the past few years , with insurance brokers reporting ample availability and lower prices than in earlier years .

a series of airliner losses in 2014 , however , may lead to increases in aviation insurance premiums .

these losses include the disappearance of malaysia airlines flight 370 with 239 people on board over the indian ocean in march , followed by the shooting down of malaysia airlines flight 17 over eastern ukraine in july , which killed 298 people on board .

further unsettling the aviation risk environment is damage to aircraft in recent attacks on airports , including taliban attacks on karachi airport in pakistan in june 2014 and fighting at tripoli airport in libya .

some aviation insurers have reportedly estimated that the industry could see insurance premiums rise as much as 50% and that premiums for war risk insurance could treble , the biggest jump since 9 / 11 .

however , some insurance company officials have said that it is "premature and speculative to talk about the level of price rises," since there has not been renewal for major carriers in the war risk insurance market .

the insurance losses in 2014 may also lead to higher premiums for "all - risk" policies .

it remains unclear how the commercial market is going to react and whether private coverage might become prohibitively expensive or even unavailable .

the unavailability of private coverage , should it occur , would be especially consequential for u.s. air carriers flying to destinations within the european union .

since april 30 , 2005 , eu regulation 785 / 2004 ( as amended by regulation 285 / 2010 ) , has required that all air carriers and aircraft operators flying within , into , out of , or over eu territory be insured with regard to their aviation - specific liabilities including war - and terrorism - related risks .

for overflights ( without a take - off or landing in the eu ) by non - eu air carriers or operators using aircraft registered outside the eu , the minimum insurance requirements for passengers , baggage and cargo do not apply .

but the overflights must comply with the requirements for insurance against third - party liability .

although the governments of many non - eu countries , such as the united states , may not require air carriers to have war risk insurance , eu regulation 785 / 2004 , in effect , has made such insurance mandatory for non - eu carriers operating to and from the eu .

key provisions of the current regulation are listed in appendix a .

the federal government made war risk insurance available to the merchant fleet in world war i and world war ii .

no aviation war risk insurance was provided during these wars because overseas commercial air operations were limited in number and were taken over by the u.s. government .

prior to 1951 , aviation war risk insurance was commercially available but subject to 48-hour cancellation clauses , which proved particularly worrisome for operators participating in the korean war airlift .

a 1951 law to amend the civil aeronautics act of 1938 ( p. l. 82-47 ) included a title giving the secretary of commerce authority to provide war risk insurance when doing so was determined necessary in the interest of air commerce .

coverage could be extended to both u.s. - and foreign - flag aircraft deemed to be operating in the interest of the national defense or the national economy of the united states .

coverage could include aircraft , cargo , personal effects and baggage of crew and other employees carried aboard the aircraft , and statutory or contractual obligations or other liabilities .

premium insurance and reinsurance rates could be set by the secretary of commerce within loosely defined bounds based on analysis of available coverage and rates in the private insurance and reinsurance markets .

under the act , a revolving fund was established within the treasury , funded through premiums , salvage , and other recoveries from loss .

any returned premiums , losses , settlements , judgments , or other liabilities covered under the insurance program would be disbursed by the treasury from these funds .

the federally provided war risk insurance could be underwritten by any company authorized to offer aviation insurance in any state .

disagreements regarding claims against the aviation war risk insurance fund could be adjudicated in federal district court .

the program was continued under the federal aviation act of 1958 ( p. l. 85-726 ) and retained within the department of commerce .

in 1966 , under the newly created department of transportation , responsibility for the program was delegated to faa .

on march 31 , 2014 , the secretary of transportation submitted to congress a legislative proposal to reform the aviation war risk insurance program , permanently authorizing it with a reduced overall scope .

specifically , if the proposal were enacted , faa would: continue to provide war risk coverage for airline losses involving the use of nuclear , biological , chemical , and / or radioactive ( nbcr ) weapons , as such coverage is not available in the commercial market ; provide full aviation war risk coverage , at the discretion of the secretary of transportation , for 90 days in the event of a widespread cancellation of coverage by the private insurance market , similar to the market disruption experience following the 9 / 11 attacks ; and continue to provide non - premium war risk insurance for carriers operating under department of defense contracts in support of national defense .

the current proposal is not the first proposed change to the aviation war risk insurance program in recent years .

the president's fy2014 budget proposed changes to underlying statutory authority allowing for cooperation and collaboration with commercial insurers to establish a shared - risk model for aviation war risk coverage .

according to faa , the proposal would have envisioned that commercial insurers take on an additional 20% of the war risk insurance market annually , starting in fy2015 and continuing through fy2018 .

thus , by fy2018 , faa's share of total war risk would have been reduced to 20% and the commercial insurance market would have taken on 80% of the risk .

the fy2013 and fy2012 budgets both included a different proposal for changes in the program .

these budgets would have implemented a $150 million deductible for hull and liability exposures under the program .

the airline industry has generally not been supportive of changes to the program , arguing in the past that war risk insurance would be prohibitively costly if offered by commercial insurers .

in responding to the fy2014 budget , airlines for america ( a4a ) president and ceo nicholas e. calio stated , "ending the war risk insurance program undermines the economic viability of the u.s. airline industry , ... [the] proposed changes are unwarranted and could cost airlines hundreds of millions of dollars , result in inadequate insurance protection and prompt further service reductions" a4a instead recommended maintaining the status quo and extending the program for three years .

a4a has not issued a specific public statement regarding the march 2014 proposal by the secretary of transportation .

improved international guidance for making informed risk decisions regarding flights in conflict zones could have important implications for stabilizing private market war risk insurance premiums and coverage terms .

following the downing of malaysia airlines flight 17 over ukraine on july 17 , 2014 , there has been increased interest in how to disseminate threat information and make informed , risk - based decisions regarding civilian flight operations in and near conflict zones and other high - risk regions .

amid these discussions , insurance underwriters are reviewing whether to provide continued coverage for aircraft operated in certain conflict zones .

it has been reported that insurance providers are requiring more details regarding flight routes and are considering withdrawing coverage for flights in certain areas in the middle east and africa .

insurers have reportedly raised concerns that airlines are inconsistent in assessing risk , pointing to the fact that many airlines overflew iraqi airspace until formal restrictions were imposed by faa in august 2014 .

airlines routinely fly over conflict zones to minimize fuel costs and time unless expressly restricted , a practice that has been questioned in the aftermath of the malaysia airlines crash .

in august 2014 , the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) , the united nations specialized agency for civil aviation , convened a multinational task force to examine how governments and international agencies can collaborate to assess conflict zone risks to civilian aircraft in a more unified fashion .

under current icao guidelines , the country responsible for providing air traffic services over a region including a conflict zone is to identify the geographic area of conflict , assess potential hazards to civil aircraft , and establish policies and procedures to avoid conflict zones or mitigate risks .

in practice , countries do not always disseminate information about conflict risks to civil aviation or take adequate precautions to mitigate risks to civil aircraft .

it may not always be in these countries' interest to do so , as restricting or curtailing flights could have significant impacts on travel and tourism .

aviation authorities , such as faa , may issue warnings or restrict overseas flight operations for operators they oversee , and some airlines may carry out their own risk assessments of flight routes , but such practices lead to disparate views regarding risk and appropriate precautions among regulators , airlines , and insurers .

in july 2014 , faa issued restrictions on flights to and from israel that lasted for about a day and a half during the armed conflict in israel and gaza after a rocket exploded about a mile from ben gurion airport .

the restriction , along with decisions by several foreign airlines to also suspend service to israel , prompted israeli authorities to ask international air carriers to resume flights , arguing that risks to civil aircraft had been adequately mitigated .

this series of events illustrates how a government may be reluctant to disseminate warnings and restrictions that may impact travel and tourism even as unrelated events , such as the destruction of malaysia airlines flight 17 , may lead other governments to be more cautious in their guidance to airlines operating overseas in areas of unrest or armed conflict .

improved processes for assessing conflict zone hazards to civil aviation , issuing warnings , and restricting flights could address concerns over private market war risk insurance premiums and coverage by potentially reducing uncertainties and ambiguities in assessing risk .

appendix a .

key provisions of eu regulation 785 / 2004 ( as amended by regulation 285 / 2010 ) principle of insurance article 4 requires that all air carriers and aircraft operators be insured regarding their aviation - specific liability with respect to passengers , baggage , cargo , and third parties .

the insured risks include acts of war , terrorism , hijacking , acts of sabotage , unlawful seizure of aircraft and civil commotion .

insurance liability article 6 requires a minimum insurance coverage of 250,000 sdrs ( $378,523 ) per passenger , in terms of passenger liability , which is significantly higher than the minimum requirement of 113,100 sdrs ( $171,259 ) per passenger prescribed by the montreal convention .

however , for non - commercial aircraft operations with a maximum take - off mass ( mtom ) of 2,700 kg , insurance is at a lower minimum of 100,000 sdrs ( $151,409 ) per passenger .

for baggage liability , the minimum insurance coverage required is 1,131 sdrs ( $1,712 ) per passenger in commercial operations ; for cargo liability , the minimum coverage required is 19 sdrs ( $29 ) per kilogram in commercial operations .

article 7 spells out the insurance requirement regarding third - party liability .

the minimum insurance coverage per accident depends on the mtom of the operated aircraft , from 750,000 sdrs ( $1,135,568 ) for aircraft with an mtom of less than 500 kg , to 700 million sdrs ( nearly $1.06 billion ) for aircraft with an mtom of 500,000 kg or more .

the minimum coverage applies per accident for each and every aircraft .

sanctions sanctions for infringement of the regulation "shall be effective , proportional and dissuasive. .

they may include the withdrawal of the operating license from eu air carriers and refusal of the right to land on the territory of a member state in the case of non - eu carriers .

appendix b .

the aviation war risk insurance program and the terrorism risk insurance program the federal government provides insurance , or insurance - like , programs in a wide variety of ways .

a 2005 report by the government accountability office identified "71 activities that provide federal insurance to entities other than the federal government. .

among these programs , the most analogous to the aviation war risk insurance program is the terrorism risk insurance program , created by the terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 ( tria , p.l .

107-297 ) .

in the aftermath of the 9 / 11 attacks , the general commercial insurance market experienced similar conditions to the aviation insurance market .

insurers moved to exclude losses due to terrorism from future coverage and , when such coverage could be found , it was very expensive .

tria temporarily provided federal coverage of losses from terrorist attacks under some circumstances .

the original act authorized a three - year program , until the end of 2005 , with the expectation that the private sector would be prepared to offer terrorism coverage by this time .

when the expiration date approached , the insurance industry again expressed unwillingness and incapacity to cover terrorism risk , and the program was reauthorized for two years in 2005 and then seven years in 2007 .

with the 2014 expiration date again approaching , several bills have been introduced to further extend the program and the insurance industry , along with many others , is supporting an extension of the tria program .

tria and the current version of the aviation war risk insurance program may share a common genesis , but their workings are very different .

these differences include the tria program does not provide coverage directly to businesses at risk of terrorism losses , but rather provides government reinsurance for private insurers offering particular lines of commercial property / casualty coverage .

these insurers are required to offer terrorism coverage and would thus cover any losses due to terrorism .

assuming certain conditions are met , the tria program would then reimburse the private insurers for some amount of their losses .

tria has no provision for premiums to be paid for the government coverage .

there is no "tria fund" in the treasury equivalent to faa's aviation war risk insurance fund .

any losses covered under tria would be paid from the government's general fund .

there are no upfront premiums , but the act provides for a post - event recoupment fee on commercial insurance policies to recover the government's costs .

depending on the size of the losses , this recoupment is either mandatory or may be applied at the discretion of the secretary of the treasury .

tria coverage is considerably more limited than federal aviation war risk insurance .

because it operates through private insurers , whatever limits or deductibles applying to an insured under the private insurance policy would also apply for tria coverage , and each insurer must meet a substantial general deductible .

in addition , the circumstances under which tria coverage applies are much more limited than for aviation war risk insurance .

before any federal funds would flow under tria , a minimum total of $100 million in insured losses must have occurred due a terrorist act .

the acts which could be certified to count against this $100 million threshold are much narrower than the acts that would trigger federal aviation war risk insurance .

there are no federal limits on the cost of terrorism coverage under tria .

the statute requires private insurers to offer coverage under the same terms as insurance against losses from causes other than terrorism , but these insurers may charge a separate premium for this coverage and the law does not specifically limit this premium .

terrorism premiums , however , may be limited under state laws regulating insurance .

