u.s. greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emission levels remain a topic of interest among policy makers and stakeholders .

on june 25 , 2013 , president obama affirmed his commitment to reduce u.s. ghg emissions by 17% below 2005 levels by 2020 if all other major economies agreed to limit their emissions as well .

in addition , during a november 2014 trip to china , president obama and president xi of china made a bilateral announcement concerning ghg emissions .

president obama announced a new policy target to reduce u.s. net ghg emissions by 26% - 28% by 2025 .

president xi agreed to "peak" chinese carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions around 2030 , perhaps earlier , and to increase the non - fossil share of china's energy to around 20% by 2030 compared to 2005 levels .

a question for policy makers is whether u.s. ghg emissions will remain at current levels , decrease to meet the president's 2020 and 2025 goals , or increase to former ( or even higher ) levels .

multiple factors , including socioeconomics , technology , and climate policies , may impact ghg emission levels .

the human - related ghg emission and related data in this report are from publicly available sources , particularly reports and tables produced regularly by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the energy information administration ( eia ) .

this first section of this report provides current levels and recent trends in u.s. ghg emissions .

the second section takes a closer look at some of the key factors that influence emission levels .

the third section discusses the challenges in making ghg emission projections by comparing observed emissions with preobserved emission estimates .

as figure 1 illustrates , u.s. ghg emissions increased during most of the years between 1990 and 2007 , and then decreased substantially in 2008 and 2009 .

although emissions increased in 2010 , levels decreased again in 2011 and 2012 , eventually reaching levels comparable to those in 1995 .

in terms of the president's 2020 emissions target ( 17% below 2005 levels ) , u.s. ghg emissions in 2012 — the most recent year with available ghg emission data — were approximately 10% below 2005 levels .

multiple variables impact u.s. ghg emission levels .

one approach often taken in climate change analysis is to examine several broad energy - related factors that influence ghg emission levels , including population , income — measured here as per capita gross domestic product ( gdp ) , energy intensity — measured here as energy use per gross domestic product , and carbon intensity — measured here as co 2 emissions per energy use .

as illustrated in the equation below , ghg emission levels can be approximated by multiplying together these four factors .

although decreases in population and / or per capita income would contribute to lowering u.s. ghg emissions , policies that would seek to directly limit these emissions drivers are essentially outside the bounds of u.s. public policy .

thus the most relevant factors in terms of climate change policy are energy intensity and carbon intensity , which are discussed below .

accurately forecasting future ghg emission levels is a complex and challenging , if not impossible , endeavor .

consequently , analysts often provide a range of emissions based on different scenarios or assumptions .

as discussed above , several broad energy - related factors influence emission levels .

in addition , other variables have impacts in ways that cannot be accurately predicted .

such variables may include technological developments , energy price fluctuations , availability of less carbon - intensive energy sources ( eg , hydroelectric , other renewables , and nuclear power ) , seasonal weather and temperature patterns , and policy changes in the united states and abroad .

eia provides annual forecasts of co 2 emissions in its annual energy outlook ( aeo ) publications .

regarding its various estimates , eia states the following: the projections in the aeo are not statements of what will happen but of what might happen , given assumptions and methodologies .

the aeo reference case projection assumes trends that are consistent with historical and current market behavior , technological and demographic changes , and current laws and regulations .

the potential impacts of pending or proposed legislation , regulations , and standards are not reflected in the reference case projections .

figure 10 compares actual co 2 emissions between 1990 and 2012 with selected eia emission projections made in past years .

in general , actual emissions have remained well below projections , particularly the projections made in 2008 or earlier .

for example , the aeo from 2000 projected co 2 emissions would be almost 6.7 billion metric tons in 2012 , about 20% higher than has been observed .

by comparison , the more recent projections ( aeo 2012 and 2014 ) indicate that co 2 emissions will remain relatively flat over the next decade .

