most individuals in the united states obtain health insurance coverage in the group market ( eg , employer - sponsored insurance ) .

the predominance of group coverage can mask differences in its availability .

historically , access to coverage has been more limited in the small group market than in the large group market .

for example , smaller employers have been less likely to offer health insurance coverage to employees compared with larger employers .

in 2013 , 34.8% of private - sector employers with fewer than 50 employees offered coverage , compared with 95.7% of those with 50 or more employees .

among smaller employers that do not offer coverage , the cost of offering coverage is often cited as a major reason for not doing so .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) includes a number of provisions intended to improve access to health insurance coverage .

these provisions have been implemented over the course of several years ; some went into effect shortly after aca was enacted ( 2010 ) , and many others were not effective until 2014 .

some of these provisions apply to the small group market to address perceived problems in the market , including lower offer rates among smaller employers and the cost of coverage .

the small business health options program ( shop ) exchanges are among these provisions .

as required by aca , a health insurance exchange was established in each state as of january 1 , 2014 .

each exchange has two parts: a marketplace where individuals can shop for and enroll in health insurance coverage ( individual exchange ) , and a shop exchange for small employers .

shop exchanges are marketplaces where private health insurance issuers sell health insurance plans to small employers .

all shop exchanges are administered in one of three ways: solely by a state , solely by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , or by hhs with some degree of state involvement .

for purposes of this report , shop exchanges solely administered by a state are referred to as state - based ( sb - shop ) , and all shop exchanges with federal involvement are referred to as federally - facilitated ( ff - shop ) .

figure 1 shows shop exchange arrangements in each state in 2014 .

all health plans sold through a shop exchange must be certified as qualified health plans ( qhps ) .

to obtain certification as a qhp , a health plan must meet certain aca - required criteria , such as offering a comprehensive benefit package ( the essential health benefits , ehbs ) .

aca does not require employers to purchase coverage through shop exchanges , nor does it prohibit employers from purchasing coverage in the market outside shop exchanges .

aca and its implementing regulations include some prescriptive requirements for the establishment and operation of shop exchanges .

these requirements often apply similarly to sb - shops and ff - shops .

when aca and regulations are not prescriptive , decisions about the establishment and operation of shop exchanges are left to a state or the entity administering the shop exchange ( eg , hhs ) .

as a result , not all sb - shops and ff - shops share the same features or implement shared features in the same way .

this report describes certain features of shop exchanges .

each description includes information about how the feature is implemented in sb - shop and ff - shop exchanges .

each description also includes information about the timing of implementation .

the report concludes with a discussion about the current and future place of shop exchanges in the broader context of the private health insurance market .

small employers that offer health insurance coverage to all of their full - time employees are eligible to use shop exchanges .

prior to january 1 , 2016 , aca allows states to define small employer as having either 100 or fewer or 50 or fewer employees .

beginning in 2016 , all states must define small employer as 100 or fewer employees .

 ( information about the definitions and methods employers must use to determine size is below. ) .

beginning in 2017 , states have the option to allow large employers to use a shop exchange .

small employers may be able to purchase coverage through one or more shop exchanges .

a small employer may purchase coverage through a shop exchange that services its principal business address or through each shop exchange that services employees' primary worksites , if employees work at multiple worksites and those worksites are not all in the service area of one shop exchange .

in order for an employee to be eligible to obtain coverage through a shop exchange , a shop - eligible employer must offer the employee coverage .

statute and regulations require that exchanges , both shop and individual , carry out certain consumer assistance functions .

some functions require that exchanges provide direct support to consumers .

for example , exchanges must provide for the operation of a call center that addresses the needs of consumers who have questions about shop exchanges and individual exchanges .

exchanges are also expected to provide indirect support to consumers by implementing consumer assistance personnel programs .

exchanges must establish navigator programs and certified application counselor ( cac ) programs , and exchanges have the option to implement a program for non - navigator consumer assistance personnel .

under these programs , individuals are trained to help consumers make informed decisions about their insurance options and help consumers access shop and individual exchange coverage .

however , consumer assistance personnel may not enroll small employers or individuals in coverage .

pursuant to state law , exchanges may also allow insurance agents and brokers to help small employers and individuals obtain coverage through exchanges .

unlike consumer assistance personnel , agents and brokers may enroll individuals and small employers in coverage through exchanges .

see the " role of agents and brokers in enrollment process " section of this report for specific information about how agents and brokers can enroll small employers in coverage obtain through shop exchanges .

to enroll in coverage offered through a shop exchange , both employers and employees must submit applications to the shop .

the shop exchange must verify the information submitted and determine employers' and employees' eligibility .

enrollment in a shop exchange is not limited to a specified open enrollment period , except in certain circumstances .

specific circumstances aside , a shop must allow employers to enroll any time during a year , and the employer's plan year must consist of the 12-month period beginning with the employer's effective date of coverage .

each shop exchange must establish uniform enrollment timelines for employers and employees .

shop exchanges must provide a specific timeframe during which an employer can select qualified health plans ( qhps ) to offer to its employees and a time period of no less than 30 days for an annual open enrollment period for employees .

shop exchanges must provide special enrollment periods for employees and their dependents .

special enrollment periods allow individuals to enroll in coverage outside the open enrollment period .

the eligibility criteria for special enrollment periods are outlined in regulations and include events such as the loss of eligibility for medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) and the experience of a life event such as marriage or divorce .

aca and its implementing regulations set forth some requirements about how issuers selling coverage in the small group market must develop premiums to offer to employers .

in general , the requirements apply regardless of whether an issuer is offering coverage inside or outside a shop exchange .

once an issuer has set premiums for an employer , the employer must determine its contribution to employees' premiums .

shop exchanges may establish standard methods that employers may use to define their contributions toward employee and dependent coverage .

in addition , shop exchanges are expected to implement certain administrative procedures related to collecting premiums from employers and paying premiums to qhp issuers .

under aca , certain small employers are eligible for a small business tax credit .

to be eligible , the small employers must contribute a uniform percentage of at least 50% toward their employees' health insurance .

the tax credits have been available to eligible small employers since 2010 .

beginning in 2014 , the tax credits are generally available only to eligible small employers that obtain coverage through a shop exchange ; however , the internal revenue service ( irs ) provides transition relief for certain small employers that cannot obtain a qhp offered through a shop exchange because the small employer's principal business address is in a county in which a qhp through a shop is not available in 2014 .

also beginning in 2014 , the credits are available only to eligible small employers for two consecutive tax years ( beginning with the first year the small employer purchases coverage through a shop exchange ) .

beginning in 2014 , the maximum credit is 50% of an employer's contribution toward premiums for for - profit employers , and 35% of employer contributions for nonprofit organizations .

the full credit is available to employers that have 10 or fewer full - time equivalents ( ftes ) and that have average taxable wages of $25,400 or less .

the tax credit is phased out as an employer's number of ftes increases from 10 to 25 and as average employee compensation increases from $25,400 to $50,800 .

in general , aca does not require health insurance issuers to participate in individual or shop exchanges .

however , hhs set forth requirements with respect to issuer participation in ff - shops .

an ff - exchange will certify a qhp for the individual market only if the issuer meets one of the following conditions: the qhp issuer offers at least one small group market qhp at the silver level and one at the gold level through the state's ff - shop ; the qhp issuer does not offer small group market plans in the state , but another issuer in the same issuer group offers at least one small group market qhp at the silver level and one at the gold level through the state's ff - shop ; or neither the qhp issuer nor any other issuer in the same group has a share of the small group market greater than 20% ( as determined by hhs ) .

in other words , if an issuer wants to offer through the ff - individual exchange , it may have to also offer through the ff - shop exchange .

this is dependent on the size of the issuer's presence in the small group market outside of an ff - shop exchange and whether an issuer in its same group offers qhps through an ff - shop exchange .

issuers offering coverage through sb - shops do not have to comply with these requirements , but states that have sb - shops may have their own requirements related to offering coverage through a shop exchange .

for example , at least three states ( dc , maryland , and vermont ) require issuer participation in shop exchanges for plan year 2014 .

shop exchanges are just one part of the health insurance landscape in the united states .

being one part of a larger whole , the shop exchanges are both affected by and affect other parts of the landscape .

this section provides some context to help clarify how shop exchanges currently operate within the broad health insurance landscape and how they are expected to do so in the future .

as noted earlier , while most individuals in the united states obtain health insurance coverage in the group market , access to coverage has historically been more limited in the small group market as compared with the large group market .

small employers often cite the cost of small group coverage as a reason for not offering coverage .

aca includes a number of provisions to address perceived problems in the small group health insurance market to improve access to coverage .

the small business health care tax credit and the shop exchanges are among these provisions .

aca also includes provisions intended to improve access to other parts of the health insurance market .

for example , aca includes a number of consumer protections that make it easier for individuals to access coverage in the nongroup ( or individual ) market , such as a prohibition on preexisting condition exclusions .

aca also requires that each state have an individual health insurance exchange , where certain lower - income individuals can obtain financial assistance to purchase nongroup health insurance coverage .

aca also expands access to medicaid , includes a requirement for most individuals to obtain coverage or face a penalty ( individual mandate ) , and assesses penalties on large employers that either do not offer coverage or offer coverage that does not meet required standards ( often referred to as the employer penalty ) .

in 2014 , internal and external factors affected the operation and functionality of shop exchanges and influenced small employers' interest in using shop exchanges .

the factors also affected the role of shop exchanges in the larger health insurance landscape in 2014 .

the internal factors relate to the functionality of shop exchange features .

shop exchanges had the potential to provide features to small employers that are not widely available in the small group market outside shop exchanges .

such features include the ability to view , compare , and enroll in plans offered by multiple issuers through one website ; employee choice , or the ability for employers to allow their employees to select from multiple health plans ; and assistance in administering the financial aspects of offering coverage ( eg , aggregating premiums owed to multiple issuers ) .

to the extent that such features attracted small employers and issuers to the shop exchanges , the shop exchanges were potentially a vehicle for increasing small employer offer rates and reducing the cost of small group coverage by increasing competition in the market .

however , as discussed in various parts of this report , implementation of many of the aforementioned features was delayed in 2014 .

the external factors relate to broader changes in the health insurance landscape ( largely as a result of aca ) that may have discouraged , or at least not encouraged , small employers to obtain coverage through a shop exchange .

aca included many health insurance market reforms that apply to coverage sold in the small group market ( including through shop exchanges ) .

for example , beginning in 2014 , small group health plans have to cover the essential health benefits ( ehbs ) .

the ehbs are a defined set of benefits , and covering the ehbs may increase the cost of some health plans .

to the extent a small employer finds obtaining aca - compliant coverage unappealing ( perhaps because compliance is seen as increasing the cost of the coverage ) , the small employer may choose not to purchase coverage to offer to its employees .

or the small employer may choose to self - insure , provided it is allowed to do so under state law , because self - insured employers can offer coverage that does not have to comply with all of aca's market reforms .

either way , the small employer will not purchase coverage in the small group market , and will have no reason to use a shop exchange .

in 2013 , media reports indicated that some small employers took advantage of the ability to early renew .

provided it was allowed under state law , an issuer could allow a small employer that would typically renew its plan in 2014 ( per the terms of the contract ) to renew its plan prior to 2014 .

for example , instead of renewing a plan in january 2014 , a small employer may have had the opportunity to renew the contract in november 2013 .

going forward , the small employer's contract year would be november – october .

if an existing plan was renewed in october 2013 with a 12-month contract , the plan would not have to comply with 2014 aca market reforms until it renews in october 2014 .

a small employer that took this option would have no need to purchase a plan through a shop exchange for at least part of the 2014 plan year .

similarly , under a transitional policy first announced by cms in november 2013 , issuers offering coverage in the small group market could choose to continue coverage that would otherwise be cancelled .

pursuant to the policy , state insurance commissioners could choose whether to enforce compliance with specified aca market reforms .

presumably , if state insurance commissioners chose not to enforce compliance , then issuers could renew coverage for small employers that would otherwise receive cancellation notices .

the transitional policy was extended in march 2014 ; pursuant to the extended policy , coverage renewed for a plan year between january 1 , 2014 , and october 1 , 2016 , does not have to comply with certain aca market reforms , provided the coverage meets specified conditions .

just like small employers that opted to early renew , small employers that were ( and still are ) able to provide coverage that is not completely aca - compliant have no reason to purchase coverage through a shop exchange .

finally , some of the external factors affecting shop exchanges have less to do with small group market coverage and more to do with improved access to other types of coverage .

aca includes provisions that make it easier for individuals to access coverage in the nongroup market .

it creates individual exchanges and provides financial subsidies to lower - income individuals purchasing nongroup coverage through those exchanges , and it expands the medicaid program .

if a small employer found that its employees were able to easily obtain coverage outside of group coverage as a result of these provisions , the small employer may lack an incentive to provide coverage to its employees , regardless of the potential attributes of a shop exchange .

these factors may be particularly salient to small employers not subject to aca's employer penalty — those employers with fewer than 50 full - time equivalent ( fte ) employees .

some of the internal and external factors affecting shop exchange performance in 2014 will change while others will remain in place in 2015 and beyond .

in addition , new factors will likely affect how issuers , employers , and consumers interact with shop exchanges going forward .

it is expected that some currently delayed features of shop exchanges will be implemented in 2015 and in future years .

for example , as discussed in this report , there are indications that shop exchange websites will generally be more functional going forward .

hhs has indicated that on - line enrollment will be available in all ff - shops in 2015 .

also , the employee choice function is to be implemented in some ff - shops in 2015 and is expected to be implemented in all shop exchanges in 2016 and beyond .

the availability of these features may attract greater shop participation from employers and issuers .

in 2016 , the definition of small changes for purposes of the small group market and shop exchange eligibility .

beginning in 2016 , a small employer is defined as having 100 or fewer employees .

larger firms ( those with between 50 and 100 employees ) are generally more likely to provide coverage than smaller firms ; as such , the definition change may increase enrollment in shop exchanges ( provided the larger employers decide to purchase coverage through shop exchanges ) .

the change in the definition coincides with implementation of the employer penalty on employers with 50-99 employees ; this could further incentivize these employers to provide coverage ( although not necessarily through a shop exchange ) .

in 2017 , states have the option to open the shop exchange to large employers , which could also change employer and issuer participation patterns in shop exchanges .

at the same time the shop exchanges change internally , the broader health insurance market will evolve as aca - related changes continue to occur in the market .

by the end of 2014 , any coverage that was renewed early will have expired , and small employers will have to obtain aca - compliant coverage for plan year 2015 if they want to continue to offer coverage .

also , the transitional policy may expire or be extended ( depending on decisions made by state insurance commissioners ) , which will affect whether small employers have to offer aca - compliant coverage .

it is difficult to say how shop exchanges changes coupled with the potential requirement to provide aca - compliant coverage will affect participation in shop exchanges .

crs is not aware of data that estimate the number of small employers that early renewed or opted for the transitional policy and therefore may need to purchase aca - compliant coverage in 2015 or later years .

it is also difficult to predict whether the requirement to offer aca - compliant coverage will incentivize small employers to stop offering coverage or to continue offering coverage .

if small employers continue to offer coverage , does the increased functionality of the shop exchanges incentivize them to offer through the shop , or would they obtain coverage outside the shop exchanges ? .

this appendix explains the methods an employer purchasing coverage through an ff - shop exchange may use to determine its contributions toward employees' and their dependents' health insurance premiums .

table a - 1 illustrates how an employer's contributions to health insurance coverage obtained through an ff - shop in 2014 may be determined .

for the purposes of the example , the employer offers coverage to all of its employees and their dependents , and none of the employees or the dependents use tobacco products .

because this example is in the context of an ff - shop in 2014 , and employee choice is not allowed in ff - shops in 2014 , the employer may select only one qhp to offer to its employees .

in the example in table a - 1 , an issuer provides an employer with per - member premiums based on the base rate of the reference plan selected by the employer and the age of all enrollees ( column d multiplied by column c to obtain the per - member premiums in column e ) .

according to regulations , either state law or the employer may require that the ff - shop base the employer's contributions on separately calculated composite premiums rather than the per - member premiums ; however , hhs has indicated that ff - shops are able to accommodate composite ratings for employees only .

provided composite premiums are used for employees only , the resulting employer contribution toward each enrollee's coverage is determined by multiplying the employer contribution percentage ( column g ) by the composite premiums for employees ( column f ) or the per - member premiums for dependents ( column e ) .

the employer then pays the resulting contribution ( columns h , i ) toward each enrollee's premium .

table a - 2 illustrates how an employer's contributions to health insurance coverage obtained through an ff - shop that allows employee choice in 2015 may be determined .

as in the previous example , the employer offers coverage to all of its employees and their dependents , and none of the employees or the dependents use tobacco products .

because this scenario takes place in an ff - shop that allows employee choice in 2015 , the employer can select more than one qhp to offer to its employees .

in the example in table a - 2 , the employer selects one plan to serve as the reference plan on which contributions are based ( but employees will have the option to select other plans according to the ff - shop's particular employee choice arrangement ) .

as in the 2014 example , regulations provide that either state law or the employer may require that the ff - shop base contributions on separately calculated composite premiums , but hhs has indicated that ff - shops are able to accommodate composite ratings for employees only ( column g ) .

however , different from 2014 , an ff - shop may permit employers to define different contribution percentages for different employees ( full - time and part - time ) and their dependents ( columns h , i ) .

provided the composite premiums for employees and per - member premiums for dependents are used , the resulting employer contribution toward each enrollee's coverage is determined by multiplying the applicable employer contribution percentage by the applicable premiums .

the employer then pays the resulting contribution ( columns j , k ) toward each enrollee's premium for the qhp selected by the enrollee .

