it is often difficult , if not impossible , to enforce child support obligations in cases where the custodial parent and child live in one country and the noncustodial parent lives in another .

international cases are often challenging and time consuming for cse workers because there are no agreed - upon standards of proof , uniform procedures , or methods of communication .

while a multilateral cse treaty has existed since november 23 , 2007 , the united states just recently ratified the treaty .

this report provides an overview of the current child support enforcement ( cse ) system , including a discussion of how international cse cases are handled .

it provides a summary of the 2007 hague convention on the international recovery of child support and other forms of family maintenance ( the convention ) and contains current status information .

it also provides a description of the provisions included in p.l .

113-183 that pertain to enforcement of child support in international cases .

these provisions would implement the hague convention on international recovery of child support and any other multilateral agreement to which the united states is a party .

supporters of ratification of the hague convention provisions related to child support and family maintenance note that many americans who live abroad may owe child support , and also that there are thousands of foreigners with children who live in the united states for whom child support should be provided .

they contend that a noncustodial parent's residence in a foreign country should not prevent his or her children from receiving the child support to which they are entitled .

according to some commentators , the united states had not previously ratified any treaty relating to child support primarily because of fundamental differences in how jurisdiction is obtained over the involved parties .

in most foreign countries , jurisdiction in child support cases is based on the habitual residence of the custodial parent .

in contrast , although the child support order is established in the home state of the custodial parent in the united states , child support enforcement relies on the ability of the court to obtain personal jurisdiction over the noncustodial parent .

on august 30 , 2016 , president obama signed the instrument of ratification for the convention .

on september 7 , 2016 , the united states deposited its instrument of ratification with the ministry of foreign affairs of the kingdom of the netherlands , which is the depository for the convention .

the cse program was enacted in 1975 ( p.l .

93-647 ) as a federal - state program ( title iv - d of the social security act ) .

its purpose is to help strengthen families by securing financial support for children from their noncustodial parent on a consistent and continuing basis and by helping some families remain self - sufficient and off public assistance .

the cse program has evolved over time from a "welfare cost - recovery" program into a "family - first" program that seeks to enhance the well - being of families by making child support a more reliable source of income .

child support orders require noncustodial parents to fulfill their financial responsibility to their children by contributing to the payment of childrearing costs .

the cse program provides seven major services on behalf of children: ( 1 ) parent location , ( 2 ) paternity establishment , ( 3 ) establishment of child support orders , ( 4 ) review and modification of child support orders , ( 5 ) collection of child support payments , ( 6 ) distribution of child support payments , and ( 7 ) establishment and enforcement of medical support .

all 50 states , the district of columbia , and three u.s. territories ( guam , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands ) operate cse programs and are entitled to federal matching funds .

the federal government reimburses each state and the jurisdictions listed above 66% of the cost of operating its cse program .

in addition , the federal government pays the states and jurisdictions an incentive payment to encourage them to operate effective programs .

state cse programs are usually operated at the county level of government in the human services department , department of revenue , or the state attorney general's office .

states must comply with a comprehensive set of requirements as a condition for receiving federal funds for operating state cse programs .

the cse program is administered at the federal level by the office of child support enforcement ( ocse ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

with the exception of the recent ratification of the convention , the united states had not ratified any of the long - standing multinational treaties or conventions related to the recognition and enforcement of child support obligations .

according to some commentators , the united states had not joined these treaties primarily because of fundamental differences in how jurisdiction is obtained over the involved parties .

in most foreign countries , jurisdiction in child support cases is based on the habitual residence of the custodial parent .

in contrast , although the child support order is established in the home state of the custodial parent in the united states , child support enforcement relies on the ability of the court to obtain personal jurisdiction over the noncustodial parent .

title iii of p.l .

113-183 includes provisions that would implement the convention .

although there are several other provisions in title iii related to the cse program , this report focuses solely on the provisions that are related to improving the enforcement of child support in international cases .

p.l .

113-183 requires the secretary of hhs to use the authorities provided by law to ensure the compliance of the united states with any multilateral child support convention to which the united states is a party .

according to cbo this provision is expected to reduce federal direct spending by $1 million across 11 years ( fy2014-fy2024 ) .

the convention will not affect intrastate or interstate child support cases in the united states .

it will only apply to cases where the custodial parent and child live in one country and the noncustodial parent lives in another country .

p.l .

113-183 gives other countries participating in the convention access to the federal parent locator service ( fpls ) .

the fpls is an assembly of systems operated by ocse to assist states in locating noncustodial parents , putative fathers , and custodial parties for the establishment of paternity and child support obligations , as well as in the enforcement and modification of orders for child support , custody , and visitation .

under prior federal law , the fpls was only allowed to transmit information in its databases to "authorized persons," which included ( 1 ) child support enforcement agencies ( and their attorneys and agents ) ; ( 2 ) courts ; ( 3 ) the resident parent , legal guardian , attorney , or agent of a child owed child support ; and ( 4 ) foster care and adoption agencies .

p.l .

113-183 expands the definition of an "authorized person" to include an entity designated as a central authority for child support enforcement in a "foreign reciprocating country" or in a "foreign treaty country" in cases involving international enforcement of child support .

the fpls assists federal and state agencies in identifying overpayments and fraud , and assists with assessing benefits .

developed in cooperation with the states , employers , federal agencies , and the judiciary , the fpls was expanded by prwora to include the following: the national directory of new hires ( ndnh ) : a central repository of employment , unemployment insurance , and wage data from state directories of new hires , state workforce agencies , and federal agencies .

the federal case registry ( fcr ) : a national database that contains information on individuals in child support cases and child support orders .

the federal offset program ( fop ) : a program that collects past - due child support payments from the tax refunds of parents who have been ordered to pay child support .

the federal administrative offset program ( faop ) : a program that intercepts certain federal payments in order to collect past - due child support .

the passport denial program ( pdp ) : a program that works with the secretary of state in denying the passport of any person that has been certified as owing a child support debt greater than $2,500 .

the multistate financial institution data match ( msfidm ) : a program that allows child support agencies a means of locating financial assets of individuals owing child support .

in addition , the fpls also has access to external sources for locating information such as the internal revenue service ( irs ) , the social security administration ( ssa ) , veterans affairs ( va ) , the department of defense ( dod ) , the national security agency ( nsa ) , and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) .

p.l .

104-193 ( the 1996 welfare reform law ) recognized federal responsibility for international child support enforcement and gave the department of state and the department of health and human services the authority to establish and administer reciprocal agreements with other countries .

countries with which the united states has entered into formal agreements are called "foreign reciprocating countries. .

p.l .

104-193 provided for services at the federal level through a central authority to ensure an efficient , consistent , and workable system in cooperation with the states and foreign reciprocating countries .

ocse serves as the u.s. central authority for international child support cases .

p.l .

113-183 gives states the option to require individuals in foreign countries to apply for cse services through their country's appropriate central authority for child support enforcement .

if the individual resides in a foreign country that is not a "reciprocating" or "treaty" country , the state may choose to accept or reject the application for cse services .

p.l .

113-183 amends section 454 ( 32 ) ( a ) of the social security act ( ssa ) to include requests for cse services by a "foreign treaty country" that has a reciprocal arrangement with a state as though it is a request by a state .

it also amends section 454 ( 32 ) ( c ) of the ssa to include a "foreign treaty country" and a "foreign individual" as entities that do not have to provide applications , and against whom no costs will be assessed , for cse services .

p.l .

113-183 establishes a definition for three terms: ( 1 ) "foreign reciprocating country," ( 2 ) "foreign treaty country," and ( 3 ) "2007 family maintenance convention. .

it defines a "foreign reciprocating country" as a foreign country ( or political subdivision thereof ) that the hhs secretary has declared as having or implementing procedures to establish and enforce duties of support for residents of the united states at no cost or low cost .

it defines a "foreign treaty country" as a foreign country for which the 2007 family maintenance convention is in force .

it defines the term "2007 family maintenance convention" to mean the hague convention on the international recovery of child support and other forms of family maintenance of november 23 , 2007 .

it amends section 459a ( c ) of the ssa by using the new terms "foreign reciprocating countries" and "foreign treaty countries" in describing cases for which the hhs secretary is responsible .

in other words , it would be the responsibility of the hhs secretary to facilitate support enforcement in cases involving residents of the united states and residents of "foreign reciprocating countries" or "foreign treaty countries. .

p.l .

113-183 amends section 459a ( c ) ( 2 ) of the ssa to include "foreign treaty countries" as entities that can receive notification as to the state of residence of the person being sought for child support enforcement purposes .

it also amends section 459a ( d ) of the ssa to include "foreign reciprocating countries" and "foreign treaty countries" as entities that states may enter into reciprocal arrangements with for the establishment and enforcement of child support obligations .

p.l .

113-183 amends federal law so that the federal income tax refund offset program is available for use by a state to handle cse requests from foreign reciprocating countries and foreign treaty countries .

the fop collects past - due child support payments from the income tax refunds of noncustodial parents who have been ordered to pay child support .

the program is a cooperative effort between ocse , the irs , and state cse agencies .

under the program , the irs , operating on request from a state filed through the secretary of hhs , intercepts tax returns and deducts the amount of certified child support arrearages .

the money is then sent to the state cse agency for distribution .

p.l .

113-183 amends section 466 ( f ) of the ssa to read as follows: "in order to satisfy section 454 ( 2 ) ( a ) , each state must have in effect the uniform interstate family support act , as approved by the american bar association on february 9 , 1993 , including any amendments officially adopted as of september 30 , 2008 by the national conference of commissioners on uniform state laws. .

 ( emphasis added ) this means that for a state to receive federal cse funding , each state's uifsa must include verbatim any amendments officially adopted as of september 30 , 2008 , by the nccusl .

states are required to adopt the 2008 amendments verbatim to ensure uniformity of procedures , requirements , and reporting forms .

collecting child support across state lines was difficult in the past .

laws varied from state to state , often causing complications that delayed the establishment and / or enforcement of child support orders .

congress recognized this problem and mandated ( pursuant to p.l .

104-193 ) that all states adopt uifsa to facilitate collecting child support across state lines .

given that roughly 33% of all cse cases involve more than one state , it is generally considered important that states have the same basic laws for handling interstate cases .

such a policy increases the likelihood that all interstate cases are handled under a similar statutory framework , thus moving closer to the "one - order" world in which a child would not be seriously disadvantaged in obtaining child support just because his or her parents do not live in the same state .

federal law requires states to treat past - due child support obligations as final judgments that are entitled to full faith and credit in every state .

this means that a person who has a child support order in one state does not have to obtain a second order in another state to obtain child support due should the noncustodial parent move from the issuing court's jurisdiction .

congress passed p.l .

103-383 , the full faith and credit for child support orders act ( ffccsoa ; 28 u.s.c .

§1738b ) in 1994 because of concerns about the growing number of child support cases involving disputes between parents who lived in different states and the ease with which noncustodial parents could reduce the amount of the obligation or evade enforcement by moving across state lines .

p.l .

103-383 required courts of all u.s. territories , states , and tribes to accord full faith and credit to a child support order issued by another state or tribe that properly exercised jurisdiction over the parties and the subject matter .

p.l .

103-383 addressed , for cases with more than one child support order issued for the same obligor and child , the need to determine which order to recognize for purposes of continuing , exclusive jurisdiction and enforcement .

p.l .

103-383 restricted a state court's ability to modify a child support order issued by another state unless the child and the custodial parent have moved to the state where the modification is sought or have agreed to the modification .

court jurisdiction: p.l .

113-183 amends 28 u.s.c .

§1738b by stipulating that a state court that has established a child support order has continuing , exclusive jurisdiction to modify its order if the order is the controlling order and ( 1 ) the state is the child's state of residence or that of any individual contestant or ( 2 ) the parties consent in a record or in open court that the court may continue to exercise jurisdiction to modify its order .

it clarifies 28 u.s.c .

§1738b by stipulating that a state court may modify a child support order issued by a court of another state if the court of the other state no longer has continuing , exclusive jurisdiction of a child support order because that state is no longer the residence of the child or an individual contestant and the parties have not consented in a record or in open court that the court of the other state may continue to exercise jurisdiction to modify its order .

it also makes minor changes to the definitions section of 28 u.s.c .

§1738b .

in addition , p.l .

104-193 clarified the definition of a child's home state and made several revisions to ensure that the full faith and credit laws could be applied consistently with uifsa .

p.l .

113-183 provides further clarification ( as noted above ) of under what conditions a state could modify a child support order .

p.l .

113-183 makes the amendments to 28 u.s.c .

§1738b effective on the date on which the hague convention on the international recovery of child support and other forms of family maintenance of november 23 , 2007 , enters into force for the united states .

in addition , it makes the amendments to the definitions section of 28 u.s.c .

§1738b effective on the date of enactment of p.l .

113-183 .

p.l .

113-183 requires that for a state to receive federal cse funding , each state's uifsa must include verbatim any amendments officially adopted as of september 30 , 2008 , by the nccusl .

it makes the uifsa provision effective for a state no later than the effective date of laws enacted by the state legislature ( that pertain to the provision ) , but in no case later than the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the state legislature that begins after the date of enactment of p.l .

113-183 .

in the case of a state that has a two - year legislative session , each year of the session is considered to be a separate regular session of the state legislature .

