this report describes and analyzes the discretionary appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fiscal year 2015 ( fy2015 ) .

it compares the president's request for fy2015 funding for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the enacted fy2014 appropriations for dhs , the house - and senate - reported homeland security appropriations measures for fy2015 , and the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

114-4 ) .

the first portion of this report provides an overview and historical context for reviewing dhs appropriations , highlighting various aspects including the comparative size of dhs components , the amount of non - appropriated funding the department receives , and trends in the timing and size of the department's appropriations legislation .

the second portion of the report outlines the legislative chronology of major events in funding the department for fy2015 .

the third portion of the report provides detailed information on dhs appropriations , broken down by component , with discussion of associated policy issues .

the report tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to dhs appropriations with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the report does not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor does the report systematically follow any other legislation related to the authorization or amendment of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of specialized budgetary concepts .

appendix a to this report explains several of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act .

the following descriptions reflect only the major actions taken on fy2015 homeland security appropriations .

for a more detailed description of the procedural actions taken , see crs report r43776 , congressional action on fy2015 appropriations measures , by [author name scrubbed] .

title i of the dhs appropriations bill provides funding for the department's management activities , analysis and operations ( a&o ) account , and the office of the inspector general ( oig ) .

the administration requested $1,172 million for these accounts in fy2015 , an increase of $134 million ( 12.9% ) above the fy2014 enacted level .

the house - reported bill would have provided $967 million , a decrease of $205 million ( 17.5% ) from the requested level and $70 million ( 6.8% ) below fy2014 .

the senate - reported bill would have provided $1,033 million , a decrease of $138 million ( 11.8% ) from the request and $4 million ( 0.4% ) below fy2014 .

title i of p.l .

114-4 provided $1,035 million , a decrease of $137 million ( 11.7% ) from the requested level and $3 million ( 0.3% ) below fy2014 .

table 4 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title i for fy2014 and the amounts requested by the administration , recommended by the house - and senate - reported bills , and provided by the enacted annual appropriation for fy2015 under title i .

title ii of the dhs appropriations bill , which includes over three - quarters of the budget authority provided in the legislation , contains the appropriations for u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , and the u.s. secret service ( usss ) .

the administration requested $29,828 million for these accounts in fy2015 , a decrease of $1,048 million ( 3.4% ) below the enacted level .

the house - reported bill provided $31,090 million , an increase of 4.2% from the requested level and 0.7% above fy2014 .

the senate - reported bill provided $30,731 million , an increase of 3.0% from the requested level and 0.5% below fy2014 .

title ii of p.l .

114-4 included $31,536 million , an increase of 5.5% from the requested level , and 2.1% above fy2014 .

senate - reported s. 2534 and p.l .

114-4 also included $213 million in overseas contingency operations funding for the coast guard .

this amount , requested by the administration after the house appropriations committee had marked up h.r .

4903 in full committee , is covered by an adjustment under the budget control act ( bca ) , and does not add to the total adjusted net discretionary budget authority in p.l .

114-4 .

table 6 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title ii for fy2014 and the amounts requested by the administration , recommended by the house - and senate - reported bills , and provided by the enacted annual appropriation for fy2015 under title ii .

title iii of the dhs appropriations bill contains the appropriations for the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) , the office of health affairs ( oha ) , and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

the administration requested $5,611 million for these accounts in fy2015 , a decrease of $341 million below the fy2014 enacted level .

the house - reported bill included $5,902 million , an increase of 5.2% above the requested level and 0.8% below fy2014 .

the senate - reported bill included $5,980 million , an increase of 6.6% above the requested level and 0.5% above fy2014 .

title iii of p.l .

114-4 included $5,979 million , an increase of 6.2% above the requested level and 0.5% above fy2014 .

in addition , p.l .

114-4 included $6,438 million for disaster relief as the administration requested .

this amount is covered by an adjustment under the budget control act ( bca ) , and does not add to the total adjusted net discretionary budget authority in p.l .

114-4 .

table 13 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title iii for fy2014 and the amounts requested by the administration , recommended by the house - and senate - reported bills , and provided by the enacted annual appropriation for fy2015 under title iii .

title iv of the dhs appropriations bill contains the appropriations for u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , the science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , and the domestic nuclear detection office .

the administration requested $1,771 million for these accounts in fy2015 , a decrease of $108 million below the enacted level .

the house - reported bill provided $1,801 million , an increase of 1.7% from the requested level and 4.1% below fy2014 .

the senate - reported bill provided $1,761 million , a decrease of 0.5% from the requested level , and 6.2% below fy2014 .

title iv of p.l .

114-4 included $1,795 million , an increase of 1.3% above the request , and 4.4% below fy2014 enacted levels .

table 17 lists the enacted amounts for the individual components of title iv for fy2014 and the amounts requested by the administration , recommended by the house - and senate - reported bills , and provided by the enacted annual appropriation for fy2015 under title iv .

title v of the dhs appropriations bill contains the general provisions for the bill .

general provisions typically include rescissions of funding from previous years that partially offset the score of the bill .

occasionally appropriations for special initiatives are found here as well .

this section of the report generally limits its discussion to new general provisions not mentioned elsewhere in the report and those with a direct impact on the budgetary scoring of the bill .

the administration generally requests rescissions in the accounts where they are made , rather than in this title .

however , this year , the administration proposed a $200 million rescission from the disaster relief fund in the general provisions of the bill .

the administration requested no appropriations through general provisions for fy2015 .

the administration proposed retaining 41 of the 78 general provisions from the fy2014 dhs appropriations act ( division f of p.l .

113-76 ) in the fy2015 appropriations act .

fifteen were proposed to be amended to one degree or another , and 26 remained without proposed changes .

these provisions may be modified to simply change their effective date , make adjustments for clarity of purpose , or provide or restore flexibility to certain aspects of departmental operations .

the administration therefore proposed eliminating 37 general provisions .

some general provisions , like those rescinding funds , have a one - time effect , and so are proposed for elimination the following years .

some are provisos proposed elsewhere in the bill , such as waivers on restrictions of the use of certain grant funds , or are consolidated , and therefore a separate general provision would be redundant .

others become overtaken by events or changes in permanent law , while others the administration proposes for elimination as they are , in their view , unduly restrictive on the department's operations or use and management of resources .

the administration also proposed adding six new general provisions aside from the aforementioned rescission .

these included the following: a new provision allowing obligation of $104 million in previously collected fees ; a provision authorizing aviation security fees and increasing aviation passenger fees for fy2015 ( this is in part similar to previously proposed provisions ) ; a new provision increasing the statutory cap on visas for crime victims ; a new provision authorizing uscis to use up to $3 million in fee revenues to start up the proposed u.s .

citizenship foundation ; a previously proposed provision authorizing a public awareness and outreach campaign on dam safety ; and a provision increasing cbp fees and authorizing the use of other fee revenues collected pursuant to the u.s. - colombia trade promotion agreement implementation act ( this is in part similar to previously proposed provisions , and a provision carried in the fy2014 act ) .

house - reported h.r .

4903 included $708 million in rescissions in title v. in addition , under this title $30 million was included for dhs financial systems modernization efforts .

these were the only provisions in this title that affected the score of the bill , providing a reduction in the net budget authority provided in the bill of $540 million .

the house appropriations committee concurred with the administration's request to drop 11 general provisions that had been included in the fy2014 homeland security appropriations act .

the house appropriations committee did not add any of the general provisions requested by the administration , with the exception of a rescission that it deepened .

the house added nine new general provisions , three of which had identical counterparts in the senate - reported bill: a provision requiring budget justification for structural pay reform affecting more than 100 fte or costing more than $5 million ; a provision making public safety officer survivor benefits available to the widow and children of a transportation security officer killed in the line of duty in 2013 ; and a provision requiring the administration provide estimates of the number of unaccompanied alien children anticipated to be apprehended in the coming budget year and the projected impact of those detentions and transfers on the budget of each component in the administration's budget request .

in total , house - reported h.r .

4903 included 74 general provisions .

senate - reported s. 2534 included $731 million in rescissions in title v. in addition , under this title $49 million was included for dhs headquarters consolidation , and $40 million for dhs financial systems modernization .

taken together , these provisions provide a reduction in the net budget authority provided in the bill of $505 million .

the senate appropriations committee concurred with the administration's request to drop 10 general provisions that had been included in the fy2014 homeland security appropriations act .

the senate appropriations committee did not add any of the general provisions requested by the administration , with the exception of a rescission that it deepened , and a portion of the fee proposal solely for hiring and retaining cbp officers at air and sea points of entry .

aside from the three new provisions noted above that were carried in both the house - and senate - reported bills , the senate appropriations also added seven of its own new general provisions .

in total senate - reported s. 2534 contains 73 general provisions .

p.l .

114-4 included $894 million in rescissions in title v. in addition , under this title $49 million was included for dhs headquarters consolidation , $34 million for dhs financial systems modernization , and $138 million for cbp .

taken together , these rescissions and other general provisions provide a reduction in the net budget authority provided in the bill of $674 million .

the act does not include 8 of the 34 general provisions included in the fy2014 homeland security appropriations act that the administration had asked to drop .

the act did not add any of the general provisions requested by the administration , with the exception of a rescission proposal that it deepened .

aside from the three new general provisions that were carried in both the house - and senate - reported bills , several other new general provisions were added .

three new general provisions from the house - reported bill , pertaining to staffing of exit lanes at airports , a report on dhs purchases of weapons , and a loran station were retained in p.l .

114-4 .

four new general provisions from the senate - reported bill , pertaining to inclusion of unauthorized fee increases in appropriations requests , posting of departmental reports , the repeal of a port of entry technology demonstration program , and a transfer of funds from the disaster assistance direct loan program to the disaster relief fund were retained as well .

in total , p.l .

114-4 contained 78 general provisions , one more than in fy2014 .

appendix a. appropriations terms and concepts budget authority , obligations , and outlays federal government spending involves a multistep process that begins with the enactment of budget authority by congress .

federal agencies then obligate funds from the enacted budget authority to pay for their activities .

finally , payments are made to liquidate those obligations ; the actual payment amounts are reflected in the budget as outlays .

budget authority is established through appropriations acts or direct spending legislation and determines the amounts that are available for federal agencies to spend .

the antideficiency act prohibits federal agencies from obligating more funds than the budget authority that was enacted by congress .

budget authority may also be indefinite , as when congress enacts language providing "such sums as may be necessary" to complete a project or purpose .

budget authority may be available on a one - year , multi - year , or no - year basis .

one - year budget authority is only available for obligation during a specific fiscal year ; any unobligated funds at the end of that year are no longer available for spending .

multi - year budget authority specifies a range of time during which funds can be obligated for spending ; no - year budget authority is available for obligation for an indefinite period of time .

obligations are incurred when federal agencies employ personnel , enter into contracts , receive services , and engage in similar transactions in a given fiscal year .

outlays are the funds that are actually spent during the fiscal year .

because multi - year and no - year budget authorities may be obligated over a number of years , outlays do not always match the budget authority enacted in a given year .

additionally , budget authority may be obligated in one fiscal year but spent in a future fiscal year , especially with certain contracts .

in sum , budget authority allows federal agencies to incur obligations and authorizes payments , or outlays , to be made from the treasury .

discretionary agencies and programs , and appropriated entitlement programs , are funded each year in appropriations acts .

discretionary and mandatory spending gross budget authority , or the total funds available for spending by a federal agency , may be composed of discretionary and mandatory spending .

discretionary spending is not mandated by existing law and is thus appropriated yearly by congress through appropriations acts .

the budget enforcement act of 1990 defines discretionary appropriations as budget authority provided in annual appropriation acts and the outlays derived from that authority , but it excludes appropriations for entitlements .

mandatory spending , also known as direct spending , consists of budget authority and resulting outlays provided in laws other than appropriation acts and is typically not appropriated each year .

however , some mandatory entitlement programs must be appropriated each year and are included in the appropriations acts .

within dhs , the coast guard retirement pay is an example of appropriated mandatory spending .

offsetting collections offsetting funds are collected by the federal government , either from government accounts or the public , as part of a business - type transaction such as offsets to outlays or collection of a fee .

these funds are not counted as revenue .

instead , they are counted as negative outlays .

dhs net discretionary budget authority , or the total funds that are appropriated by congress each year , is composed of discretionary spending minus any fee or fund collections that offset discretionary spending .

some collections offset a portion of an agency's discretionary budget authority .

other collections offset an agency's mandatory spending .

these mandatory spending elements are typically entitlement programs under which individuals , businesses , or units of government that meet the requirements or qualifications established by law are entitled to receive certain payments if they establish eligibility .

the dhs budget features two mandatory entitlement programs: the secret service and the coast guard retired pay accounts ( pensions ) .

some entitlements are funded by permanent appropriations , others by annual appropriations .

the secret service retirement pay is a permanent appropriation and as such is not annually appropriated , whereas the coast guard retirement pay is annually appropriated .

in addition to these entitlements , the dhs budget contains offsetting trust and public enterprise funds .

these funds are not appropriated by congress .

they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority .

302 ( a ) and 302 ( b ) allocations in general practice , the maximum budget authority for annual appropriations ( including dhs ) is determined through a two - stage congressional budget process .

in the first stage , congress sets overall spending totals in the annual concurrent resolution on the budget .

subsequently , these amounts are allocated among the appropriations committees , usually through the statement of managers for the conference report on the budget resolution .

these amounts are known as the 302 ( a ) allocations .

they include discretionary totals available to the house and senate committees on appropriations for enactment in annual appropriations bills through the subcommittees responsible for the development of the bills .

in the second stage of the process , the appropriations committees allocate the 302 ( a ) discretionary funds among their subcommittees for each of the appropriations bills .

these amounts are known as the 302 ( b ) allocations .

these allocations must add up to no more than the 302 ( a ) discretionary allocation and form the basis for enforcing budget discipline , since any bill reported with a total above the ceiling is subject to a point of order .

302 ( b ) allocations may be adjusted during the year by the appropriations committee by issuing a report delineating the revised suballocations as the various appropriations bills progress towards final enactment .

table a - 1 shows dhs's initial 302 ( b ) allocations in the house and senate for fy2015 , and comparable figures for fy2014 , the president's request for fy2015 , and the enacted fy2015 dhs appropriation .

the budget control act , discretionary spending caps , and adjustments the fy2012 appropriations bills were the first appropriations bills that were affected by the budget control act ( bca ) , which established discretionary security and nonsecurity spending caps for fy2012 and fy2013 , and overall caps that will govern the actions of appropriations committees in both houses .

subsequent legislation , including the bipartisan budget act of 2013 , has amended those caps .

for fy2015 , the overall cap on discretionary spending is $1,014 billion .

separate limitations are made for defense and non - defense spending — roughly $521 billion and $492 billion , respectively .

most of the budget for the department of homeland security is considered non - defense spending .

in addition , the bca allows for adjustments that would raise the statutory caps to cover funding for overseas contingency operations / global war on terror , emergency spending , and , to a limited extent , disaster relief and appropriations for continuing disability reviews and for controlling health care fraud and abuse .

three of the four justifications outlined in the bca for adjusting the caps on discretionary budget authority have played a role in dhs's appropriations process .

two of these — emergency spending and overseas contingency operations / global war on terror — are not limited .

the third justification — disaster relief — is limited .

under the bca , the allowable adjustment for disaster relief is determined by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , using the following formula: limit on disaster relief cap adjustment for the fiscal year = rolling average of the disaster relief spending over the last ten fiscal years ( throwing out the high and low years ) + the unused amount of the potential adjustment for disaster relief from the previous fiscal year .

for fy2014 , omb determined the allowable adjustment for disaster relief to be $12,143 million , of which only $5,717 million was exercised .

in february 2015 , omb noted the fy2015 allowable adjustment for disaster assistance would be $18,430 million: $11,913 million from the rolling average and $6,517 million in carryover from fy2014 .

fy2015 was the first year in which there was more than $1 billion of allowable adjustment for disaster relief carried over from the previous fiscal year .

appendix b. dhs appropriations in context dhs appropriations history as established earlier in the report , the department was first established by the homeland security act , p.l .

107-296 .

it became operational on january 24 , 2003 , in the middle of the fiscal year .

its initial partial year of operation was funded by transfers and supplemental appropriations .

fy2004 was the first year the department requested and received an annual appropriations bill .

the tables below present information on dhs discretionary appropriations , as enacted , for fy2004 through fy2014 .

to allow for comparisons over time , table b - 1 provides data in nominal dollars , while table b - 2 provides data in constant fy2013 dollars .

making meaningful comparisons over time for the department's appropriations as a whole is complicated by a variety of factors , the two most significant of which are the frequency of supplemental appropriations for the department , and the impact of disaster assistance funding .

supplemental funding , which frequently addresses congressional priorities , such as disaster assistance and border security , varies widely from year to year and as a result distorts year - to - year comparisons of total appropriations for dhs .

in the department's initial fiscal year of operations , it received over $5 billion in supplemental funding during that fiscal year in addition to all the resources transferred with the department's components .

twenty separate supplemental appropriations acts have provided appropriations to the department since it was established .

gross supplemental appropriations provided to the department in those acts exceed $115 billion .

table b - 1 and table b - 2 , in their second and third columns , provide amounts of new discretionary budget authority provided to dhs from fy2004 through fy2014 , and a total for each fiscal year in the fourth column .

one of dhs's larger component budgets is that of the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

that budget includes the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , which funds a large portion of the costs incurred by the federal government in the wake of disasters .

of the billions of dollars provided to the drf each year , only a single - digit percentage of this funding goes to pay for fema personnel and administrative costs tied to disasters ; the remainder is provided as assistance to states , communities , and individuals .

the gross level of funding provided to the drf has varied widely since the establishment of dhs depending on the occurrence and size of disasters , from less than $3 billion in fy2008 to more than $60 billion in fy2005 .

table b - 1 and table b - 2 , in their fifth column , provide the amount of new budget authority provided to the drf , and in the sixth column , show the total new budget authority provided to dhs without counting the drf .

a visual representation of this data is available in figure 3 .

