in the united states , the modern electric utility industry began to emerge about 100 years ago and would be guided by a philosophy which came to be called the "regulatory compact. .

under the compact , state and local governments generally granted utilities the monopoly right to provide electric power in a designated service territory , in exchange for an obligation to serve all electric power customers .

much of the nation's power generation and delivery infrastructure was built and maintained under this arrangement , with customers ultimately paying for the costs of electricity services .

state public utility commissions ( pucs ) or similar organizations provided oversight of the rates charged for electricity services .

pucs also approved the construction of new power plants and electric power lines , allowing utilities to recover costs of providing service in rates charged to customers .

the modern electric utility industry thus emerged and grew in most states as a virtual monopoly , with vertically integrated companies generating electric power , and delivering electricity directly to customers .

large , central station power plants were built employing economies of scale across much of the united states , most often fueled by coal , which was generally an inexpensive , local resource .

large - scale hydropower was developed where it was available as a resource .

in areas without access to cheap coal or hydropower , nuclear power later developed as an option for base load power to meet the growing demand for electricity .

natural gas - fired power plants were generally built to meet intermediate and peak load needs .

petroleum saw a brief period of increasing use in the 1970s and 1980s , mostly in dual fuel combustion turbines , but has declined ever since .

the vertically integrated , regulated model for the electric power industry remained essentially unchanged across the united states until the latter years of the last century .

the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 ( purpa ) ( p.l .

95-617 ) was arguably the law that ended the near utility monopoly on electric power .

among other goals , purpa was designed to conserve supplies of natural gas ( considered threatened at the time ) , encouraging fuel efficient cogeneration and alternative fuels and methods to generate electricity .

purpa required electric utilities to purchase power from these new power generators , essentially allowing a competitive provider into a utility's formerly exclusive service territory .

the efficiency of combustion turbines used for generating electricity accelerated as their use in purpa - qualified cogeneration projects expanded , and this in turn aided in the growth of the nonutility power sector .

the power generation sector has a variety of structures and ownership arrangements .

electric utilities have diversified ownership , including publicly owned utilities , investor - owned utilities , electric cooperatives , federal power agencies , and nonutility generators .

competition in the electricity industry was strengthened as federal policy with the passage of the energy policy act of 1992 ( epact92 ; p.l .

102-486 ) , allowing a new class of nonutility producers to emerge .

as is shown in figure 1 , the nonutility power generation sector is the largest in the united states .

in the early years of the last century , electric utility companies quickly realized that they could reduce costs and enhance reliability by interconnecting with one another , thus sharing generation resources .

the development of "power pools" allowed member electric utilities to exchange power , or transfer ( i.e. , "wheel" ) power to another utility in either wholesale or retail ( to an end - use customer ) transactions .

power pools can be "loose" or "tight," with the level of independence being the primary differentiator .

with ferc order 2000 , the transformation of existing tight power pools was completed with the formal establishment of the regional transmission organizations ( rtos ) in several regions of the united states ( see figure 2 ) .

this led to the rise of wholesale power markets , and enabled industry restructuring in various u.s. states and regions , requiring utilities in some states to move power plants into a competitive function , while retail distribution utilities remained under state regulation .

under this arrangement , utility transmission systems are run by the rto and are regulated largely under ferc jurisdiction .

in some states , retail competition was introduced to give end - use electricity consumers a choice between their incumbent utility supplier and competitive electricity suppliers .

power plants under this new regime were therefore required to compete with each other to sell power to retail distribution companies in markets administered by the rto .

nowadays , the electric utility model is under further pressure as the sector deals with issues such as the aging of power generation and other assets , the implementation of new environmental regulations leading to different choices in power generation fuels , and the development of technologies providing more and newer options for customers to self - generate electric power .

these factors have the potential to cause dramatic changes in how the united states acquires , generates , and uses electricity .

given that the united states seems to be at a turning point in the history of the electric power sector , some have advocated for the electric utility industry model to be reinvented under a "utility 2.0" paradigm , wherein the projected needs of society for electric power and services become the driving force behind future utility investments .

various states and jurisdictions have begun initiatives to look at what this new "regulatory compact" could specifically encompass .

the state of maryland , for example , has issued a report detailing its "vision of an energy future that is more reliable , cost effective , green , energy efficient , consumer - directed , and technology advanced .

utility 2.0 can make this service quality transformation a reality with major economic , environmental and security benefits to maryland and all its citizens. .

another proposed model for utility 2.0 in the state of new york would see development of a system capable of accommodating more renewable electricity from smaller solar and wind generation , and depend less on power from larger , central station power plants .

the question some stakeholders are asking is whether a formal transition from today's grid to the grid of the future is needed .

this report will begin to explore the issues , discussing what forms a transition could take , and suggest questions that congress may want to address .

electricity is fundamental to the commerce and daily functioning of the u.s. economy .

the modern , technological underpinning of manufacturing and services relies largely on digital devices which have increased u.s. productivity and global sales .

the way electricity is produced has changed in the last 40 years , along with the regulatory structures and laws governing its production in most of the united states .

the following sections will discuss some of the primary factors affecting the u.s. power sector .

the u.s. electric utility industry as it exists today largely reflects the underlying fuel resources , economics , and physical limitations which exist in various regions of the country .

these characteristics led to the specific technologies and infrastructure used to produce electricity .

the regulatory regime has changed in some parts of the united states from a cost - of - service approach to a competitive environment for power generating plants .

with the increasing availability of new technologies and paradigms for satisfying electricity demand , the traditional ways of doing things in the electric utility business are being challenged .

how some of these factors have and are expected to drive change is discussed in the following paragraphs .

the preceding sections have discussed some of the new drivers for technology in the power sector .

while the electric utility industry has also seen technological advances over the years , the economies of scale possible with large , central station power generation have discouraged any real change in the industry model .

but with aging of this power generation infrastructure , new environmental regulations , the prospect of increased supplies of natural gas for years to come , and the potential development of economic alternative power technologies , electric utilities are facing questions about the near - term future .

this section of the report will discuss how change may come to the electric utility industry , and the roles that government may possibly play .

the u.s. grid has long been considered as one of the wonders of the last century .

but the grid is aging and in need of modernization in many areas .

the average age of u.s. coal power plants , the mainstay of the industry is about 43 years , and supporting transmission and distribution systems are similarly aging .

new technologies and cost structures are now making inroads into u.s. electricity markets and may eventually result in dramatic changes to the industry over the next few decades .

the electricity industry is unlike most industries in that the product it produces is important to the functioning of our modern commercial society .

produced using economies of scale , electricity has been a fairly inexpensive enabler of national economic activity .

but the convergence of many factors — new environmental regulations , an aging electric utility infrastructure , the growing availability of cost - competitive consumer - oriented electricity technologies , and state implementation of policies to advance renewable electricity — is presenting challenges to the electric utility industry while providing consumers with increasing choices for obtaining electric power .

an evolution to some version of a new utility 2.0 model capable of providing for customer choice in a clean energy future has been advocated by some as the next logical step for the electric utility industry .

the electric utility industry would likely argue that before the united states can shift to utility 2.0 , the obligations of today's utility 1.0 model must be considered in plans to move forward .

such obligations would include the unrecovered costs of power plants and other infrastructure , and environmental and public safety obligations related to legacy coal and nuclear power .

it may well be assumed that the current electric utility model will continue to evolve .

a key to the future is likely to be cost control for many electric utilities , so that utility electricity prices will be competitive with other choices .

conversely , as utility customers seek to control their own costs or power - related decisions , the service choices offered to entice them to stay utility customers will probably increase , especially as the dg option becomes potentially more attractive .

the options for electric utilities to satisfy these customers in the future may even include support services for customer self - generation beyond merely providing backup power .

congress began to address the move of the electricity utility industry away from the regulatory compact concept by introducing competitive providers to the electric utility industry with purpa , and reinforced competition as federal policy with epact92 .

several congressional bills have contained provisions to further a range of technologies and paradigms , especially in the various states - must - consider standards .

in the future , congress may yet consider if a formal legislative initiative would be required to move the electric power industry to a clean energy power system should that be the goal .

congress may also consider legislation if a market failure is perceived or if consumer choice is seen to be unduly constrained .

