in 2014 , the armed offensive of the islamic state ( also known as isil , isis , or daesh ) in northern and western iraq and northeastern syria raised significant concerns for the united states .

after first ordering multiple deployments of u.s. troops to iraq to provide security to diplomatic personnel and facilities , advise iraqi security forces , and conduct intelligence gathering and reconnaissance , president obama began ordering u.s. military airstrikes on is forces in iraq in august 2014 .

later in september , after laying out plans for expanded use of military force against the islamic state in a televised speech to the american people , the president ordered u.s. military airstrikes in syria against both is forces and forces of the "khorasan group," identified by the president as part of al qaeda .

in 2015 , the president ordered new deployments to iraq , and the administration announced deployment of a small number of special operations forces to syria to conduct military operations that involve advising regional partner armed forces but also can include "unilateral" u.s. operations .

the intensified u.s. military engagement has raised numerous questions in congress and beyond about the president's authority to use military force against the islamic state .

some efforts began near the end of the 113 th congress to consider enactment of a new authorization for use of military force targeting the islamic state , and have continued into the 114 th congress ; the issue , however , remains contentious .

in addition , the president provided congress a new authorization proposal in february 2015 , and in his 2016 state of the union address again called on congress to enact a new aumf targeting the islamic state .

in 2016 , both u.s. military operations and deployments of u.s. armed forces increased to continue the campaign against the islamic state , and hostilities are ongoing .

president obama in his august 2014 notifications to congress of deployments and airstrikes in iraq indicated his powers as commander in chief and chief executive under article ii of the constitution gave him authority to undertake such action .

obama administration officials and the president obama's september 2014 notifications to congress for airstrikes and other actions in iraq and syria , however , stated that two enacted authorizations for use of military force ( aumfs ) , the authorization for use of military force ( 2001 aumf ; p.l .

107-40 ) , and the authorization for use of military force against iraq resolution of 2002 ( 2002 aumf ; p.l .

107-243 ) , provide authorization for certain u.s. military strikes against the islamic state in iraq and syria , as well as the khorasan group of al qaeda in syria .

after these notifications , however , president obama indicated on november 5 , 2014 , that he intended to enter into discussions with congressional leaders to develop a new aumf specifically targeting the islamic state , in order to "right - size and update whatever authorization congress provides to suit the current fight , rather than previous fights" authorized by the 2001 and 2002 aumfs .

president obama called on congress to enact a new aumf targeting the islamic state in his january 2015 state of the union address , and transmitted a draft aumf to congress on february 11 , 2015 .

although the obama administration claimed 2001 aumf and 2002 aumf authority for its recent and future actions against the islamic state , these claims have been subject to debate .

some contend that u.s. military operations against the islamic state also fall outside the president's article ii powers .

concerned with congress's constitutional role in the exercise of the war power , perceived presidential overreach in that area of constitutional powers , and expansion of the use of military force in iraq and syria , several members of congress have continued to express the view that continued use of military force against the islamic state requires congressional authorization .

members have differed on whether such authorization is needed , given existing authorities , or whether such a measure should be enacted .

near the end of the 113 th congress , a number of members proposed new authorization proposals ( several of these are examined in greater detail in appendix b ) .

in december 2014 , the senate foreign relations committee conducted a hearing and considered an is aumf proposed by committee chairman robert menendez .

prior to the committee's markup of the proposal on december 11 , the committee held a hearing on december 9 with secretary of state john kerry to discuss the obama administration's views on enactment of a new is aumf .

senator menendez's is aumf proposal , as amended and reported favorably out of committee on december 13 ( s.j.res .

47 ) , would have authorized the use of u.s. armed forces against the islamic state and "associated persons or forces," prohibited "ground combat operations" with limited exceptions , repealed the 2002 aumf , and sunset the authorization in the 2001 aumf and the is aumf itself three years after enactment .

at the hearing , secretary kerry reiterated president obama's earlier - stated position that the administration supported enactment of a new aumf targeting the islamic state .

the secretary stated that the administration agreed with the three - year sunset of the authorization contained in senator menendez's proposal , "subject to provisions for extension" of that authorization .

he stated the administration's view , however , that such authority "should give the president the clear mandate and flexibility he needs to successfully prosecute the armed conflict against [the islamic state]," and thus the administration opposed limitation on the use of ground combat forces , and geographic restriction limiting operations to iraq and syria .

the 113 th congress did not ultimately enact a new is authorization bill , and many members called upon the president to submit his own proposal .

for a comparison of multiple is aumfs proposed in the 113 th congress and issues raised by their provisions , see appendix b .

during the 114 th congress , several proposals for a new is aumf or repeal of existing aumfs were introduced and considered .

appendix a provides a comparison of is aumf proposals introduced or announced during the 114 th congress , including president obama's february 15 , 2015 , proposal .

the below section discusses key elements and related issues concerning these proposals , as well as other proposals that aim to alter existing legislation or presidential action regarding military action against the islamic state .

early in the 115 th congress , the issue of a new is - specific aumf remains of interest to many members of congress .

one new aumf has been proposed as of the date of this report .

identical to the joint resolution he introduced in the 114 th congress ( h.j.res .

33 ) , representative adam kinzinger introduced the authorization for use of military force against the islamic state of iraq and the levant ( h.j.res .

63 ) on february 3 , 2017 .

the proposal would authorize the president "to use the armed forces of the united states as the president determines to be necessary and appropriate against the islamic state of iraq and the levant ( 'isil' ) or associated persons or forces.... " the proposal defines the term "associated persons or forces" as "individuals and organizations fighting for , on behalf of , or alongside isil or any closely - related successor entity in hostilities against the united states or its coalition partners. .

it requires the president to report on activities undertaken pursuant to the authorization every three months , and it would repeal the 2002 aumf .

on february 11 , 2015 , president obama provided congress with a draft proposal for a new is aumf , stating in an accompanying letter that he "can think of no better way for the congress to join [the president] in supporting our nation's security than by enacting this legislation , which would show the world we are united in our resolve to counter the threat posed by isil. .

the president's proposal would have authorized the use of u.s. armed forces that he deems "necessary and appropriate" against the islamic state and associated persons or forces .

in the proposed authorization , "the term 'associated persons or forces' means individuals and organizations fighting for , on behalf of , or alongside isil or any closely - related successor entity in hostilities against the united states or its coalition partners. .

the authorization did not include authority for the use of u.s. armed forces for "enduring offensive ground combat operations. .

the proposal's authorization would have terminated three years after enactment , and contained a provision repealing the 2002 aumf upon enactment .

the president would have been required to report to congress at least every six months on actions taken under the proposed is aumf .

the president's proposal raised a number of issues for congress and its role in authorizing the use of military force: first , the proposal would have prohibited "enduring offensive ground combat operations," instead of specifically prohibiting the use of ground combat forces , or execution of ground combat operations , with exceptions for certain types of units or operations , as some of the previous is aumf proposals have .

it is not clear what that limitation , expressed as it is , would mean in practice , although the president's letter states that it is designed to allow the same excepted units and / or operations .

second , the proposal did not include any geographical limitation , possibly enabling the use of military force in countries other than iraq and syria .

third , the definition of "associated persons or forces," especially the inclusion of the phrase "fighting ... on behalf of ... isil," might be considered lacking in precision , leading to confusion in the future interpretation of what constitutes a lawfully targeted entity .

fourth , the proposal , unlike many of the previous is aumf proposals , did not provide a purpose or objective for the use of u.s. armed forces against the islamic state in the authorization language itself .

this could lead to concerns that the authorization does not sufficiently direct the president's actions or provide a definition of victory , and therefore authorizes military operations without an endpoint or measurable goal .

fifth , the proposal did not contain a provision that repeals or sunsets that measure , unlike most of the is aumf proposals previously introduced .

finally , the reporting requirement was for a basic periodic "actions taken" report , and would have been similar to certain reporting requirements already in place concerning deployed u.s. armed forces .

this is in contrast to other past is aumf proposals , which have required information concerning all targeted entities , specific reports on operations and effectiveness of those operations , and the budget effects of operations .

president obama , in his december 6 , 2015 , address to the nation after the killings in san bernardino , ca , by individuals who pledged support for the islamic state , renewed his call for congress to enact a new authorization for use of force against the islamic state: [i]f congress believes , as i do , that we are at war with isil , it should go ahead and vote to authorize the continued use of military force against these terrorists .

for over a year , i have ordered our military to take thousands of airstrikes against isil targets .

i think it's time for congress to vote to demonstrate that the american people are united , and committed , to this fight .

president obama made similar comments in his state of the union address on january 12 , 2016 , stating , "if this congress is serious about winning this war , and wants to send a message to our troops and the world , authorize the use of military force against isil .

take a vote. .

as in previous statements , however , president obama did not link enactment of a new is aumf to the source of current presidential authority to direct the use of military force against the islamic state , and indicated that military action against the group would continue regardless: "[t]he american people should know that with or without congressional action , isil will learn the same lessons as terrorists before them. .

in general , language in a new aumf targeting the islamic state and other groups ( is aumf ) could either broaden the purpose of military force to include unspecified u.s. national security interests , or narrow the scope of authorization to specific objectives related to the administration's stated goal of "degrading and ultimately destroying" the islamic state .

congress could limit the is aumf's geographic scope , authorizing force only in iraq and / or syria .

with continued uncertainty surrounding the iraqi government , congress might include authorization to use u.s. armed forces in iraq in furtherance of political stability objectives .

provisions in any is aumf targeting the islamic state might address the possible effect that targeting the islamic state in syria and iraq could have on the ongoing conflict in syria .

congress might also include a prohibition on the use of appropriated funds for the use of military force outside the scope of the specified authorization .

proposals for a new is aumf might contain provisions to limit presidential authority to use military force against the islamic state as to scope and duration , and in some cases to sunset or repeal the existing authority in the 2001 and 2002 aumfs .

president obama stated that an is authorization should provide the flexibility to carry out "not just our strategy [for the military campaign against the islamic state] over the next two or three months , but our strategy going forward. .

it could be argued , however , that even if limitations are enacted and perceived later to have a deleterious effect on the u.s. campaign against the islamic state , such limitations could be removed or modified through subsequent legislative action if the need arises .

such limitations and an overall lack of flexibility in any is aumf , however , might be difficult to change legislatively if members of congress cannot agree to changes ; neither the 2001 nor 2002 aumf has been amended , for example , despite the stated need for amendments by observers and members over the lifespan of those two measures .

the following sections address some specific aspects of an aumf that have or might come under debate in the 114 th congress .

some observers and members of congress have argued that recent open - ended , broadly worded authorizations can empower a president to continue military operations outside of congress's intent .

an is aumf could include language in the authorizing provision identifying the specific purpose for and scope of the president's use of u.s. military force , narrowing or broadening the president's flexibility .

an authorization that authorizes force to defend "u.s. national security" against the threat posed by the islamic state would seem to provide a broad "national security" basis for possible long - term , open - ended military operations .

authorizing force to protect u.s. "interests" generally would seem to provide even wider authority to the president , while including the goal of protecting both the united states and u.s. allies could expand the range of purposes for military action .

as to scope , many past aumfs include language stating that the president can use all "necessary and appropriate" force to achieve the purpose of the authorization .

while this could provide the president with the flexibility he needs to effectively employ u.s. armed forces , such language leaves the determination of the form and extent of u.s. military force generally to the president .

congress could decide to place limitations and conditions on any broader purpose and scope provisions in an attempt to shape the president's use of u.s. military force .

 ( see " limitations and conditions ," below. ) .

any new is aumf would be expected to name the islamic state ( or one of its other monikers , including isis , isil , or daesh ) as the primary entity to be targeted by authorized u.s. military force .

as evidenced by the implementation of the 2001 aumf , however , a number of issues arise in determining exactly who can be lawfully targeted under such a provision , and the extent to which congress desires to define and / or limit the universe of lawful targets in an is aumf .

first , while specifically targeting the islamic state provides a basic starting point for determining authorized targets , in many cases it might be unclear whether individuals are in fact part of the islamic state , are part of groups fighting alongside the islamic state , or are merely part of non - aligned groups also fighting in the region , either against the united states and its allies or otherwise .

congress might also wish to include language providing for future iterations of the structure of the islamic state group .

the islamic state might splinter at multiple points in time into several new entities with different names and different affiliations , or combine with other groups to form new entities .

indeed , the islamic state itself was formerly known , among other things , as al qaeda in iraq ( aqi ) , and its former close relationship and subsequent reported split with al qaeda has complicated determinations of whether the 2001 aumf could be applied against it .

an is aumf could include language that extends the authority to use military force against any successor entities of the islamic state .

perhaps the aspect of identifying lawful targeted entities considered most fraught is the matter of "associated forces. .

one of the central criticisms of the application of authority in the 2001 aumf has been the expansion of military force to target entities that successive administrations have designated "co - belligerent" with al qaeda and the taliban .

in the context of the current campaign against the islamic state , the obama administration has asserted that the islamic state can be targeted as it can be considered a branch or in some ways a successor to al qaeda .

it can be argued that this opens the possibility of military force being used now and in the future against a number of groups associated with the islamic state , further expanding the universe of targeted entities , possibly in countries other than iraq and syria .

some recent is aumf proposals have attempted to better define what constitutes "associated forces," or requires presidential reporting on or certification of newly designated associated forces , in an attempt to circumscribe the number of lawfully targeted entities and ensure congressional input into any expansion of such entities .

the term "associated forces" would seem to apply to forces that are not part of is forces but are fighting in concert with such forces .

some proposals , however , such as president obama's is aumf proposal , include language that seems to define both is and associated forces , stating the term means "individuals and organizations fighting for , on behalf of , or alongside isil.... " this language might be seen as overly broad and vague ; members of congress may desire to more precisely define the term , ensuring that only those forces that are determined to directly engage in military operations in cooperation with is forces are lawfully targeted under any is aumf .

on the other hand , given the continued u.s. policies of defending u.s. national security , stabilizing and maintaining a democratic iraq , and supporting moderate syrian groups fighting the syrian forces of the asad government , an is aumf could eschew the "associated forces" term in favor of targeting the islamic state and any other individuals or groups that pose a threat to those policies .

in considering any proposals to limit the authority of an is aumf , for example , by prohibiting the use of ground forces or constraining operations to a certain geographic area , congress must weigh competing interests .

the president's proposal would not allow "enduring offensive ground combat operations," while several previous is aumf proposals prohibited the use of ground combat forces or operations with specific carve - outs regarding special forces and training , among other units / operations .

understanding the expected effect of these different provisions would likely be key to congress's decision on including them into a finalized is aumf .

the limitation on the use of ground forces or prohibiting ground combat operations might , as some argue , significantly restrict the ability of the president and u.s. military leadership to prosecute conflict against the islamic state in the manner they feel is most effective .

some in congress might consider such restriction acceptable , however , if it is determined to avoid the involvement of the u.s. armed forces in another large - scale ground conflict following so closely upon the end of two such conflicts in iraq and afghanistan .

a geographic limitation might hinder the president's ability to strike is and associated forces in countries other than iraq and syria , despite these forces' proven ability to cross state borders when it suits their purposes .

in addition , as more groups pledge to fight alongside the islamic state , or identify themselves as parts of the islamic state itself , in countries such as egypt , libya , algeria , saudi arabia , and yemen , it could be reasonably expected that the president might determine that u.s. military operations should expand outside iraq and syria in the future .

congress , however , might wish to include such a limitation to prevent a similar geographic expansion of military operations to the president's expansion under the 2001 aumf's authority to several countries other than afghanistan .

the president's proposal includes a three - year sunset provision automatically terminating the is - specific authorization ; past proposals like h.j.res .

27 ( 114 th cong. ) .

would have terminated the new authorization and repealed the 2001 aumf after three years ; representative schiff's december 2015 draft is aumf proposal would have repealed the 2001 and 2002 aumfs immediately , replacing them with a comprehensive authorization against the islamic state , al qaeda , and the afghan taliban .

there is concern that congress placing time limitations on the campaigns against the islamic state , as well as al qaeda and other terrorist groups targeted under the 2001 aumf , would send the wrong message to such targeted groups and the world about u.s. resolve to defeat these groups .

on the other hand , a sunset on authority to use military force could be utilized to ensure that the is and 2001 aumf authorizations are not interpreted to authorize the use of military force in perpetuity , and in a manner that some perceive as outside the scope and intent of the original authorizations .

given the executive branch's continuing reliance on that authorization to conduct the current campaign against the islamic state , for example , leaving the 2001 aumf in place without amendment might be a continuing source of confusion and contention concerning presidential authority to use military force against the islamic state , and in iraq , syria , and the middle east / north africa region in general .

in any case , some argue , automatic terminations of authority might force congress to reconsider previous aumfs and their provisions in light of changed circumstances , amending and reauthorizing as congress sees necessary .

although the executive branch has provided information both publicly and in briefings to members of congress concerning the campaign against the islamic state , congress may decide to require the president to report to congress both before a new authorization can enter into effect , and at regular intervals as the campaign moves forward .

ensuring congress is being presented with substantive , up - to - date information might serve to mitigate concerns over unchecked expansion of the scope and duration of military operations taken under any is aumf .

president obama's proposal would have required general reporting on the actions taken under the authorization every six months , which is in line with the existing reporting requirements in the war powers resolution .

previous is aumf proposals have contained more frequent and detailed reporting requirements .

representative schiff's december 2015 draft is aumf proposal sought to replace limiting provisions defining targetable associated forces and circumscribing the geographic and operational scope of the new authorization , instead creating specific congressional reporting requirements on those issues .

members of congress might wish to have clear strategy presented before agreeing to authorize military force , requiring a report explaining such a strategy to congress ( such as the report required in h.j.res .

30 ) , and make it a condition of authorization .

periodic reporting could require updated information on the effectiveness of previously stated strategy , and the extent to which strategic goals are being achieved .

appendix a .

comparison of is aumf proposals from the 114 th congress as discussed in the main text of this report , there have been several new proposals for authorizations to use military force against the islamic state during the 114 th congress , both from members of congress and the president ( see table a - 1 ) .

table b - 2 , below , provides a breakdown of these seven proposals by type of provision .

s. 1587 and h.r .

4208 contain identical provisions , and are treated as one proposal in the table .

s.j.res .

26 and s.j.res .

29 contain substantially similar provisions , but some are not identical , and thus the resolutions are treated separately .

appendix b .

comparison of is aumf proposals from the 113 th congress near the end of the 113 th congress , a number of members proposed several new authorizations to use military force against the islamic state: the analysis provided below compares similar types of provisions included in is aumf proposals from the 113 th congress and issues related to those provisions .

table b - 2 provides a breakdown of seven out of eight of these proposals by type of provision .

treatment of s.j.res .

47 is included in the section entitled " calls for a new aumf and congressional action in the 113th congress " in the main text of this report .

