article iii of the constitution established the judicial branch of the united states , consisting of the supreme court and of any "inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish.... " to staff such courts , the constitution empowered life - tenured and salary - protected judges to adjudicate certain "cases" or "controversies," including cases arising under the constitution .

the supreme court , in marbury v. madison , held that the judicial power to interpret the constitution necessarily includes the power of judicial review — that is , the power to countermand the decisions by other government agents because a given decision contravenes the constitution .

judicial review is not only a potent tool for the judiciary — it is also a controversial one , in that unelected federal judges possess the power to undo the decisions of the branches that are theoretically the most responsive to the people .

from the early days of the republic to the new deal to modern times , the history of the united states is replete with examples of conflicts between the political branches and the judiciary over the latter's use of the power of judicial review .

indeed , over the last two terms of the supreme court , the high court , whether in striking down section 3 of the federal defense of marriage act ( doma ) in united states v. windsor or section 441 of the federal election campaign act ( feca ) in mccutcheon v. fec , has shown a willingness to exercise its power to invalidate a congressionally enacted law , and , in turn , the supreme court's exercise of the power of judicial review has led to sharp criticisms of the court and accusations of judicial "activism" thwarting the will of the majority .

notwithstanding the recent high - profile matters in which the court has exercised its often controversial power of judicial review , judicial invalidation of democratically enacted laws on constitutional grounds remains relatively rare at the supreme court .

of the 75 opinions issued by the roberts court in the october 2013 term , only one decision — mccutcheon — invalidated a congressionally enacted law on constitutional grounds , and three cases declared a positive enactment under state law to be unconstitutional .

the court's apparent reticence in using judicial review is supported by long - standing case law cautioning against judicial review and counseling courts to "avoid" unnecessarily broad rulings on constitutional questions .

for example , the supreme court has established a "time - honored presumption" that a congressionally enacted law is constitutional , and , as a general rule , courts should not "pass on questions of constitutionality ... unless such adjudication is unavoidable. .

indeed , the supreme court has established a host of loosely related rules generally called the constitutional avoidance doctrine that discourage a federal court from issuing broad rulings on matters of constitutional law .

after providing general background on the power of judicial review and the major theories justifying the constitutional avoidance doctrine , this report explores the various rules that allow a court to avoid a broad ruling that invalidates a democratically enacted law and the logic behind those rules .

the report concludes with an exploration of how the doctrine of constitutional avoidance has influenced some of the recent jurisprudence of the roberts court , criticisms of the doctrine , and the implications for congress .

in establishing the federal tripartite government , the framers of the constitution , while proponents of democracy , were wary of any form of unchecked power , even when that power was lodged in a democratic majority .

as a consequence , the framers envisioned a written constitution , which protected specific values , principles , and rights , as a limit of what could be changed through ordinary political processes .

because the political branches may not be expected to always adhere to the constitutional limitations placed on each body , as these branches are most directly responsive to the often temporary whims of the people , the federal judiciary established under article iii was deliberately designed by the framers of the constitution to be a "countermajoritarian" branch that interpreted the written constitution and protected its principles .

the constitution did this by "insulating the federal judiciary" from potential pressures , from either the political branches or the public , which could potentially "skew the decision making process or compromise the integrity or legitimacy of federal court decisions. .

the key sources of the judiciary "insulation" from the political processes are the good behavior clause and the compensation clause of article iii .

for the framers , the good behavior clause , by creating a "permanent tenure of judicial offices," ensures an "independent spirit in judges," and the compensation clause , by creating a "fixed provision for [the judiciary's] support," prevents the political branches from having power over a judge's subsistence and , with that , "power over his will. .

while the constitution itself is silent on the power of judicial review , in marbury v. madison , chief justice john marshall formally concluded that the logic of the written constitution coupled with an independent judiciary necessitated the federal judiciary's unique role in being able to invalidate the acts of other branches of government that contravened the constitution .

in contrast to the political branches , the federal judiciary as envisioned by the nation's founding document arguably raised few concerns and was the subject of little debate for the framers of the constitution .

records from the constitutional convention of 1787 consist of "surprisingly little" on the federal judiciary .

most delegates to the convention took "for granted" even the seemingly most controversial aspect of the federal judicial power , the power of judicial review .

moreover , the constitution itself devotes — relative to the other branches — very little attention to the role of the judiciary: less than 500 words .

and in the midst of the debate over whether to ratify the constitution , alexander hamilton famously downplayed anti - federalist concerns regarding the power of the federal courts , calling the judiciary the "least dangerous branch" because the judiciary possesses neither the power of the purse , like the legislative branch , nor the power of the sword , like the executive branch .

in sharp contrast to the views of the framers , american history has been replete with examples of outcry at the scope of the powers provided to the unelected federal judiciary .

thomas jefferson , in the wake of his presidency , disavowed the power of judicial review , arguing that "[e]ach of the three departments has equally the right to decide for itself what is its duty under the constitution , without any regard to what the others may have decided for themselves under a similar question. .

andrew jackson , in vetoing the reauthorization of the bank of the united states , dismissed the 1819 case mcculloch v. maryland that upheld the constitutionality of the bank , contending that "the opinion of the judges has no more authority over congress than the opinion of congress has over the judges , and on that point the president is independent of both. .

in the wake of dred scott v. sandford and its declaration that african americans had "no rights which the white man was bound to respect," abraham lincoln , in his first inaugural address , famously noted that , if the policy of government upon vital questions ... is to be irrevocably fixed by decisions of the supreme court ... the people will have ceased to be their own rulers , having ... practically resigned their government into the hands of that eminent tribunal .

while modern criticisms of the court have eschewed explicitly disputing marbury's central holding , controversies over the power of judicial review have extended into the 20 th and 21 st centuries .

in 1935 , franklin roosevelt prepared a message announcing that he would ignore the court's decision in the gold clause cases , deterred only by a favorable ruling by the high court .

and the supreme court's invalidation of several of the central features of roosevelt's new deal spurred the president's infamous "court packing" plan aimed at limiting the power of the court to invalidate progressive legislation .

two decades later , the court's decision in brown vs. board of education ending racial segregation in public schools spurred intense backlash against the court in the south , with one prominent southern senator going so far as to describe brown as a "legislative decision by a political court.... " by the late 1960s , richard nixon coined the phrase "judicial activism" to describe the constitutional jurisprudence of the warren court and pledged to appoint "strict constructionists" to the court to "restore" a proper "balance," leading some scholars to suggest that nixon's message in 1968 was centered on the anti - marbury proposition that it was "not for the court to be deciding major constitutional issues. .

and president obama , following oral argument regarding the constitutionality of the affordable care act , expressed concern that an "unelected group of people" would take the "unprecedented , extraordinary step of overturning a law that was passed by a strong majority of a democratically elected congress. .

the framers' treatment of the judiciary's powers juxtaposed with the political branches' often - fractious relationship with the judiciary illustrates the "root difficulty" with the power of judicial review .

on one hand , an independent judiciary is needed to ensure that the core norms of our society , as embodied in the constitution , are enforced against temporary populist interests .

after all , according to professor alexander bickel in his seminal work the least dangerous branch , "when the pressure for immediate results is strong enough and emotions ride high enough," the political branches may "prefer to act on expediency rather than take the long view. .

in contrast to acting on "expediency," the federal judiciary , per bickel , acts on "principle" and , therefore , should be expected to be the central governmental actor that , for example , enforces the first amendment to "protect unpopular individuals from retaliation — and their ideas from suppression — at the hand of an intolerant society. .

and when the court opts to shirk its duty to act on "principle" and instead upholds a law that may not in actuality adhere to core constitutional norms , the high court "legitimates" or validates that law , and , in so doing , risks damage to the basic values undergirding our system of government .

on the other hand , when a court "declares unconstitutional a legislative act or the action of an elected executive , [the court] thwarts" the enforcement of an act that presumably reflects the will of the voters .

as a result , judicial review necessarily invites conflict with the political branches .

this "countermajoritarian difficulty" — a phrase coined by professor bickel — creates a fundamental dilemma for a court , because the judiciary , lacking either the power of the "sword" or "purse," cannot enforce its own decisions and must rely on external support to "compel recalcitrant parties" to comply with a given ruling .

as a consequence , the "court's power lies ... in its legitimacy , a product of substance and perception that shows itself in the people's acceptance of the judiciary as fit to determine what the nation's law means and to declare what it demands. .

in turn , a court that is overly aggressive in its exercise of judicial review or simply abuses that power risks losing its legitimacy and , with that , invites political and cultural backlash that can undermine the role of the judiciary in our system of government .

more broadly , aggressive use of judicial review can "seriously ... weaken the democratic process. .

after all , by striking down legislation on a constitutional ground a court not only voids the law that is being challenged , but generally prohibits any future version of that law from being enacted .

and if a court's act of judicial review is simply mistaken or proves to be unwise , the constitutional nature of a decision forecloses a legislature from correcting the error .

as a result , at its worst , judicial review can "foreclos[e] all democratic outlet for the deep passions" on a particular issue and invite intense conflict within the nation .

given the challenges posed by the countermajoritarian difficulty , ultimately the question for the supreme court is how to maintain the "peaceful coexistence of the countermajoritarian implications of judicial review and the democratic principles upon which our federal government .. .

rests. .

in the least dangerous branch , professor alexander bickel proposed a solution to the countermajoritarian difficulty , a solution that has deep roots in the high court's constitutional jurisprudence and has been the inspiration for many members of the judiciary when approaching difficult constitutional questions .

bickel argued that when the supreme court is faced with a difficult question of constitutional law , the court need not as a matter of course exercise the power of judicial review and serve in either a legitimating or countermajoritarian role .

instead of validating a law or striking down a piece of legislation , bickel noted that the court " may do neither " and simply "stay[] its hand. .

the supreme court can opt for the third route by practicing the so - called "passive virtues," a set of tools , such as the justiciability doctrines and the court's discretionary certiorari power , with which the court can return an unsettled constitutional problem to the political realm for resolution .

for bickel , by employing the "passive virtues" and exercising judicial review only when constitutional principles are sufficiently clear for resolution , the court can avoid unnecessary entanglement in controversial and sensitive constitutional issues , protecting the judiciary from potential backlash by the political branches and preserving the court's role as the protector of established constitutional principles .

at the same time , the use of the "passive virtues," according to bickel , encourages constitutional dialogue within the other branches and the public and allows the court to better gauge what is the appropriate constitutional principle animating a particular issue .

put another way , for professor bickel , the value of the "passive virtues" can be summarized in a short quote from justice louis brandeis: "the most important thing we do is not doing. .

professor cass sunstein's work on "judicial minimalism" is often seen as the modern continuation of professor bickel's work .

in contrast to bickel's focus on a court's silence in response to a controversial constitutional question , however , sunstein's approach to constitutional adjudication is geared toward the type of response the supreme court should provide when it reaches the merits of the constitutional question that has been presented to the court .

specifically , professor sunstein advocates for "judicial minimalism" — that is , in deciding cases , judges should "say[] no more than necessary to justify an outcome , and leav[e] as much as possible undecided.... " in particular , courts , according to sunstein , should strive to make rulings that are both narrow — decisions that are no broader than necessary to resolve the case at hand — and shallow — decisions that avoid questions of basic principle and reach "concrete judgments on particular cases , unaccompanied by abstract accounts about what accounts for those judgments. .

sunstein , echoing bickel , justifies his theory of minimalism on two separate grounds .

first , professor sunstein argues that minimalism reduces burdens on the judiciary in trying to reach a decision .

for sunstein , at least with respect to the supreme court , attempting to wholly resolve a broad and complex constitutional legal issue by a "multimember court , consisting of diverse people who disagree on a great deal," in a single opinion may be time - consuming , resource - draining , and poorly suited to the competencies of the court .

second , and perhaps most important to sunstein , minimalism makes "judicial errors less frequent and ( above all ) less damaging," as a court that "leaves things open will not foreclose options in a way that may do a great deal of harm. .

as a consequence , sunstein views judicial minimalism to go hand - in - hand with democratic deliberation , as minimalist rulings on major constitutional issues "increase the space for further reflection and debate at the local , state , and national levels , simply because [such rulings] do not foreclose subsequent decisions. .

in this sense , like bickel , sunstein proposes a judicial philosophy aimed at successfully responding to the "countermajoritarian difficulty. .

professor bickel's "passive virtues," professor sunstein's "minimalism," and the general theories of constitutional avoidance are not grounded purely in theory , but instead have their basis in long - standing supreme court case law .

as justice felix frankfurter wrote over 70 years ago , "[i]f there is one doctrine more deeply rooted than any other in the process of constitutional adjudication , it is that we ought not pass on questions of constitutionality ... unless such adjudication is unavoidable. .

to understand the modern influence of constitutional avoidance on judicial decision making , the starting point is the most famous articulation of the constitutional avoidance doctrine and the various "passive virtues": justice brandeis's concurring opinion in ashwander v. tennessee valley authority ( tva ) .

notwithstanding the near omnipresence of the constitutional avoidance doctrine at the roberts court , the doctrine and the work of professors bickel and sunstein are not without their critics , both inside and outside of the court .

in fact , the doctrine has been attacked both with respect to its underlying assumptions and to how the doctrine has been deployed .

in addition , the different strands of the constitutional avoidance doctrine , such as the rule counseling judicial minimalism and the constitutional avoidance canon , have been critically assessed by both legal scholars and jurists .

regardless of the relative merits of constitutional avoidance as a judicial strategy and philosophy , the doctrine of constitutional avoidance appears to have a broad following at the supreme court , as demonstrated by the recent terms of the roberts court .

and the continued viability of the constitutional avoidance doctrine could have significant implications for congress .

in a world with increasing gridlock in congress , the temptation may be for the legislative branch to draft legislation in a broad , and perhaps vague , manner or wholly ignore major legal questions , with the hopes that the unelected judiciary can help resolve the most pressing legal issues facing the country .

this temptation may be especially pronounced with respect to major questions of constitutional law , such as whether the constitution protects the concept of marriage equality or the limits the fourth amendment provides on the ability of the president to conduct foreign intelligence gathering .

nearly 20 years ago , senator robert byrd echoed these concerns during the midst of debate over the drafting of the line - item veto: why are we trying to pass a bill that raises such serious and substantial constitutional questions ? .

we should be resolving those questions on our own .

all of us take an oath of office to support and defend the constitution .

during the process of considering a bill , it is our duty to identify — and correct — constitutional problems .

we cannot correct these here because we cannot amend the conference report .

it is irresponsible to simply punt to the courts , hoping that the judiciary will somehow catch our mistakes .

to the extent congress "punts" to the court on an issue of constitutional importance , the constitutional avoidance doctrines raises the possibility that the court may send the "political football" back to the democratic arena and force the political branches to resolve major constitutional questions on their own .

in this sense , the avoidance doctrine may be a means of reinforcing and correcting congressional intransigence on major legal issues , potentially casting into doubt alexis de tocqueville's famous observation that "scarcely any political question arises in the united states that is not resolved , sooner or later , into a judicial question. .

at the same time , as demonstrated by the criticisms of the avoidance doctrine and the court's willingness to answer major constitutional questions , the ashwander doctrine often does not operate as a comprehensive or cohesive theory .

more broadly , the roberts court "cannot simply avoid answering difficult moral , social , and political questions altogether," and the high court may indeed find it conducive to its role in government to provide clarity with respect to certain questions of constitutional law .

as a result , the extent to which the federal judiciary ignores the constitutional avoidance doctrine will necessarily dictate congress's co - equal role in interpreting the constitution and will , more broadly , animate the extent of dialogue amongst the political branches on matters of constitutional law .

in turn , the constitutional avoidance doctrine necessarily becomes the starting point by which the federal judiciary chooses to set forth the chief constitutional rules that police every action of congress , making the doctrine potentially fundamental to understanding the roles of the judiciary and the political branches in the federal tripartite system of government .

