c ongress passed comprehensive food safety legislation in december 2010 ( fda food safety modernization act , or fsma , p.l .

111-353 ) , which was signed into law on january 4 , 2011 .

fsma represented the largest expansion and overhaul of u.s. food safety authorities since the 1930s .

fsma greatly expanded food safety oversight authority at the food and drug administration ( fda ) within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , but did not alter oversight authorities within other federal agencies responsible for food safety , such as the u.s. department of agriculture .

under fsma , fda is responsible for more than 50 regulations , guidelines , and studies .

these included several "foundational" rules required to fully implement fsma covering preventive controls for human food and for animal food , produce safety , sanitary transportation , intentional adulteration , and development of a foreign supplier verification program along with a program for the accreditation of third - party auditors to conduct food safety audits and issue certifications of foreign facilities producing food for humans or animals .

these regulations become final in 2016 .

this report documents the scheduled timeline for action on selected fsma provisions , as specified in the enacted law , and fda - reported actions taken to date .

fsma focused on fda - regulated foods and amended fda's existing structure and authorities , in particular the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca , 21 u.s.c .

§§301 et seq. ) .

among its many provisions , fsma expanded fda's authority to conduct a mandatory recall of contaminated food products ; enhanced surveillance systems to investigate foodborne illness outbreaks ; established new preventive controls and food safety plans at some food processing facilities and farms ; enhanced fda's traceability capacity within the nation's food distribution channels ; increased inspection frequencies of high - risk food facilities ( both domestic and foreign facilities ) ; and expanded fda's authority and oversight capabilities regarding foreign companies that supply food imports to the united states .

fsma does not directly address meat and poultry products under the jurisdiction of usda .

when the law was enacted , fda has identified five key elements of fsma: preventive controls — fsma provides fda with a legislative mandate to require comprehensive , prevention - based controls across the food supply .

as examples , the act requires mandatory preventive controls for food facilities and mandatory produce safety standards , and also gives fda the authority to prevent intentional contamination .

inspection and compliance — fsma provides fda with the ability to conduct oversight and ensure compliance with new requirements and to respond when problems emerge .

examples include establishing a mandated inspection frequency ( based on risk ) ; giving fda access to industry records and food safety plans ; and requiring certain testing to be conducted by accredited labs .

response — fsma provides fda with the ability to respond to problems when they emerge .

examples include giving fda mandatory recall authority for all food products ; expanding fda's authority to administratively detain products that are in violation of the law ; giving fda the authority to suspend a facility's registration , effectively prohibiting the company from selling any products within the united states ; establishing pilot projects so fda can enhance its product tracing capabilities ; and requiring additional recordkeeping by facilities that "manufacture , process , pack or hold" foods designated as "high - risk. .

imported food safety — fsma provides fda with the ability to help ensure that food imports meet u.s. food safety standards .

examples include requiring importers to verify that their foreign suppliers have adequate preventive controls ; establishing a third - party verification system ; requiring certification by a credible third party for high - risk foods as a condition for entry into the united states ; establishing a voluntary qualified importer program for expedited review and entry from participating importers ; and giving fda the right to refuse entry into the united states of food from a foreign facility if fda is denied access to the facility or the country where the facility is located .

enhanced partnerships — fsma provides fda with the authority to improve training of state , local , territorial , and tribal food safety officials .

examples include requiring fda to develop and implement strategies to enhance the food safety capacities of state and local agencies through multi - year grants , as well as strategies to enhance the capacities of foreign governments and their industries ; and giving fda the authority to rely on inspections of other federal , state , and local agencies in meeting its increased inspection mandate for domestic facilities .

fsma authorized additional appropriations and staff for fda's future food safety activities .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that implementing the newly enacted law could increase net federal spending subject to appropriations by $1.4 billion over a five - year period ( fy2011-fy2015 ) .

fsma authorizes an increase in fda staff , to reach 5,000 in fy2014 .

during the regulatory development phase of fsma , seven "foundational" rules were identified as required to fully implement fsma ( see listing in text box below ) .

these regulations were to have been proposed or , in some cases , finalized within one to two years of enactment ( roughly january 2012 and january 2013 ) ; other rules were to have been submitted within 18 months of enactment ( roughly mid - 2012 ) .

however , fda's regulations were not finalized until 2016 .

some other fda actions under fsma were also delayed .

table 3 documents the scheduled timeline for actions on selected fsma provisions , as specified in the law , and fda - reported actions taken to date , based on available fda press releases and publicly available progress reports .

for more information about each of these provisions , see appendix b in crs report r40443 , the fda food safety modernization act ( p.l .

111-353 ) .

fda began to release proposed rules for some of the foundational regulations that constitute the food safety framework under fsma in 2013 .

however , there were continued delays in the agency's release of other fsma rules , industry guidance , and reports , well beyond the dates required under the law .

these delays were exacerbated by fda's decision to extend the public comment and response period for most fsma proposed regulations as well as the agency's decision to re - propose key provisions of some regulations .

other factors also contributed to delays in fsma implementation , including oftentimes a lengthy review process by the office of management and budget's ( omb ) and — according to fda — limited agency resources and the lack of availability of discretionary appropriations .

delays in fda's rulemaking process resulted in many fsma regulations being released according to a court - ordered schedule under a federal lawsuit brought by the center for food safety .

in august 2012 , the center for food safety ( cfs ) filed suit in federal court against fda and omb , citing the government's failure to implement seven food safety regulations required by fsma ( see box below ) .

cfs argues that , by not meeting statutory deadlines for rulemaking , fda is breaking the law and needs to protect the public .

fda filed a motion to dismiss the complaint against the agency in november 2012 , which was denied by the court in april 2013 .

as part of a june 2013 agreement , fda was ordered to complete the regulations as follows: by november 30 , 2013 , publish all remaining proposed regulations ; by march 31 , 2014 , close any comment period on these proposed regulations ; and by june 30 , 2015 , finalize all regulations .

in july 2013 , fda filed a motion to reconsider , asking the court to extend the implementation timeline for two fsma - required rules: sanitary transport of food and feed ( fsma §111 ) and intentional contamination ( fsma §106 ) .

this motion was also denied in august 2013 .

the center for food safety accepted a 60-day extension of the deadline for publication of the sanitary transport proposed rule ( until january 31 , 2014 ) , provided that the comment period end date not be extended beyond april 30 , 2014 , and that the final rule date remain june 30 , 2015 .

the rule timeline for the intentional contamination proposal was not extended , although in november 2013 fda was later granted a 20-day extension , until december 20 , 2013 , to publish the proposed rule on intentional contamination due to setbacks that were likely caused by the federal government shutdown in october 2013 .

under a february 2014 agreement between fda and the center for food safety , the agency agreed to a new court - ordered schedule requiring that final fsma regulations be issued by mid - 2016 .

this schedule further pushed back the implementation dates for final fsma regulations beyond the dates originally mandated by congress in the enacted law .

in late 2014 , an fda official indicated that full implementation of fsma would likely take another 10 years , the amount of time needed to "reasonably expect all the rules to be working. .

fda's operational strategy for implementing the fda food safety modernization act ( fsma ) was released in may 2014 and describes "the next phase of fsma implementation by outlining broadly the drivers of change in fda's approach to food safety and the operational strategy for implementing that change , as mandated and empowered by fsma. .

full implementation of the most fsma regulations will be phased in over the next several years , mostly to provide flexibility to farms and food businesses to comply with the new requirements , as provided for in the enacted law .

in addition , in september 2016 , fda further extended the compliance dates for many regulated facilities , especially small and very small businesses , within the main core regulations including preventive controls for human and animal food , produce safety standards , and the foreign supplier verification program ( fsvp ) for food imports .

table 1 provides summary information on fsma phased - in general compliance schedule .

table 2 compares the compliance schedule for small and very small business compliance periods .

