virtually every federal crime comes with a hidden feature .

helpers and hands - on offenders face the same punishment .

the result is the work of 18 u.s.c .

2 , which visits the same consequences on anyone who orders the commission of a federal crime .

this secondary liability is much like that which accompanies conspiracy , and the rationale is the same for both: society fears the crimes of several more than the crimes of one .

 ( a ) whoever commits an offense against the united states or aids , abets , counsels , commands , induces or procures its commission , is punishable as a principal .

section 2 ( a ) , the aiding and abetting subsection , is more frequently prosecuted than §2 ( b ) , the causes subsection .

although its elements are variously described , it is often said that , "[i]n order to aid and abet another to commit a crime it is necessary that a defendant in some sort associate himself with the venture , that he participate in it as in something that he wishes to bring about , [and] that he seek by his action to make it succeed. .

aiding and abetting means assisting in the commission of someone else's crime .

section 2 ( a ) demands that the defendant embrace the crime of another and consciously do something to contribute to its success .

that means that the defendant must know that the offense is afoot before it occurs if he is to be convicted of aiding and abetting .

that does not mean that the defendant must aid in every aspect of the substantive offense .

at common law: "where several acts constitute[d] together one crime , if each [was] separately performed by a different individual[,] ... all [were] principals as to the whole... .

indeed , ... a person's involvement in the crime could be not merely partial but minimal too: [t]he quantity [of assistance was] immaterial , so long as the accomplice did something to aid the crime.... that principal continues to govern aiding and abetting law under §2. .

yet , neither knowledge without assistance nor assistance without intent is enough .

moreover , §2 ( a ) requires that someone else commit a federal offense , because "[a]iding and abetting is not itself a federal offense , but merely describes the way in which a defendant's conduct resulted in the violation of a particular law. .

in standefer , the supreme court rejected the petitioner's contention that "he could not be convicted of aiding and abetting a principal , niederberger , when that principal had been acquitted of the charged offense. .

that view still prevails .

a completed offense is a prerequisite to conviction for aiding and abetting , but the hands - on offender need be neither named nor convicted .

as a general rule , the defendant's aiding and abetting must come before or at the time of the offense .

assistance given after the crime has occurred is a separate , less severely punished , offense — acting as an accessory after the fact .

 ( b ) whoever willfully causes an act to be done which if directly performed by him or another would be an offense against the united states , is punishable as a principal .

although the words "commands , induces or procures" in §2 ( a ) would seem to capture crimes committed through an agent , as the 1948 report explained the language of §2 ( b ) leaves no doubt .

section 2 ( b ) applies to defendants who work through either witting or unwitting intermediaries , through the guilty or the innocent .

whether the intermediary is a subordinate or an undercover government agent , he may be well aware that his conduct constitutes an element of the underlying offense .

on the other hand , whether the intermediary is a dupe or a facilitating governmental official , §2 ( b ) also applies even if he is unaware of the nature of his conduct .

when the intermediary is an innocent party , no one but the "causing" individual need commit the underlying offense .

yet there must be an underlying crime .

section 2 ( b ) imposes no liability unless the actions of the defendant and his intermediary , taken together , constitute an offense .

congress gave little indication of its purpose when it changed "causes" to "willfully causes," in 1951 .

the amendment originated in the senate judiciary committee , after the house had passed its version of the bill .

the committee report explained why it changed "is a principal" to "is punishable as a principal," but said nothing about why it added the word "willfully. .

there has been some speculation that the word "willfully" was added to address an observation by judge learned hand .

judge hand had observed that §2 ( a ) had a mental element ( "knowing" ) , but that §2 ( b ) had no comparable element .

in any event and although it seems far from certain , it appears that the courts understand "willfully" to mean a dual form of "intentionally. .

they believe that an individual "willfully" causes an offense when he intends the commission of conduct that constitutes a crime and then intentionally uses someone else to commit it .

an individual may incur liability under §2 ( b ) even if he is unaware that the underlying conduct is in fact a crime .

federal courts sometimes mention a withdrawal defense comparable to one available in conspiracy cases .

in conspiracy , withdrawal is not a defense for conspiracy itself but only for the crimes committed in foreseeable furtherance of the scheme after the defendant's withdrawal .

"to establish withdrawal from a conspiracy , the defendant has the burden to demonstrate that he took affirmative action by making a clean breast to the authorities or by communicating his withdrawal in a manner reasonably calculated to reach his coconspirators. .

in aiding and abetting , the withdrawal defense in federal cases may be more limited .

certainly , an individual faces no liability under §2 ( a ) if the underlying offense goes uncommitted as a consequence of the withdrawal of his necessary assistance .

aiding and abetting needs a completed offense .

the question is more difficult in cases where the crime blooms in spite of an abettor's abandonment .

"[i]t is unsettled if a defendant can withdraw from aiding and abetting a crime .

other courts have reached varying results when considering the applicability of the withdrawal defense to the federal accomplice liability statute. .

proponents of a general withdrawal defense may claim support from recent dicta in rosemond .

rosemond had been convicted of two crimes , distributing marijuana ( 21 u.s.c .

841 ) and discharging a firearm during a drug trafficking offense ( 18 u.s.c .

924 ( c ) ) .

the tenth circuit had upheld an alternative aiding and abetting instruction concerning the firearm charge .

the supreme court explained that an accomplice must know of the substantive offense beforehand in order to be shown to have embraced its commission .

it did so in a manner suggesting an accomplice might be able to withdraw and escape liability prior to the commission of the substantive offense , even if he had contributed to the crime's ultimate success .

"congress has not enacted a general civil aiding and abetting statute... .

thus , when congress enacts a statute under which a person may sue and recover damages from a private defendant for the defendant's violation of some statutory norm , there is no general presumption that the plaintiff may also sue aiders and abettors. .

with this in mind , the courts have concluded , for example , that aiders and abettors incur no civil liability as a consequence of their violations of the anti - terrorism act ; the electronic communications privacy act ; the stored communications act ; or rico .

