t he labeling of genetically engineered ( ge ) foods , sometimes referred to as genetically modified foods ( gmo foods ) , has been the subject of debate among members of the general public and federal and state governments .

certain state legislatures have responded to public demand for ge labeling by enacting state laws requiring such a labeling scheme .

the federal food , drug , & cosmetic act ( ffdca ) does not impose specific labeling requirements on a food just because it may or may not contain ge ingredients or was derived using ge techniques .

additionally , the food and drug administration ( fda ) has yet to issue formal regulations and policies on the labeling of ge food .

however , this absence of direct federal regulation does not mean that ge foods are free from any federal oversight .

instead , labels of ge foods follow the same federal labeling requirements and guidelines outlined in the ffdca and implementing regulations as non - ge foods .

despite this regulation , parties have brought claims against manufacturers of ge foods alleging that such products are mislabeled as "natural. .

but , the courts , when faced with these claims , have inconsistently balanced the expectations of consumers and manufacturers with deference to fda expertise in the context of ge food labeling .

the united states department of agriculture's ( usda's ) oversight over organic meat and poultry products involves the regulation of ge ingredients .

however , the discussion of such oversight is beyond the scope of this report .

this report analyzes the federal laws and policies impacting the labeling of ge foods and the legal ambiguities that have arisen in the courts concerning this area of regulation .

the report begins with a brief discussion about ge foods and the wider controversy of consuming foods derived from these techniques .

the report then examines the current federal regulatory framework for food labeling and how these provisions may impact the labeling of ge foods .

next , the report analyzes legal issues relating to judicial deference to the fda when claims involving the labeling of ge foods appear in court .

the report concludes with a discussion about legislation introduced during the 114 th congress that would impose federal labeling requirements for ge foods .

"genetic engineering" refers to the scientific methods "use[d] to introduce new traits or characteristics to an organism. .

these procedures can create a tolerance to herbicides , promote resistance to viruses , increase yields , and alter acidic content .

"genetically engineered foods" ( ge foods ) , also referred to as "genetically modified foods" ( gmo foods ) , are foods that are derived from these methods or include ingredients that are derived from these methods .

food and ingredients from ge plants were first introduced into the food supply in the mid - 1990s .

common ge plants include corn , canola , soybean , and cotton .

these plants , in the form of cornstarch , corn syrup , canola oil , and soybean oil , are used as ingredients in common food products , such as salad dressings , cereals , soups , breads , and snack foods .

the fda has found that ge foods are generally as nutritious as traditionally bred plants .

the world health organization has reported that ge foods currently on the market are not likely to present human health risks .

however , some members of the public generally oppose ge foods and have demanded specific labeling requirements for food products containing ge ingredients .

federal law does not impose specific labeling requirements on food just because it may or may not contain ge ingredients or was derived using ge techniques .

labels of ge foods follow the same federal labeling requirements and guidelines outlined in the ffdca as non - ge foods .

the fda has issued informal policy statements emphasizing its position that specific labeling requirements for ge foods are unnecessary because the general labeling provisions in the ffdca will guide and protect consumers .

however , some states have enacted laws that specifically demand manufacturers disclose the presence of ge ingredients in certain foods on the label .

this section first examines the federal statutory requirements that the fda has highlighted as particularly relevant to the labeling of ge foods .

the section then reviews the informal policy statements issued by the fda concerning ge food labeling and the state laws enacted to address this particular issue .

the section concludes with a brief discussion about the use of the word "natural" on ge food labels .

consumer claims in litigation concerning ge food often focus on allegedly misleading or deceptive terms on the label when the food contains ge ingredients .

defendants in these cases typically make a motion to dismiss the case based on deference to the fda's expertise in this area as articulated in the primary jurisdiction doctrine .

however , courts have not consistently interpreted the primary jurisdiction doctrine in the context of ge labeling , creating some ambiguity as to when courts should defer to the fda's expertise if the fda has repeatedly declined to take action on this particular labeling issue .

consumers tend to bring these legal claims under state unfair competition laws and not the ffdca , despite similarities in statutory language , because the ffdca prohibits private litigants from suing to enforce compliance with the statute .

only the federal government may enforce the provisions under the ffdca .

this section begins with an explanation of the primary jurisdiction doctrine and the factors a court considers when applying this doctrine .

then , this section examines the role of the primary jurisdiction doctrine in cases where consumers have brought misleading and deceptive labeling claims against a defendant's use of the term "natural" on ge foods labels .

several bills have also been introduced in the 114 th congress that address labeling of ge foods .

the genetically engineered food right - to - know act would amend the ffdca to classify any food as misbranded that has been ge or contains one or more ge ingredients , unless such information is clearly disclosed .

the bill would exempt any food that ( 1 ) is served in restaurants or other similar eating establishments , ( 2 ) is a medical food , ( 3 ) would be subject to such requirement solely because it was produced using a ge vaccine , or ( 4 ) would be subject to such requirement solely because it includes the use of a ge processing aid or enzyme .

the bill defines "genetically engineered" food as a material intended for human consumption that is an organism produced through the intentional use of ge , or the progeny of intended sexual or asexual reproduction ( or both ) of organisms that are the product of ge .

the safe and accurate food labeling act of 2015 would establish different certification programs and labeling requirements under the oversight of both the fda and the usda .

first , section 101 of the bill would direct the fda to continue its current premarket consultation process for food derived from new plant varieties , including ge plants .

under the bill , the fda may require that the labeling of food produced from , containing , or consisting of a ge plant display a statement to inform consumers of a difference between food so produced and a comparable non - genetically engineered food .

under this proposed requirement , the fda may require such labeling if the agency has determined that there is a material difference between the two foods and the disclosure of such difference is necessary to protect public health or to prevent the label from being false or misleading .

additionally , the bill would amend the plant protection act to create a notification program requiring those who plan to introduce into interstate commerce ge plants for the use of food to notify the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) , who must then evaluate the food under the premarket consultation process described above .

the bill would then require the entity to submit the evaluation to the secretary of agriculture .

the bill's section 201 would establish a voluntary ge food certification program within the usda to govern label claims with respect to the use or non - use of ge in the production and process of food .

section 301 of the bill would amend section 403 of the ffdca to deem a food misbranded if its labeling contains an express or implied claim that food is "natural" unless the claim uses terms that have been defined by regulations promulgated by the fda .

the bill also contains several provisions that would impact a state's regulation of ge food labeling .

in february 2016 , senator pat roberts introduced a bill , s. 2609 , that would establish a national voluntary bioengineered food labeling standard , overseen by the usda .

specifically , the bill would require the usda to promulgate regulations that would outline the process the agency would follow to determine when a food may be labeled as bioengineered .

these regulations would also prohibit an express or implied claim that a food is or is not safe solely based on whether the food is bioengineered .

additionally , the bill includes a provision with respect to preempting state laws relating to the labeling requirements of ge food in interstate commerce .

however , the bill would permit a state to establish food labeling requirements for bioengineered food in interstate commerce that are identical to the proposed voluntary labeling standard .

in march 2016 , senator merkley introduced s. 2621 , the "biotechnology food labeling uniformity act. .

unlike senator roberts's bill , this act would amend the ffdca by stating that a ge food would qualify as misbranded unless it bears a label stating that it is ge .

according to the bill , the mandatory label must include either the words "genetically engineered" or "ge" immediately following the common name of the ge ingredient , an asterisk that denotes ge ingredients , a statement disclosing that the food is produced with ge or contains ge ingredients , or a symbol established by the secretary of hhs that would disclose the presence of a ge ingredient .

the misbranding provision would not apply to processed food that contains ge ingredients that do not account for more than nine - tenths of one percent of the total weight of the processed food ; food that may be considered ge solely on the basis that it was subject to a ge vaccine at some point ; and food that would be considered ge solely on the basis that it was produced using a ge processing aid .

like the other ge labeling bills , this act also contains a federal preemption provision that intends to preempt state ge labeling requirements that are different from those that would be imposed by the act .

however , the bill would further clarify the intended scope of this preemption clause by also expressly stating that other food labeling laws or common law remedies would not be preempted .

