in march 2014 , a regional director of the national labor relations board ( nlrb or board ) ruled that scholarship football players at northwestern university are employees for purposes of the national labor relations act ( nlra ) , and ordered an election to determine support for the college athletes players association ( capa ) , a newly created labor organization .

although the full five - member nlrb agreed to review the regional director's decision , an election was held on april 25 , 2014 , with the ballots impounded until after a final decision is issued in the case .

if the decision is upheld and a majority of players have voted to be represented by capa , the players are expected to negotiate with the university over various terms and conditions of employment .

this report provides an overview of the nlra , and reviews the decision by the nlrb's regional director .

the report also examines the concerns raised by northwestern and capa .

the report ends with a brief discussion of other developments that could affect unionization efforts by athletes at private colleges and universities .

the nlra , as amended , establishes the basic framework governing labor - management relations in the private sector .

the act provides workers the right to join or form a labor union and to bargain collectively over wages , hours , and other conditions of employment .

under the act , workers also have the right to not join a union .

the act requires an employer to bargain in good faith with a union chosen by a majority of employees .

to protect the rights of employers and workers , the act identifies certain activities as unfair labor practices .

the nlra covers most , but not all , private sector workers in the united states .

it does not cover agricultural workers , family domestic workers , supervisors , or independent contractors .

the act does not apply to railroad or airline employees , who are covered by the railway labor act ( rla ) .

the nlra does not cover federal , state , or local government employees .

most federal employees are covered by the federal service labor - management relations statute ( fslmrs ) .

employees of state and local governments , including employees of public colleges and universities , are covered by state or local laws .

in a majority of states , public employees have the right to engage in some form of collective bargaining .

this right may be limited , however , to only some employees ( eg , to public safety workers ) .

in late january 2014 , a group of students who play football for northwestern university filed a representation petition with the nlrb .

the students are seeking to be represented by capa , which contends that college football and basketball players , particularly those who compete in division i of the national collegiate athletic association ( ncaa ) , are essentially employees given the amount of time they commit to athletics , the revenue they generate for their schools , and their receipt of compensation in the form of scholarships .

it has been reported that the organizing effort is supported by a majority of northwestern's football players .

the ncaa has maintained , however , that the players are "student - athletes" and not employees , and that their participation in college sports is voluntary .

whether the northwestern players may be considered employees for purposes of the nlra is a threshold question that will likely determine their collective bargaining rights .

in general , the nlrb has been guided by common law principles to evaluate an individual's employment status .

the board has considered , for example , the degree of control exercised by an employer over an alleged employee .

the nlrb has also examined the economic realities of a situation , that is , the degree to which an alleged employee is dependent on an employer .

in 2004 , the board also considered congressional intent to determine whether graduate student assistants should be considered employees for purposes of the nlra .

in brown university , the board noted that "[t]he issue of employee status under the act turns on whether congress intended to cover the individual in question .

the issue is not to be decided purely on the basis of older common law concepts. .

ultimately , the nlrb concluded that "it simply does not effectuate the national labor policy" to recognize collective bargaining rights for graduate student assistants because they are primarily students .

northwestern cited the nlrb's decision in brown university to support its position that the football players are not employees .

on march 26 , 2014 , however , the regional director of the nlrb's region 13 in chicago concluded that the players are employees for purposes of the nlra .

citing the common law definition for the term employee , the regional director maintained that an individual is an employee if he "performs services for another under a contract for hire , subject to the other's control or right of control , and in return for payment. .

after reviewing how the northwestern players were recruited and treated by the school and its coaches , the regional director found that the players met the common law definition .

in this case , the "tender" that must be signed by the players before each scholarship period was found to serve as an employment contract , providing "detailed information concerning the duration and conditions under which the compensation will be provided to [the players]. .

with regard to the control exercised by the school and its coaches , the regional director cited the daily itineraries that are provided to the players "which set forth , hour by hour , what football related activities the players are to engage in from as early as 5:45 a.m. until 10:30 p.m. , when they are expected to be in bed. .

as for payment , the regional director stated simply: "[i]t is clear that the scholarships that players receive are in exchange for the athletic services being performed. .

the regional director declined to view the northwestern players as similar to the graduate assistants in brown university .

the regional director explained that the players' football - related duties "are unrelated to their academic studies unlike the graduate assistants whose teaching and research duties were inextricably related to their graduate degree requirements [.] .

on april 9 , 2014 , northwestern requested a review of the regional director's decision .

northwestern argued that the decision should be reviewed because the players' petition presents a unique and novel issue , because the regional director misapplied and departed from board precedent , and because the regional director's findings on substantial factual issues are clearly erroneous on the record and prejudicially affect the university's rights .

on april 24 , 2014 , the board agreed to review the regional director's decision .

if capa becomes the players' exclusive representative , the union has indicated that it will bargain over health and safety issues , additional financial support for the players , and health insurance .

capa has said that it will bargain with the university within the existing ncaa rules and will not bargain for terms that are prohibited by the ncaa .

capa has also said that it will "speak for the players as the ncaa landscape continues to evolve. .

northwestern believes that capa would bargain over pay and other economic benefits , if it is certified as the players' exclusive representative .

if capa does attempt such negotiations , and the university declines to bargain over these mandatory subjects of bargaining , it could be subject to an unfair labor practice charge .

at the same time , however , the negotiation of economic benefits could lead to possible ncaa sanctions .

northwestern has explained that it cannot offer scholarships greater than the amount allowed by the ncaa .

according to the university , if it did , the ncaa could prevent it from playing football .

the university also argues that , because they are subject to ncaa rules , it could not bargain over the sale by players of their images or likenesses , the types of leases allowed for players living off - campus , the types of outside employment , or random player drug testing .

if the board and federal courts determine that northwestern university football players are employees for purposes of collective bargaining , other developments may affect unionization efforts by athletes at private colleges and universities .

under ncaa rules , a division i student - athlete cannot receive financial aid that exceeds the cost of attendance at an institution .

a student - athlete may receive financial aid up to a full "grant - in - aid. .

except for possible changes described below , a full grant - in - aid at division i schools covers the institution's cost of tuition and fees , room and board , and the cost of required books .

the cost of attendance may , however , include other costs that are not included in a full grant - in - aid ( eg , the cost of supplies , transportation , or other expenses ) .

thus , the cost of attendance is generally greater than a full grant - in - aid .

in addition to a full grant - in - aid , a student - athlete might receive other financial assistance up to the cost of attendance .

pursuant to a federal district court decision issued on august 8 , 2014 , the ncaa division i football bowl subdivision ( fbs ) and division i basketball schools can use revenue from the use of player's names , images , or likenesses to provide financial aid up to the cost of attendance .

these schools may also provide up to $5,000 annually to current , former , and prospective players for the licensing or use of their names , images , or likenesses .

the latter amounts would be paid when the players leave school or when their eligibility for athletic aid expires .

the decision applies to student - athletes at both private and public colleges and universities .

the ncaa has said that it will appeal the ruling .

also , on august 7 , 2014 , the ncaa division i board of directors adopted a new governing structure for division i colleges and universities .

among other changes , five conferences — consisting of 65 private and public colleges and universities — will be allowed to adopt new rules affecting student athletes .

the five conferences are the atlantic coast conference ( acc ) , big ten , big 12 , pac - 12 , and southeastern conference ( sec ) .

 ( northwestern university is a member of the big ten conference. ) .

under new authority , the conferences will be allowed to increase the maximum grant - in - aid up to the full cost of attendance .

the conferences will also be allowed to provide student - athletes with multi - year scholarships , offer health insurance coverage , pay for disability insurance , cover the cost of transportation for high school students and their parents to visit campus , change the limits on the amount of time devoted to sports , increase the amount of academic support , or allow athletes to earn money from activities not related to sports .

to vote for a rule change , each of the 65 schools will have one vote .

in addition , 15 student - athlete representatives — three from each of the five conferences — will be able to cast votes .

the first votes on rule changes could be held in january 2015 .

the ncaa could reconsider the rule changes if at least 75 division i schools request a vote to override the changes .

the rule changes could be suspended if at least 125 schools request a vote on the changes .

schools must request a vote within 60 days of the date that the rule changes were adopted by the board of directors .

college sports teams that bring in more in revenues than it costs to run the program , the "revenue sports" teams , help support "non - revenue sports," such as golf , tennis , swimming , baseball , softball , and others .

the principal revenue sports are football and men's basketball .

division i football is divided into two subdivisions .

the football bowl subdivision ( fbs ) has 128 teams ; the football championship subdivision ( fcs ) has 126 teams .

northwestern university is one of 17 private , four - year colleges and universities in the fbs .

another 46 private colleges and universities participate in the fcs .

both the fbs and fcs are further divided into different conferences , leagues , or associations .

division i men's basketball has 346 teams .

115 schools that compete in division i men's basketball are private four - year colleges or universities .

the 128 fbs schools must support at least 16 varsity sports teams .

the schools can award financial aid to as many as 85 football players , with each player able to receive up to a full scholarship .

the 126 fcs schools must sponsor at least 14 varsity sports teams and can award up to the equivalent of 63 full football scholarships , divided among no more than 85 players .

fbs schools participate in bowl games , while the fcs uses a playoff system to determine a champion .

table a - 1 lists the 17 fbs football schools that are private four - year schools ; the 46 fcs football schools that are private ; and the 115 division i men's basketball schools that are private .

