the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) is a refundable tax credit available to eligible low - wage workers .

many low - income workers , especially those with children , can receive several thousand dollars of financial assistance from this tax provision .

 ( childless recipients can receive slightly less than $500 if they qualify for the maximum credit. ) .

because the credit is refundable , an eitc recipient need not owe taxes to receive the benefit .

in the 113 th congress , many legislative proposals have been introduced that would modify the eitc .

in general , these bills modify either how the credit is calculated or eligibility requirements for the credit , or both .

to understand how these bills would modify the credit , this report first provides a brief overview of eligibility requirements for the credit and how the credit is calculated under current law .

 ( for a more detailed description of eitc eligibility requirements and the calculation of the credit , see crs report rl31768 , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) : an overview , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the report then summarizes how different legislative proposals modify certain parameters of the credit , starting with modifications that expand the credit for workers without qualifying children , followed by those that expand the eitc for workers with qualifying children .

 ( some legislative proposals modify the credit for workers both with and without children. ) .

o ther modifications to the credit , including those made by house ways and means committee chairman camp 's tax reform proposal , are briefly summarized .

eligibility for and the amount of the eitc are based on a variety of factors , including residence and taxpayer id requirements , the presence of qualifying children , age requirements for certain recipients , amount of investment income , and the recipient's earned income .

this section briefly describes key eligibility factors and provides an overview of how eligible taxpayers calculate the value of the credit under current law .

several bills introduced in the 113 th congress would expand the eitc for childless workers .

these bills — h.r .

4117 , h.r .

2116 , s. 836 , s. 2162 , h.r .

2359 , and the obama administration's fy2015 budget — would modify how the credit is calculated , increasing the amount of the credit for childless workers .

all of these bills — except h.r .

2359 — would also modify various eligibility rules for the credit , expanding the number of taxpayers eligible to claim it .

these legislative changes are summarized below in table 2 and described subsequently in this report .

there are several bills introduced in the 113 th congress that would expand the eitc for workers with qualifying children .

several of these bills — h.r .

2116 , s. 836 , h.r .

2320 , and the obama administration's fy2015 budget — would make the larger credit for families with three or more children , enacted temporarily as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) , permanent .

h.r .

2320 would also expand the eitc for tax filers with four , five , six , and seven or more qualifying children .

h.r .

2116 also includes a provision to enable certain separated spouses with children to claim the credit .

finally , s. 2162 includes a proposal that would allow dual - earner couples with at least one child to reduce their earned income if it would result in a larger credit .

several bills , including h.r .

4117 , h.r .

2116 , and chairman camp's tax reform proposal , include changes to the eitc that are not solely dependent on whether the eitc claimant does or does not have qualifying children .

under current law , individuals who live in u.s. territories ( cnmi , american samoa , the u.s. virgin islands ( usvi ) , guam , and puerto rico ) cannot claim the federal eitc .

h.r .

4117 would require the secretary of the treasury to transfer revenue to puerto rico and american samoa that would be equal to the total amount of eitc benefits puerto rican and american samoan residents could claim if they were eligible for the credit .

this provision would not apply to the other u.s. territories ( including cnmi , usvi , and guam ) .

puerto rico and american samoa would be required to provide the u.s. treasury with a plan for how it would distribute the aggregate funds .

the legislation does not provide a method or formula that puerto rico and american samoa must use when distributing this money to puerto rican and american samoan residents .

under current law , eligible eitc recipients cannot have investment income greater than $3,350 in 2014 .

investment income includes interest income ( including tax - exempt interest ) , dividends , net rent , and royalties that are from sources other than the filer's ordinary business activity , net capital gains , and passive income .

h.r .

2116 would repeal this limitation .

among its many changes to the income tax code , the house ways and means committee chairman camp tax reform proposal ( hereinafter referred to as the "camp proposal" ) would change the structure of and eligibility for the eitc .

specifically , the camp proposal would reduce the amount of the eitc for most tax filers by reducing the maximum value of the credit and the credit rates , as well as by eliminating the expanded credit for families with three or more children .

in addition , the camp proposal would modify the age limit for the qualifying child for the eitc to under 18 years old , with no exception made for full - time students .

the changes made to the eitc under the camp proposal , however , would occur in the broader context of comprehensive changes to a wide variety of family - and child - related tax provisions .

given the significant revisions made to the tax code by this proposal , an evaluation of the eitc in isolation would not accurately reflect how tax liabilities would change for tax filers under the proposal .

for example , while the eitc is generally reduced in size , the child tax credit , standard deduction , and 10% tax bracket are all expanded .

these legislative changes may offset or even exceed any reductions in the eitc for certain tax filers , especially those with children .

hence , some low - income workers who claim the eitc would see their tax liabilities fall under the camp proposal , while others would see their tax liabilities increase .

the joint committee on taxation found that beginning in 2017 , tax filers with income under $20,000 — which would likely include many eitc recipients — would on average see a reduction in their taxes .

however , an analysis of the camp proposal by the tax policy center highlighted that the actual impact of the proposal on individual taxpayers would depend on their particular circumstances , including their income , number and age of any qualifying children ( and whether they were college students or not ) , and filing status .

several parameters of the eitc are listed at statutory levels in the tax code and then adjusted annually for inflation using a cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) specified in section ( 1 ) ( f ) ( 3 ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

under current law , the cola for any year is the percentage ( if any ) by which the consumer price index ( cpi ) for the preceding calendar year exceeds the cpi for the calendar year , referred to as the "base year. .

hence , the inflation factor used to adjust statutory levels to 2014 levels is the ratio of the cpi for 2013 divided by the cpi for the base year .

different parameters of the eitc can have different base years .

statutorily , the inflation adjustment for any calendar year is the average of the cpi as of the close of the 12-month period ending on august 31 of such calendar year .

thus , the inflation adjustment for 2013 would be equal to the annual average of the cpi from september 2012 to august 2013 .

this report provides an overview of changes to the statutory amounts of the eitc for childless workers that are made by various bills introduced in the 113 th congress .

however , these bills use different "base years" when adjusting parameters for inflation , like the earned income amount , phase - out amount , and marriage penalty relief .

in addition , these bills are drafted in such a way that they could , if enacted in 2014 , go into effect in different years .

hence , the first time these parameters would be adjusted for inflation may differ .

it is unclear under the fy2015 obama administration proposal what the base year for inflation adjustments would be , and therefore it is not included in the table .

