the tibetan policy act of 2002 ( tpa ) is among the primary legislative measures guiding u.s. policy toward tibet and the tibetan people .

enacted into law on september 30 , 2002 , as part of the foreign relations authorization act , fy2003 ( p.l .

107-228 ) , it lists its "purpose" as being "to support the aspirations of the tibetan people to safeguard their distinct identity. .

the act establishes in statute the state department position of united states special coordinator for tibetan issues and states that the special coordinator's "central objective" is "to promote substantive dialogue between the government of the people's republic of china and the dalai lama or his representatives. .

the first of the special coordinator's duties and responsibilities , according to the tpa , is to "coordinate united states government policies , programs , and projects concerning tibet. .

many of those policies , programs , and projects are mandated in other legislation .

they include u.s. government assistance for nongovernmental organizations to work in tibetan communities in china ; an educational and cultural exchange program with "the people of tibet" ; voice of america and radio free asia tibetan - language broadcasting into tibet ; assistance for tibetan refugees in south asia ; a scholarship program for tibetans living outside tibet ; and national endowment for democracy human rights and democracy programs relating to tibet .

the special coordinator is also required to "vigorously promote the policy of seeking to protect the distinct religious , cultural , linguistic , and national identity of tibet" and press for "improved respect for human rights. .

among the tpa's other provisions are requirements that the president and the secretary of state encourage dialogue between the chinese government and the dalai lama or his representatives "leading to a negotiated agreement on tibet," and that in meetings with representatives of the government of the people's republic of china ( prc ) , they raise the issue of political and religious prisoners in tibet .

specifically , they are required to request the "immediate and unconditional" release of such prisoners , seek access for international humanitarian organizations to prisoners in tibet , and seek medical parole for tibetan prisoners known to be in ill health .

the secretary of state is also required to "make best efforts to establish an office in lhasa , tibet , to monitor political , economic , and cultural developments in tibet. .

these and other provisions of the tpa are discussed in detail below .

actions of the u.s. congress on issues related to tibet and tibetans , including the tibetan policy act of 2002 , have long been a source of friction in the u.s. relationship with the prc .

china charges that many congressional actions amount to support for challenges to chinese rule in tibet and thus threaten chinese sovereignty and territorial integrity .

congress has shown consistent support for tibet's exiled spiritual leader , the 14 th dalai lama ; china considers him to be a separatist , although since 1988 he has sought autonomy for tibet within the prc .

in march 2014 , after members of congress met the 14 th dalai lama , a chinese foreign ministry spokesperson said , "china urges the u.s. congress to honor the commitment the u.s. side has made of recognizing tibet as one part of china and not supporting 'tibet independence,' stop interfering in china's internal affairs with tibet - related affairs , cease to connive at and support anti - china separatist activities by 'tibet independence' forces , and do more things that promote friendship between the two peoples and bilateral relations rather than the opposite. .

the purpose of this report is to offer background on the tibetan policy act of 2002 , including discussion of other u.s. legislation related to tibet , and examine implementation of the act .

in recent years , three bills seeking to update the tibetan policy act of 2002 have passed the house .

in the 113 th congress , h.r .

4194 , the government reports elimination act of 2014 , passed the house with a provision that would eliminate a report required by the tpa ; the provision was removed in the senate - passed bill .

h.r .

2410 in the 111 th congress and h.r .

2601 in the 109 th congress both included substantial revisions to the tpa , although neither bill was acted on by the senate .

this report concludes with a list of questions that congress may wish to consider if it again seeks to update the tpa .

when the chinese government speaks of "tibet," it is usually referring only to the area within the borders of the tibet autonomous region ( tar ) , which the prc formally established in 1965 with the bureaucratic rank of a chinese province .

the tar constitutes just under half the area that tibetan exile groups consider to be historical tibet , and is home to just under half the ethnic tibetans in china , 2.7 million of an ethnic tibetan population of 6 million .

tibetan exile groups consider historical tibet to have covered an area of 965,000 square miles ( 2.5 million square kilometers ) , divided into three provinces , u - tsang , kham , and amdo .

they consider present day tibet to include the area within the borders of the tar , plus the area covered by 10 tibetan autonomous prefectures and two tibetan autonomous counties that china created in four other chinese provinces , plus the remainder of qinghai province .

approximately 3 million ethnic tibetans live in the tibetan autonomous prefectures and counties outside the tar .

those prefectures and counties are located in the chinese provinces of qinghai , sichuan , and yunnan , which border the tar , and gansu , which borders qinghai and sichuan .

 ( see text box below. ) .

in what tibetan exiles characterized as a compromise , representatives of the 14 th dalai lama in 2008 submitted a proposal to beijing that dropped the claim to the remainder of qinghai province .

the proposal called , among other things , for "bringing all the tibetans currently living in designated tibetan autonomous areas within a single autonomous administrative unit.... " beijing rejected the proposal .

in its 2015 white paper on tibet , china's government declared the idea of such a "greater tibet" to be "sheer fantasy. .

among other objections , the white paper noted such a greater tibet would constitute more than a quarter of china's total territory .

congressional appropriations legislation has repeatedly used the term , "tibetan communities in the tibetan [sic] autonomous region and in other tibetan communities in china," in order to indicate that the legislation is intended to apply to tibetan areas beyond the borders of the tar .

the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 2010 and 2011 ( h.r .

2410 ) , which passed the house but was not acted on by the senate , referred to "tibet , including tibetan areas of qinghai , sichuan , gansu , and yunnan provinces. .

by referring to tibetan areas of chinese provinces outside the tar , but avoiding use of the word "china," that language defined "tibet" more broadly than the tar but left some ambiguity about tibet's political status .

in areas of china that the chinese government has designated as "autonomous," members of the dominant ethnic group in china , han chinese , usually head the powerful local communist party committee , while ethnic minority officials head the government , which implements communist party policies .

the current party secretary of the tar is chen quanguo , an ethnic han chinese .

the current chairman of the tar people's government is lobsang gyaltsen ( china romanizes his name as losang jamcan ) , an ethnic tibetan .

the chinese communist party declared the establishment of the prc in 1949 .

in 1950 , it sent its people's liberation army ( pla ) into eastern tibet .

in may 1951 , the chinese central government in beijing signed a 17-point agreement with a delegation from tibet establishing principles for prc rule of tibet .

tibet's temporal and spiritual leader , the then - teenaged 14 th dalai lama , tenzin gyatso , did not personally sign the agreement , but did agree to cooperate with the new prc government .

in march 1959 , after a failed tibetan uprising against chinese rule , however , the dalai lama fled tibet and settled with fellow tibetan exiles in the indian hill town of dharamsala , where he has been based since .

the dalai lama is believed by tibetan buddhists to be a manifestation of an enlightened being , the bodhisattva of compassion , avalokitesvera , and heads the gelugpa sect of tibetan buddhism .

over 80,000 tibetans followed the 14 th dalai lama into exile in 1959 .

in dharamsala , the dalai lama established an exile government , now known formally as the central tibetan administration ( cta ) .

the government of india does not recognize the cta as a government body , deeming it instead to be a non - governmental organization .

nonetheless , the cta has a cabinet , known as the kashag , and operates "foreign missions" in 11 cities around the world , including washington , dc , and taipei , the capital of taiwan .

the tibetan exile community is also represented by a 44-member dharamsala - based tibetan parliament - in - exile .

the u.s. state department's position on the cta is outlined in the department's annual report to congress on tibet negotiations: "the u.s. government does not recognize tibet as an independent state and therefore does not conduct official diplomatic relations with the central tibetan administration , an organization based in dharamsala , india. .

in march 2011 , the 14 th dalai lama devolved political leadership of the tibetan exile movement to the head of the kashag .

dr. lobsang sangay , a harvard university - educated legal scholar , was elected to this post in april 2011 with 55% of more than 49,000 votes cast by the tibetan diaspora .

he is now referred to as sikyong , or "political leader. .

sangay's five - year term expires in 2016 .

a new sikyong election process is scheduled to get underway in the fall of 2015 and extend through the spring of 2016 .

by the terms of its revised "charter of the tibetans - in - exile," the tibetan exile community has deemed that the dalai lama should continue to serve as "the supreme leader , the symbol of tibetan identity and unity , and the voice of the whole tibetan people. .

according to a demographic survey undertaken by the cta in 2009 , the tibetan diaspora then numbered 128,000 , including 94,000 tibetans in india , 14,000 in nepal , 1,300 in bhutan , and 19,000 in other countries .

the state department's bureau of population , refugees , and migration , which provides assistance to tibetan refugees in india and nepal , estimates that tibetan refugees in india currently number 110,000 , and that tibetan refugees in nepal currently number 15,000 to 20,000 .

the numbers include new arrivals from tibet in the decades since the dalai lama's flight .

tibetans in south asia are concentrated in 58 tibetan refugee settlements administered by the cta .

with the 14 th dalai lama now 80 , observers are increasingly speculating about the fate of tibet and the exile movement after his death .

the present dalai lama is the 14 th in a lineage that began in the 14 th century , with each new dalai lama identified in childhood as the reincarnation of his predecessor .

the prc government has made clear that it intends to control the reincarnation process for the 15 th dalai lama .

as the legal basis for its involvement in the process , beijing cites its own state council regulations on religious affairs , adopted in 2005 , and the management methods on the reincarnation of tibetan living buddhas , issued by its state administration for religious affairs in 2007 .

in its insistence that the reincarnation process be governed by chinese law , beijing has so far declined to acknowledge the long tibetan buddhist traditions of other nations .

in mongolia , for example , 55% of the population is tibetan buddhist .

in a 2011 statement on reincarnation , the dalai lama sought to assert his own control over the process , and raised the possibility that he could confound beijing's plans by declining to be reincarnated at all .

he said he had heard that china's communist leaders "are waiting for my death and will recognize a fifteenth dalai lama of their choice. .

in response , he asserted that , "the person who reincarnates has sole legitimate authority over where and how he or she takes rebirth and how that reincarnation is to be recognized. .

he also said that when he is "about ninety" he will "re - evaluate whether the institution of the dalai lama should continue or not. .

if he determines that a 15 th dalai lama is needed , he instructed that , "no recognition or acceptance should be given to a candidate chosen by political means by anyone , including those in the people's republic of china. .

a chinese foreign ministry spokesperson in september 2014 declared that the dalai lama has no right to end the institution of the dalai lama , stating , "the title of dalai lama is conferred by the central government" in beijing .

at a press conference in beijing in march 2015 , zhu weiqun , chairman of the committee for ethnic and religious affairs in china's national political advisory body , the national committee of the chinese people's political consultative conference , reinforced that position .

"decision - making power over the reincarnation of the dalai lama and over the end or survival of his lineage , resides with the central government of china," zhu stated .

the u.s. government has criticized beijing's involvement in reincarnation matters .

in june 2015 remarks , under secretary of state sarah sewall , who serves as the u.s. government's special coordinator for tibetan issues , stated that , "the basic and universally recognized right of religious freedom demands that any decision on the next dalai lama must be reserved to the current dalai lama , tibetan buddhist leaders , and the tibetan people. .

on may 9 , 2001 , senator dianne feinstein and representative tom lantos each introduced in the senate and house , respectively , "the tibetan policy act of 2001. .

the two measures ( s. 852 and h.r .

1779 ) had the stated purpose of supporting "the aspirations of the tibetan people to safeguard their distinct identity. .

although neither bill was acted upon either in committee or in its respective body , the main components of the measures later were incorporated into h.r .

1646 , the foreign relations authorization act , fy2003 ( p.l .

107-228 , at title vi , subtitle b ) .

the same law also included provisions related to tibet that were not part of the tibetan policy act .

provisions of the tpa and their implementation are discussed below .

china typically has reacted angrily to congressional actions on tibet , routinely declaring tibetan issues an internal chinese matter in which foreigners should not interfere .

the chinese government portrays the dalai lama , on whom congress bestowed the congressional gold medal , as a dangerous separatist .

after president obama met with the dalai lama at the white house on february 21 , 2014 , a chinese foreign ministry spokesman described the tibetan spiritual leader as "a political exile who has long been engaged in anti - china separatist activities under the cloak of religion" and accused him of "essentially pursuing 'independence in disguise.' .

chinese academic articles on congress's role in tibet policy express particular concern about legislation declaring tibet to be an occupied country .

chinese scholars also fault congress for putting pressure on the executive branch to take actions related to tibet , thus "seriously harming the healthy development of china - u.s .

relations. .

the chinese academic literature also blames congress's support for the dalai lama for helping him and his supporters to internationalize the issue of tibet , a development that china equates with "splittism. .

many chinese scholars have suggested that the united states seeks to use the issue of tibet to pressure china and slow its emergence as a great power .

chinese discussions of the tibetan policy act of 2002 focus on the tpa's creation of a statutory requirement for the position in the state department of a special coordinator for tibetan issues .

the chinese government has made clear that it does not recognize the position .

responding to under secretary sewall's 2014 appointment as special coordinator , chinese foreign ministry spokesperson hua chunying said , "the chinese government is firmly opposed to any country's interference in china's internal affairs by making use of the so - called 'tibetan issues. .

we will never recognize the so - called 'special coordinator for tibet issues' designated by the u.s. as we have never before. .

a 2013 chinese academic study of the position noted that while the clinton administration created the post before passage of the tpa , the tpa made the special coordinator's role more "institutionalized , open , and specific. .

among the conclusions the authors drew about the special coordinator position were: "in the eyes of the american government , the special coordinator position is very important," as evidenced by the fact that before the tpa required the position , then - secretary of state colin powell chose to retain it even as he eliminated 23 other positions .

the u.s. establishment of a special coordinator position has had a "bad international influence" by encouraging other governments to consider designating representatives or offices for tibet issues .

the authors note a european union effort to create a special representative for tibet and an australian effort to create a tibet coordination office .

the rank of special coordinators has risen since passage of the tpa , "demonstrating that u.s. support for the dalai clique is constantly increasing , and that the united states is attempting to enhance the status of its relationship with tibet in order to suppress and contain china. .

the authors argue that special coordinators had a negative impact on the dialogue between the chinese government and representatives of the dalai lama by backing the dalai lama's positions , rather than staying neutral ; by denying that the dalai lama was seeking tibetan independence ; and by supporting the dalai lama's calls for a "middle way" involving "genuine autonomy" for tibetan districts within the framework of the prc .

u.s. involvement in the development of the negotiating positions of the dalai lama's representatives made it impossible , the authors argue , for the two sides to reach agreement .

in recent years , three legislative efforts to update the tibetan policy act of 2002 have passed the house , but not progressed further .

in the 113 th congress , h.r .

4194 , the government reports elimination act of 2014 , as reported in the house ( h.rept .

113-419 ) and referred in the senate , would have required the elimination of the report on tibet negotiations required by section 613 ( b ) of the tpa .

the senate removed the provision , however , and it is absent from the legislation as enacted .

in the 111 th congress , the house on june 10 , 2009 passed h.r .

2410 , the foreign relations authorization act , fy2010 and 2011 , which contained substantive amendments to the tpa .

h.r .

2410 was not acted on by the senate .

the main proposed amendments in h.r .

2410 are summarized below , with key provisions appearing in bold text: section 613 ( a ) , as amended , would not only have required the president and the secretary to encourage dialogue between the prc government and the dalai lama or his representatives leading to a negotiated agreement on tibet , but also to coordinate with other governments in multilateral efforts to encourage dialogue .

it would also have added a "policy coordination" paragraph requiring the president to direct the national security council to ensure that united states policy on tibet is coordinated and communicated with all executive branch agencies in contact with the government of china .

section 616 , as amended , would have added a subsection on u.s. assistance stating that " the president shall provide grants to nongovernmental organizations to support sustainable economic development , cultural and historical preservation , health care , education , and environmental sustainability projects for tibetan communities in the tibet autonomous region and in other tibetan communities in china," subject to project principles and to "the review and approval of the special coordinator for tibetan issues. .

section 621 , as amended , would have expanded the duties and responsibilities of the special coordinator for tibetan issues to include reviewing and approving all the president's grants to ngos to support projects for tibetan communities in china .

it would also have required the secretary of state to assign dedicated personnel to the office of the special coordinator for tibetan issues sufficient to assist in the management of the office's responsibilities , including the review and approval of grants to ngos .

the bill would have authorized the secretary of state to establish a tibet s ection within the u .

s .

e mbassy in beijing , china , headed by an official of "senior rank," to follow "political , economic , and social developments inside tibet , including tibetan areas of qinghai , sichuan , gansu , and yunnan provinces , until such time as a u.s. consulate in tibet is established. .

it would also have authorized "such sums as may be necessary" for this tibet section for fy2010 and fy2011 .

notably , this language would have expanded the definition of "tibet" to encompass tibetan areas in neighboring chinese provinces .

the central tibetan administration in india considers tibet to encompass the tibet autonomous region ; all of qinghai province ; and ethnic tibetan areas of sichuan , gansu , and yunnan provinces .

this provision would also have required that the new tibet section be in the u.s. embassy in beijing , although the u.s. government's "tibet - watcher" position is currently located at the u.s. consulate general in chengdu , which is closer to tibetan areas .

section 618 , as amended , would have directed the secretary of state to "seek to establish a u.s. consulate in lhasa , tibet , to provide services to united states citizens traveling to tibet and to monitor political , economic , and cultural developments" in tibetan areas .

the language would have replaced language in the tibet policy act of 2002 that directed the secretary to "make best efforts to establish an office," in lhasa .

section 620 ( b ) , as amended , would have specified that in exchanges with chinese government officials , when u.s. government representatives promote the cessation of prc or communist party interference in the religious affairs of the tibetan people , that category should include the reincarnation system of tibetan buddhism .

finally , in the 109 th congress , the house passed h.r .

2601 , the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 2006 and 2007 .

it included some of the same amendments to the tpa that were included in the 111 th congress's h.r .

2410 : like h.r .

2410 , section 616 , as amended , would have added a subsection on u.s. assistance requiring the president to provide grants to nongovernmental organizations for projects for tibetans inside tibet , and required that projects be subject to review and approval by the special coordinator for tibetan issues .

unlike h.r .

2410 , it would also have authorized $6 million in appropriations for such projects in fy2006 and $8 million in fy2007 .

unlike h.r .

2410 , it would have amended section 619 to require the secretary of state to ensure that at least one foreign service officer was assigned to a u.s. post in the prc to monitor developments in tibet , and that the officer had at least six months and as much as one year of tibetan - language training prior to taking up the post .

like h.r .

2410 , it would have amended section 621 to require the secretary of state to assign dedicated personnel to the office of the special coordinator for tibetan issues sufficient to assist in the management of the office's responsibilities , including the review and approval of grants .

as noted above , the house has passed three legislative measures seeking to update the tibetan policy act of 2002 to take account of developments since the act's original passage .

advocates with close ties to the tibetan exile movement and other human rights advocates have also called on congress to update the act .

as it considers the future of the tpa , issues congress may wish to consider include the following general questions: relations with china .

to what degree , if any , should congress consider policy toward tibet in the context of relations with china ? .

bilateral trade between the united states and china totaled $593 billion in 2014 , and the united states seeks china's cooperation on multiple global challenges , even as the two countries' relationship is characterized by many areas of profound disagreement , including on the issue of human rights .

tibet's political status: "occupied country" or part of china ? .

does congress see a need to clarify its position on tibet's status ? .

as noted above ( see " the u.s. congress and the question of tibet's political status " ) , while the executive branch considers tibet to be a part of china , in the early 1990s , congress passed legislation declaring tibet to be "an occupied country" and stating that , "tibet's true representatives are the dalai lama and the tibetan government in exile as recognized by the tibetan people. .

a number of subsequent legislative measures , however , have implied congress's acceptance of a status for tibet as part of china .

tibet's geographic scope .

the tpa refers throughout to "tibet," without defining the geographic scope of the term .

 ( see " the geographic scope of "tibet" " above. ) .

china usually considers "tibet" to refer only to the area within the borders of the prc - established tibet autonomous region ( tar ) , which is home to just under half of china's ethnic tibetan population and comprises less than half of the area that tibetan exile organizations consider to constitute "tibet. .

the india - based central tibetan administration's position is that "tibet" includes the tar , tibetan autonomous prefectures and counties in china's sichuan , gansu , and yunnan provinces , and all of china's qinghai province .

congressional appropriations legislation has repeatedly used the term , "tibetan communities in the tibetan [sic] autonomous region and in other tibetan communities in china," in order to indicate that the legislation is intended to apply to tibetan areas beyond the borders of the tar .

tibetans in tibet vs. tibetans in exile .

what should be the balance between u.s. programs , activities , and policies focused on the 6 million tibetans living under chinese communist party rule and those focused on the approximately 130,000 tibetans living in exile in south asia ? .

changes in the political arrangements of the tibetan exile movement .

as noted above ( see " tibetans in exile " ) , the dalai lama in 2011 gave up political leadership of the tibetan exile movement and raised the possibility that that the institution of the dalai lama might end with him .

lobsang sangay is now serving a five - year term as the elected political head , or sikyong , of the central tibetan administration .

to what degree , if any , should the tpa reflect these changes ? .

tibetan - language reports .

in congressional testimony in 2011 , a state department official said the department was working to translate into tibetan its international religious freedom report and its country report on human rights practices in china .

the 2013 country report on human rights practices in china is available on the state department website in chinese translation , but not tibetan .

the 2013 international religious freedom report does not appear to be available in either chinese or tibetan .

does congress see a need to address the issue of the languages of the reports ? .

congress may also wish to consider the following questions about specific provisions of the tibetan policy act of 2002: section 621 ( c ) : dialogue between the prc and the dalai lama's representatives .

with the dialogue process stalled since january 2010 , should section 621 ( c ) of the tpa continue to define the "central objective" of the special coordinator for tibetan issues to be "to promote substantive dialogue between the government of the people's republic of china and the dalai lama or his representatives" ? .

section 621 ( c ) and ( d ) : alignment in the tpa between the special coordinator's "central objective" and "duties and responsibilities. .

in the tpa , the special coordinator's "central objective" and the official's "duties and responsibilities" are not aligned .

should they be ? .

section 621 ( d ) ( 1 ) : the special coordinator's coordination of u.s. government programs and projects concerning tibet .

the tpa requires the special coordinator to coordinate u.s. government programs and projects related to tibet , but it does not reference most ongoing programs and projects related to tibet .

should it do so ? .

for a list of such programs and projects , see " congressionally mandated programs and earmarked appropriations for tibet and tibetans " above .

none of these programs is mentioned in the tpa .

in addition , should the tpa provide a mechanism for the special coordinator formally to "task" non - state department entities in order to coordinate policy ? .

or is such a provision unnecessary ? .

section 621 ( d ) ( 3 ) : regular travel by the special coordinator to tibetan refugee settlements in india and nepal .

the tpa does not mention travel to the 12 tibetan refugee settlements in bhutan .

should it do so ? .

section 621 ( d ) ( 5 ) : the special coordinator's contacts with foreign governments related to tibet .

the tpa requires the special coordinator to "make efforts to establish contacts in the foreign ministries of other countries to pursue a negotiated solution for tibet. .

should this language be amended to reflect the actual scope of the special coordinator's international coordination efforts ? .

should it refer to "foreign governments" rather than only "foreign ministries," for example ? .

should the purpose of contacts with other countries be broader than pursuing a "negotiated solution" for tibet ? .

should multilateral settings be addressed ? .

or is the current language sufficient ? .

section 621 ( d ) ( 6 ) : ensuring "adequate sources , staff , and bureaucratic support" for the special coordinator .

should this be the responsibility of the special coordinator , as indicated in the tpa , or of the president or the secretary of state ? .

section 614: reporting on tibet .

what should be the scope of the annual report required in section 613 ( b ) of the tpa ? .

should it remain confined to the president and the secretary of state's efforts to encourage dialogue between the prc and representatives of the dalai lama and the status of such dialogue ? .

should it be expanded to cover implementation of the entire tibetan policy act of 2002 ; all activities of the special coordinator for tibetan issues ; or the full range of activities related to tibet undertaken by the u.s. government , including activities not specifically mandated by the act ? .

or should the report be eliminated , as proposed in h.r .

4194 , the government reports elimination act of 2014 , as introduced ? .

if the report is retained , should the legislation require that it be made public ? .

section 616 ( d ) : economic principles .

fear of violating the "tibet project principles" outlined in section 616 ( d ) of the tpa appears to have dissuaded some international financial institutions and such u.s. institutions as the trade development administration from pursuing projects in tibet .

does congress see a need to reevaluate the principles ? .

or does it believe they have served their purpose ? .

section 615 ( 3 ) and section 621 ( d ) ( 2 ) : elements of tibet's "distinct identity. .

section 621 ( d ) ( 2 ) requires the special coordinator to promote the policy of seeking to protect "the distinct religious , cultural , linguistic , and national identity of tibet" ( crs emphasis ) .

section 615 ( 3 ) directs the congressional - executive commission on china to include in its annual report a description of "measures taken to safeguard tibet's distinct historical , religious , cultural , and linguistic identity" ( crs emphasis ) , adding "historical" and dropping "national. .

should these provisions be consistent ? .

the obama administration's 2013 report on tibet negotiations refers to respect for "the distinct religious , linguistic , and cultural identity of the tibetan people. .

sections 613 , 617 , 6 20 , and 621: specific u.s. officials tasked with implementing p rovisions of the tpa .

these four provisions of the tpa require specific individuals to carry out mandates , as summarized below .

does congress see any need to review which individuals are required to carry out specific provisions of the tpa ? .

should the tasks be required of a broader set of individuals ? .

or should the individuals tasked in each provision remain unchanged ? .

in section 613 ( a ) and ( b ) ( 1 ) , the president and the secretary of state alone are required to encourage the chinese government "to enter into a dialogue with the dalai lama or his representatives leading to a negotiated agreement on tibet. .

the annual reported mandated by the tpa requires reporting exclusively on the president's and the secretary's steps to encourage dialogue .

in section 617 , the president and the secretary of state alone are required to request the release of political and religious prisoners in tibet , seek access for international humanitarian organizations to prisoners in tibet , and seek medical parole for tibetan prisoners known to be in ill health .

in section 620 , the u.s .

ambassador to china alone is required to ascertain information about the well - being of the 11 th panchen lama and to request his release from chinese government custody .

in section 621 , the special coordinator alone is required to "vigorously promote the policy of seeking to protect the distinct religious , cultural , linguistic , and national identity of tibet , and pressing [sic] for improved respect for human rights. .

