pakistan has waged a decades - long struggle to establish a sustainable democratic system in which elected civilian leaders have clear primacy over the country's military .

in august 2014 , this effort appears to be meeting with another potentially serious reversal as ongoing political protests in the capital may trigger a new round of direct military intervention in the country's governance .

such an outcome could jeopardize a number of u.s. interests .

the democratically elected government of prime minister nawaz sharif , seated in may 2013 , has come under strident , highly visible criticism from two opposition figures and their followers: imran khan , leader of the pakistan tehreek - e - insaf ( pti ) , parliament's second - largest opposition party ; and tahir - ul - qadri and his pakistan awami tehreek ( pat ) party .

on august 15 , these two leaders — acting separately , but , some suspect , with tacit support from or in collusion with the military — were able to amass an estimated 30,000 anti - government protestors in the heart of islamabad , and many thousands remain in place in early september .

both have held fast to demands that sharif resign his office: khan accuses the prime minister's party of election fraud , while qadri complains of a broader systemic illegitimacy and corruption .

after two weeks of peaceful protest , violence erupted in the final days of august , killing three and injuring hundreds more .

prime minister sharif regards the protesters' demands as unconstitutional , and the political consensus in islamabad appears to agree , with the view widely held that a forced dissolution of elected assemblies would significantly undermine what most observers have seen as major progress in democratization over the past six years .

all political parties also appear to agree that substantial electoral reforms are required and that the election commission of pakistan requires an overhaul .

pakistan's military , now led by army chief general raheel sharif ( no relation to the prime minister ) , has launched three overt coups in pakistan's 67-year history , and has dictated the country's foreign and national security policies even when not directly governing .

in late august , the army announced that it was taking a "facilitative" role in resolving the political impasse , a step that many analysts see as a precursor to what they say would be a "soft coup" in which sharif might be reduced to a "ceremonial prime minister" who lacks any formal authority over the country's most sensitive policy making .

the international crisis group warns that the current crisis is a grave threat to pakistan's fragile democratic transition and opens the possibility of "the military ruling through the back door. .

the obama administration has taken a low - key posture toward pakistani unrest , but it has emphasized its support for democracy and rule of law .

as articulated by a state department spokeswoman on august 20 , we support the constitutional and electoral process in pakistan , which produced prime minister nawaz sharif .

that was a process they followed , an election they had , and we are focused on working with pakistan .

and we do not support any extra - constitutional changes to that democratic system or people attempting to impose them .

in later comments , the state department spokeswoman said u.s. officials were "carefully monitoring" developments in islamabad , and "continue to urge all sides to refrain from violence , exercise restraint , respect the rule of law .

peaceful protest and freedom of expression are , of course , important aspects of democracy , and that's certainly a message we're conveying. .

one scholar and longtime pakistan - watcher opines that washington's most helpful role can come through full - throated support for the current government — despite its pursuit of policies sometimes vexing for u.s. officials — in the vital long - term interest of strengthening pakistan's democratic system and institutions .

because political unrest is ongoing , final resolution of the current protests remains uncertain .

yet the general desire of all sitting opposition parties ( other than pti ) to adhere to constitutional and parliamentary processes — combined with the army's apparent aversion to intervening directly — suggests that the sharif government will remain in office , albeit in a much - weakened state .

implications for u.s. interests are likewise unclear , but are most likely to be negative in the context of pakistani democratization , along with some added challenges related to fostering afghan stability , pakistan - india rapprochement , and perhaps even pakistan's economic development .

moreover , if chaos continues effectively to paralyze pakistan's governance mechanisms , regional terrorist groups could see an opportunity to exploit the instability .

on august 27 , after nearly two weeks without a public statement on the crisis , prime minister sharif told the parliament that he would not be intimidated by the protests and that "the supremacy of law and constitution will continue in pakistan. .

on august 28 , punjab police allowed registration of a "first information report" that reportedly names 21 people , including the prime minister and punjab chief minister , as potential culprits in the june killing of 10 opposition activists in lahore .

on friday , august 29 , the army formally stepped in to play a "facilitative" role in breaking the deadlock , ostensibly at the request of the government .

yet prime minister sharif told parliament that he had nothing to do with the army's decision , even as his interior minister indicated that the government endorsed only a "facilitative" role , and did not accept the army as "mediator and guarantor. .

violence broke out over the weekend of august 30-31 , reportedly beginning when paramilitary frontier corps troops fired tear gas at what they saw as an encroachment of the grounds of the prime minister's residence .

three people were killed and several hundred injured in an ensuing melee in which police used batons and fired rubber bullets at protesters .

this marked the first such incident in the heretofore peaceful mobilization by khan and qadri .

the pti now appears to be facing a splintering in its upper ranks: senior khan ally and party president javed hashmi , formerly a lieutenant to nawaz sharif , claimed on august 30 that khan had violated a pledge to his own followers that they would not march on the prime minister's residence and had overruled other senior party leaders in escalating the protest .

hashmi went on flatly to blame khan for any imposition of martial law .

the united states has taken an interest in assisting the creation of a more stable , democratic , and prosperous pakistan that is actively combating religious militancy .

this has been among the most important u.s. foreign policy efforts in the post - 9 / 11 period .

many americans believe that the united states has vital interests at stake in u.s. engagement with pakistan .

these are related to regional and global terrorism ; efforts to stabilize neighboring afghanistan ; nuclear weapons proliferation ; links between pakistan and indigenous american terrorism ; pakistan - india tensions and conflict ; democratization and human rights protection ; and economic development .

as a haven for numerous islamist extremist and terrorist groups , and as the world's most rapid vertical proliferator of nuclear weapons , pakistan presents a combination that places it at the top of many governments' international security agendas .

the u.s. government has sought to help in developing pakistan's economy and boosting the effectiveness of its security forces .

islamabad has been among the leading recipients of u.s. foreign assistance in the 21 st century , receiving more than $20 billion in overt transfers since 2001 .

while such assistance has contributed to some successes , pakistan remains racked by militancy and terrorism , and is suffering through an extended period of inflation , unemployment , and weak economic growth .

the history of democracy in pakistan is marked by ongoing tripartite power struggles among presidents , prime ministers , and army chiefs .

military regimes have ruled pakistan directly for 34 of the country's 67 years of independence , and observers agree that pakistan has no sustained history of effective constitutionalism or parliamentary democracy .

the country has had five constitutions , the most recent ratified in 1973 ( and significantly modified several times since ) .

from the earliest days of independence , the country's armed forces have conceived of themselves as "saviors of the nation," a perception that has received significant , though limited , public support .

the military , usually acting in tandem with the president , has engaged in three outright seizures of power from elected civilian governments: by general ayub khan in 1958 ; general zia ul - haq in 1977 ; and general pervez musharraf in 1999 .

pakistan's most recent national election , in may 2013 , ousted the incumbent , pakistan people's party ( ppp ) - led coalition government headed by then - president asif zardari .

the democratic exercise was seen by close observers as having been relatively free and fair , although accusations of vote - rigging were widespread .

those charges against the victorious party were a key motivator of the street protests that erupted in august 2014 .

the election winner , nawaz sharif — a two - time former prime minister from a prominent punjabi industrialist family — had returned to pakistan from exile in 2007 , eight years after general musharraf unseated him in a bloodless 1999 coup .

sharif's pakistan muslim league – nawaz ( pml - n ) party had won approximately 33% of the popular vote and 166 of the assembly's 343 seats .

subsequent late - joiners provided an outright majority .

of the 320 assembly members present to vote in the new prime minister in early june , more than three - quarters supported sharif .

many observers in the united states , pakistan , and elsewhere saw the peaceful transfer of power — the first in pakistan's history from one elected government to another — as a historic milestone in pakistan's struggle to establish sustainable representative government .

at present , experts expect few , if any , notable adjustments in the near - future to pakistan's policies that are of international interest .

according to one longtime dc - based analyst , there is little reason to anticipate any major changes in pakistani policy on issues of special interest to the united states in the short term , but "serious hope for a gradual consolidation of effective democratic rule" has been dimmed by the latest upheaval .

yet the unrest is likely to have significant impact on pakistan's already difficult domestic circumstances , and thus potentially for u.s. interests in the region .

the pakistan army's reclaiming of more direct and robust control of the country's foreign and security policies may , over time , shift pakistan's approach toward afghanistan further into a policy framework that seeks to counter indian influence there .

it also could present new challenges to the goal of improving india - pakistan relations , and put a damper on hopes for effective regional cooperation and commerce in south asia .

the u.s. government's more acute security interests related to pakistan include nuclear security and proliferation , counterterrorism , afghanistan stability , and normalization of pakistan - india relations .

any new erosion of the ability of islamabad's civilian leaders to oversee ( or make ) the country's security policy likely will not affect the nuclear realm , which has long been assumed to be wholly ruled by the military .

with regard to counterterrorism and domestic counterinsurgency , washington has for years been confounded by and disappointed with the pakistan army's apparent willingness to distinguish between islamist militant groups , and to spare from meaningful pressure those that are deemed useful as proxies with which to counter indian or afghan influence .

however , in the areas of afghanistan stability and islamabad's relations with new delhi , any marginalization of the sharif government could have negative implications for u.s. interests .

as the united states winds down its military operations in preparation for a withdrawal from afghanistan , washington has looked to islamabad as a crucial partner in ensuring afghan stability and prosperity after 2014 .

however , pakistan's security establishment , ever fearful of strategic encirclement by india , has , by many accounts , continued to view the afghan taliban as a relatively friendly and reliably anti - india element in afghanistan , one that can help to provide pakistan with "strategic depth. .

the army's 2014 north waziristan offensive was publicly debated months in advance , and it is widely believed that most of the militants that pose a threat to u.s. interests , such as the leaders of the haqqani network , were able to flee across the durand line into afghanistan .

in august , the state department announced new bounties for haqqani leaders ; whether it did so on the assumption that pakistan's civilian government was losing influence over the country's afghanistan policy remains unclear .

pakistan's alleged material support of the afghan taliban — a group that islamabad actively supported until september 2001 — is a crucial concern for leaders in both afghanistan and india .

afghan president hamid karzai's perpetual distrust of pakistan has led him to look to india for support , including in the realm of defense articles and training .

both of the leading prospects to assume the afghan presidency have relatively positive dispositions toward new delhi .

upon taking office in mid - 2013 , prime minister sharif sought to improve pakistan's relations with afghan leaders , but little progress was made , ostensibly due to pakistan army resistance .

the present weakening of sharif's government and corresponding ( re - ) empowerment of the army could undermine efforts to foster cooperative regional policy toward stabilizing afghanistan .

tensions between pakistan and india grew in august , apparently unrelated to the unrest in islamabad , where political instability only serves to reduce already thin prospects for rapprochement between islamabad and new delhi .

the sharif government had shown a strong interest in resolving outstanding disputes with india and deepening bilateral ties both commercially and more broadly .

many independent observers see the pakistani army obstructing efforts to deepen trade with india because it seeks a resolution of territorial disputes as a prerequisite .

significantly , sharif attended the inauguration of indian prime minister narendra modi in late may , when the two leaders agreed to resume a wide - ranging dialogue that has been on hold since a late 2008 terrorist attack in mumbai .

in the ensuing months , however , prime minister sharif's clout within the pakistani establishment apparently diminished , and with it the influence of the political and business constituencies for better relations with india .

indian reports of attempts to infiltrate separatist militants across the kashmiri line of control ( loc ) into indian kashmir have become more common over the course of the summer , perhaps in correspondence with sharif's waning influence .

when the pakistani ambassador to new delhi met with kashmiri separatists in august , the new indian leader abruptly canceled planned foreign secretary - level talks .

in mid - august , cross - border firing along the loc intensified , leading to fears of escalation and potential collapse of a 2003 ceasefire agreement .

the downturn in pakistan - india relations is viewed by some as being orchestrated by a pakistani military intent on taking full control of pakistan's india policy , but numerous other factors , some domestic to india , are at play .

still , a recent opinion survey found 71% of pakistanis expressing an unfavorable view of india .

an even more empowered pakistani military is likely to further slow , if not altogether halt , the modest movement toward increased trade and economic relations with india that was initiated by prime minister sharif .

although islamabad struck a transit trade agreement with afghanistan in 2010 , pakistan continues to block most indian access to that country , and thus to all of central asia via land .

any further stiffening of official pakistani perspective on greater trade access for india could be harmful to an obama administration policy that seeks to better link india with central asia via a "new silk road. .

on a regional stage , such stiffening could be anathema to proponents of south asian regional cooperation .

geopolitically , it could boost new delhi's motivation to develop iran's chabbahar port , bypassing pakistan for access to central asia , but also potentially engaging in mutually beneficial ties with a u.s. adversary .

whether prime minister sharif sought out or merely acceded to the army's late august intervention as a "facilitator" between the government and the protesters , most analysts contend that , because he has not demonstrated civilian control over domestic security , he will be left in a weakened state .

this could have negative implications for u.s. efforts to strengthen pakistan's democratic governance institutions .

any overt military ouster of sharif could trigger another round of democracy - related u.s. sanctions on foreign assistance to pakistan , potentially putting an indefinite halt to what has been one of the highest - priority american aid programs since 9 / 11 .

