c ongress has an ongoing interest in regulating the immigration of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers to the united states .

this workforce is seen by many as a catalyst of u.s. global economic competitiveness and is likewise considered a key element of the legislative options aimed at stimulating economic growth .

the challenge central to the policy debate is facilitating the migration of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers without adversely affecting u.s. workers and u.s. students entering the labor market .

this report opens with an overview of the policy issues .

it follows with a summary of each of the various visa categories available for temporary professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers as well as an analysis of the trends in the use of these various visas over the past two decades .

the policy of authorizing foreign students to work in the united states for at least a year following graduation is discussed next .

the labor market tests for employers hiring temporary foreign workers are also summarized .

the rules regarding federal taxation of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers are explained .

the report concludes with a discussion of the avenues for professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers to become legal permanent residents ( lprs ) in the united states .

temporary visas for professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers have become an important gateway for high - skilled immigration to the united states .

over the past two decades , the number of visas issued annually for all temporary employment - based admission has more than doubled from just over 400,000 in fy1994 to over 1 million in fy2015 .

as figure 1 shows , the total number of temporary employment - based visas issued in fy2007 and fy2008 surpassed 1 million and subsequently fell during the 2007-2009 recession .

while the total visa numbers include some unskilled and low - skilled workers , the visas for managerial , skilled , and professional workers depicted in figure 1 clearly dominate the trends .

in fy2014 and fy2015 , visas for managerial , skilled , and professional workers surpassed the prior peak year of fy2007 ( 885,232 ) as they reached 929,129 and 984,360 , respectively .

the data presented in figure 1 understate the trends in professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers because the state department does not issue visas to nonimmigrants who change status within the united states .

for example , a foreign national who is in the united states as a student may convert status to a temporary foreign worker nonimmigrant without going abroad to obtain a new visa .

for comparison , the department of homeland security office of immigration statistics estimated that there were approximately 1.1 million temporary workers and long - term exchange residents living in the united states in january 2012 ; and the state department reported that there were 937,366 visas issued to temporary employment - based workers and their families in fy2012 .

the foreign labor certification program in the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) is responsible for ensuring that foreign workers do not displace or adversely affect the working conditions of u.s. workers .

under current law , dol adjudicates labor certification applications ( lca ) for permanent employment - based immigrants .

many of the foreign nationals entering the united states on a temporary basis for employment , however , are not subject to any labor market tests ( i.e. , demonstrating that there are not sufficient u.s. workers who are able , willing , qualified , and available ) , and as a result , their employers do not file lcas with the dol .

there are several groups of temporary foreign employees , however , that are covered by labor market tests .

dol adjudicates the streamlined lca known as labor attestations for certain temporary workers , as discussed more fully below .

when it was enacted in 1952 , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) authorized visas for foreign nationals who would perform needed services because of their high educational attainment , technical training , specialized experience , or exceptional ability .

today , there are several temporary visa categories that enable employment - based temporary admissions for highly skilled foreign workers .

these visa categories are commonly referred to by the letter and numeral that denote their subsection in the ina .

they perform work that ranges from skilled labor to management and professional positions to jobs requiring extraordinary ability in the sciences , arts , education , business , or athletics .

a more detailed presentation of visas issued to professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers by visa category for fy2015 is presented in figure 3 .

as some , but not all , visa categories differentiate between the principal or qualifying foreign national and derivative immediate family that are permitted to accompany the foreign national , figure 3 omits the derivative family members when possible .

the total number of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign worker visas issued abroad to principals was 707,781in fy2015 .

although the cultural exchange workers are the largest single category of temporary foreign workers ( 47% ) , it is important to note that about one - third of the j - 1 visas are issued to persons engaged in summer work travel ( swt ) .

the state department characterizes swt as providing "foreign students with an opportunity to live and work in the united states during their summer vacation from college or university to experience and to be exposed to the people and way of life in the united states. .

many compare this use of the j - 1 visas for swt to the h - 2 visas for seasonal and shortage guest workers .

similarly , the q visa is often used by the hospitality and entertainment industry ( eg , disney parks ) .

q visas comprised less than 1% of all cultural exchange visas issued in fy2015 .

over the past two decades , the numbers of visas issued to each of the categories of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign worker have increased .

the relative portions , however , have not changed substantially , as figure 4 makes clear .

the professional workers ( h - 1bs and tns ) , the cultural exchange workers ( j - 1 ) , and the intra - company transferees ( l - 1 ) have driven most of the growth over the past two decades .

there has also been a slow but steady increase in foreign workers deemed outstanding and extraordinary ( o and p ) over this same period .

only the religious worker visa category has remained rather flat .

although foreign students on f visas are generally barred from off - campus employment , some f - 1 foreign students are permitted to participate in employment known as optional practical training ( opt ) after completing their undergraduate or graduate studies .

opt is temporary employment that is directly related to an f - 1 student's major area of study .

generally , an f - 1 foreign student may work up to 12 months in opt status .

in 2008 , the bush administration expanded the opt work period to 29 months for f - 1 students in stem fields .

to qualify for the 17-month extension , f - 1 students must have received stem degrees included on the stem designated degree program list , be employed by employers enrolled in e - verify , and have received an initial grant of post - completion opt related to such a degree ( i.e. , already approved for 12 months in opt ) .

president barack obama's immigration accountability executive action of november 20 , 2014 , included a "high skilled memorandum" that directed uscis and immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) to develop regulations to expand the number of degree programs eligible for opt , and to extend the time period and use of opt for stem students and graduates .

the new policy would also require the opt program to have stronger ties to degree - granting institutions to ensure that a student's opt furthers his or her course of study in the united states .

in addition , the "high skilled memorandum" stated that the new policy would have to be consistent with u.s. worker protections .

dhs proposed new rules in october 2015 that , among other things , would extend the 17-month extension for stem graduates to a 24-month extension .

according to uscis , the number of f - 1 visa holders who are engaged in opt has risen substantially , from 28,497 in fy2008 to 136,617 in fy2014 ( figure 5 ) .

opt workers are now approaching the h - 1b workers in terms of number of visas issued annually .

in 2014 , gao released a report noting the potential for fraud and abuse of the opt status .

gao concluded that dhs' immigration and customs enforcement was unable to "fully ensure foreign students working under optional practical training are maintaining their legal status in the united states. .

temporary professional visas have become an important gateway for high - skilled immigration to the united states .

about half of all employment - based lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) have been working in the united states on temporary visas .

more specifically , 46% of the foreign nationals who became employment - based lprs in the united states during the decade of 2000-2009 had formerly held h - 1b visas .

over this same time period , almost half ( 48.6% ) of employment - based principals who were deemed extraordinary / priority workers had been l intracompany transferees .

more recently , the opt status may provide the link for foreign students to become employment - based lprs .

many anecdotal accounts tell of foreign students who are hired by u.s. firms as they are completing their programs .

employers may opt to hire them as opt to extend their f - 1 visas .

according to dhs: "this extension of the opt period for stem degree holders gives u.s. employers two chances to recruit these highly desirable graduates through the h - 1b process , as the extension is long enough to allow for h - 1b petitions to be filed in two successive fiscal years. .

if the temporary foreign workers meet expectations , the employers may also petition for them to become lprs through one of the employment - based immigration categories .

over 90% of employment - based lprs are adjusting from a temporary visa category to lpr status within the united states , rather than newly arriving from abroad .

because the ina requires most foreign nationals seeking to qualify for a nonimmigrant visa to demonstrate that they are not coming to reside permanently , these adjustment of status statistics prompt further explanation on the exceptions noted in the law .

the metaphor for u.s. policy on economic migration is a post at the border with two signs: one reads "help wanted," and the other reads "keep out. .

this tension between competing interests on foreign workers has long characterized american immigration policy .

balancing these priorities on the issues of temporary visas for professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers is no small feat , and is further complicated by a lack of consensus on the broader policy debate over comprehensive immigration reform .

