federal outlays for grants to state and local governments have grown from $15.4 billion in 1940 to $509.7 billion in 2013 .

the number of congressionally authorized grant programs has also increased over time , with over 2,179 congressionally authorized grant programs currently being administered by federal agencies .

recently , congressional interest has focused on the efficient and effective management of federal grant programs .

as a result of this interest , congress has asked the government accountability office ( gao ) to conduct investigations into the grants management practices of federal agencies .

these investigations have shown that federal agencies struggle with conducting timely federal grant closeouts , ensuring appropriate internal controls in the oversight of federal grants , and need to establish better monitoring of federal grant recipients and subgrant recipients to reduce the risk of waste , fraud , and abuse .

delays in closing out federal grants result in delays in identifying points in the grants management process where waste , fraud , and abuse may be occurring .

failure to identify and resolve these weaknesses increases the likelihood of continued waste , fraud , and abuse .

grant administration tasks , such as closing out federal grants , are necessary to ensure appropriate oversight of federal grant funds .

closing out federal grants involves reviewing all expenditures made under the grant to ensure that funds were spent appropriately and identifying unspent ( i.e. , undisbursed ) funds that should be transferred back to the department of the treasury .

gao has reported that it found more than $794 million in undisbursed federal grant funds in expired grant accounts administered by federal agencies and concluded that federal agencies needed to improve the timeliness of federal grant closeouts to address the undisbursed funds issue .

while delayed federal grant closeout may contribute to the issue of undisbursed grant funds , there may be underlying causes , other than inefficient grants management , that might help to explain how undisbursed funds end up in expired grant accounts .

furthermore , it is possible , if not likely , that the estimated amount of undisbursed funds in expired grant accounts may be inflated .

while the undisbursed funds identified by gao represent significantly less than 1% of annual federal grant outlays to state and local governments , the existence of undisbursed grant funds in expired grant accounts is an indicator of a systemic grants management challenge .

it suggests a lack of coordination between the financial and program management of federal grants .

this report is designed to assist congress in its oversight of federal grants - in - aid programs by providing a summary of relevant laws , processes , and authorities .

the report analyzes the causes of undisbursed grant funds in expired grant accounts and presents congressional options to reform federal grant administration to increase the timeliness , reliability , and comprehensiveness of grant management - related information .

the topic of undisbursed grant funds is a complex one , because it draws on specialized terms from the fields of grants and budgeting .

thus , it is necessary to explain relevant processes , uses , and relevant terms of art .

as detailed in figure 1 , the life cycle of a federal grant includes four stages: pre - award , grant award , grant administration , and post - award / audit .

in order to evaluate options to address undisbursed grant funds in grant accounts , it is arguably necessary to understand the primary causes of delays in grant closeouts .

for example , delays in closing out a federal grant may occur when the grant recipient has not completed closeout documentation , or the federal agency has not processed the closeout documentation .

as shown in figure 2 , federal grant funds pass through several entities before reaching the local level .

while the primary grant recipient , frequently the state , is responsible for submitting closeout documentation to the federal agency , the state often relies on the local subgrantee to submit documentation to the state before a federal grant can be closed out .

as discussed previously , there are several potential causes for delays in federal grant closeout .

therefore , several solutions may be necessary to provide the scope needed to resolve any recipient or agency delays in closing out federal grants .

these solutions may include reforming the financial management structure , establishing mechanisms to increase congressional oversight of the monitoring activities of federal agencies and grant recipients , increasing the amount of federal grant funds that can be used by federal agencies and grant recipients for management and administration ( m&a ) of federal grants , and providing incentives for federal agencies to expedite grant closeouts .

on december 26 , 2013 , omb published new guidance to implement reforms to federal polices relating to federal grant management , including administrative requirements , cost principles , and audit requirements .

the new omb guidance combines requirements from several existing omb circulars into one document , the uniform administrative requirements , cost principles , and audit requirements for federal awards .

the final guidance consolidates the administrative requirements of several circulars into the uniform guidance .

in addition to consolidating the circulars , the final guidance requires federal agencies to provide grant recipients with clear performance goals , indicators , and milestones , includes a new provision on internal controls , and expands guidance on grant closeout requirements .

the final guidance consolidates circulars that regulate cost principles for grant recipients , including general principles for determining allowable costs , cost allocation plans , and indirect costs .

the final guidance included new provisions relating to the audit requirements .

these provisions include requiring federal awarding agencies to designate a senior agency official to oversee the audit resolution process and additional changes to audit resolution practices .

because the reform of the omb grant guidance is a recent occurrence , it is unclear how the changes in guidance to federal agencies regarding federal grant closeouts and audit requirements may affect delayed closeout .

congressional interest in oversight of the financial aspects of federal grants is evident in at least six key legislative efforts to reform the federal financial management structure: the budget and accounting act of 1921 ( p.l .

67-13 ) , the single audit act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-502 ) , the chief financial officers act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-576 ) , the federal financial assistance management improvement act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-107 ) , the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-282 ) , and the digital accountability and transparency act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-101 ) .

with these laws , congress created a framework for government - wide leadership roles in federal financial management , established uniform requirements for audits of federal grants , and reformed federal financial management systems to create a financial leadership structure within federal agencies in an effort to ensure efficient management of federal funds .

budget and accounting act of 1921 among other things , the budget and accounting act of 1921 , as amended and currently codified in title 31 of the u.s. code , created the general accounting office , now known as the government accountability office , to evaluate , investigate , and audit federal funds , including federal grant funds .

single audit act of 1984 the single audit act of 1984 , as amended , establishes uniform audit requirements for recipients of federal grant funds .

the single audit act sought to promote sound financial management , establish uniform requirements for audits of federal awards , promote efficient and effective use of audit resources , reduce the burden on state , local , and tribal governments , and ensure that federal departments and agencies rely upon and use the audit work .

the act allowed grant recipients to consolidate financial reviews into a single audit rather than conduct individual reviews for each federal grant award .

omb is tasked with developing policies , procedures , and guidelines for single audits .

audit findings are a critical activity in the financial monitoring of federal grants and can provide information to evaluate whether grant funds were used appropriately .

chief financial officers act of 1990 the chief financial officers act ( cfo act ) reformed the financial management structure by providing broad authority to the office of management and budget ( omb ) to direct financial management , modernize financial management systems , and strengthen financial management reporting .

federal financial assistance management improvement act of 1999 under the provisions of the federal financial assistance management improvement act of 1999 ( ffamia ) , congress set out to improve the effectiveness of grant programs , simplify grant reporting requirements , and foster greater coordination within and across federal agencies administering federal grants .

federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 the federal accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( ffata ) , as amended , was enacted to expand oversight into federal spending by requiring omb to establish a publicly available database containing award information for a variety of federal assistance , including grants and contracts .

in response to this directive , omb established usaspending.gov to provide a means of tracking the distribution of federal grant funds .

