in may 2012 , transcanada ( a canadian company ) submitted to the u.s. department of state an application for a presidential permit authorizing construction and operation of pipeline facilities for the importation of crude oil at the u.s. - canada border .

the keystone xl pipeline would transport canadian oil sands crude extracted in alberta , canada , and crude produced from the bakken region in north dakota and montana to a market hub in nebraska for further delivery to gulf coast refineries .

a decision to issue the presidential permit would be conditioned on a state department determination that the pipeline project would serve the national interest .

members of congress remain divided on the merits of the project , as some have expressed support for the potential energy security and economic benefits , while others have reservations about its potential environmental impacts .

there is also concern over how much crude oil , or petroleum products refined from keystone xl crude , would be exported overseas .

though congress , to date , has had no direct role in permitting the pipeline's construction , it has oversight stemming from federal environmental statutes that govern the review .

further , congress may seek to influence the state department's process or to assert direct congressional authority over approval through new legislation .

this report describes the keystone xl pipeline project and the process that the state department must complete to decide whether it will approve or deny transcanada's permit application .

the report also discusses key energy security , economic , and environmental issues relevant to the state department's national interest determination .

some of these issues include perspectives among various stakeholders both in favor of and opposed to the construction of the pipeline .

finally , the report discusses the constitutional basis for the state department's authority to issue a presidential permit , and opponents' possible challenges to this authority .

in recent decades , the natural bitumen in oil sands , particularly deposits in alberta , canada , has been extracted to generate substantial quantities of crude oil .

the alberta deposits are estimated to be one of the largest accumulations of oil in the world , contributing to canada's third - place ranking for estimated proven oil reserves ( behind venezuela and saudi arabia ) .

in 2005 , transcanada announced a plan to address expected increases in alberta oil production by constructing the keystone pipeline system .

when complete , the system would transport crude oil from alberta to u.s. markets in the midwest and gulf coast .

the pipeline system was proposed as two distinct phases — the keystone pipeline ( now constructed and in service ) and the keystone xl pipeline .

the keystone xl pipeline project would consist of 875 miles of 36-inch pipeline and associated facilities linking hardisty , alberta , to steele city , ne .

the pipeline would also include the bakken marketlink in baker , mt — a pipeline lateral that could transport crude oil from the bakken oil fields into steele city ( further discussed below ) .

from steele city , crude oil could be transported to the gulf coast via previously constructed transcanada pipelines — the cushing extension and the gulf coast pipeline , both already operating ( figure 1 ) .

both the keystone xl and gulf coast pipelines would ultimately have a capacity of 830,000 bpd .

in 2012 , transcanada estimated the capital cost of the u.s. portion of the keystone xl project would be $5.3 billion .

however , this figure has reportedly risen to $8 billion during the permit review .

currency swings , changing regulatory requirements , the cost of materials , and legal expenses could be factors contributing to the increase in project cost .

federal agencies ordinarily have no authority to site oil pipelines , even interstate pipelines .

this authority generally would be established under state law .

however , the construction of a pipeline that connects the united states with a foreign country requires executive permission conveyed through a presidential permit .

executive order 11423 , as amended by executive order 13337 , delegates to the secretary of state the president's authority to receive applications for presidential permits .

issuance of a presidential permit requires a state department determination that the project would serve the "national interest. .

the term is not defined in the executive orders or elsewhere .

the state department has asserted that , consistent with the president's broad discretion in the conduct of foreign affairs , it has discretion in deciding the factors it will examine in making a national interest determination .

there are numerous policy considerations potentially relevant to the national interest determination for keystone xl .

the following are brief introductions to key issues in ongoing congressional debate: energy security , environmental impacts , economic impacts , the canada - u.s. relationship , and keystone xl in the context of u.s. energy policy , broadly .

the united states and canada maintain extensive trade in crude oil and petroleum products .

canada is the single largest foreign supplier of crude oil and petroleum products to the united states — and the united states is the dominant consumer of canada's exports .

of the 9.2 million barrels per day ( mbpd ) the united states imported in 2014 , canada supplied 3.4 mbpd ( 37% ) , more than the combined imports from the next two largest suppliers — mexico and saudi arabia .

keystone xl would bring canada's total petroleum export capacity to the united states via pipeline to over 4.1 mbpd , enough capacity to carry more than 45% of u.s. crude petroleum imports in 2014 .

given that canada actually supplied the united states with 3.4 mbpd in 2014 , large increases in canadian supply via pipeline could ultimately be possible , although much of the increased crude supply , while refined domestically , could be destined for foreign markets in the form of refined petroleum products such as diesel fuel .

increased energy trade between the united states and canada is viewed by some pipeline proponents as a major contributor to u.s. energy security .

most notably , transcanada's presidential permit application argues that the pipeline will allow u.s. refiners to substitute supply from canada — a stable , friendly neighbor — for other foreign crude supply and to obtain direct pipeline access to growing canadian crude output .

such energy security arguments have taken on additional weight for some proponents in light of the recent geopolitical tensions in venezuela , as well as in other oil - producing countries in the middle east and north africa .

with expanded pipeline capacity extending to the u.s. gulf coast , alberta crude may compete with other heavy crudes such as those from mexico , venezuela , and elsewhere .

it is difficult to predict precisely how this competition would play out , but it could take place through shifting discounts or premiums on crude oils from various sources .

thus , it could be possible for canadian oil supplies to effectively "push out" waterborne shipments from other countries , although this would depend on a wide range of market conditions .

if keystone xl is not permitted , the absence of the pipeline may encourage alberta producers to increase shipments by rail and to find an alternate pipeline export route through either the canadian east or west coast .

thus , canadian supplies may displace heavy oil supplies in overseas markets and potentially lead to relatively more overseas imports coming into the u.s. gulf coast .

during a press conference on november 14 , 2014 , president obama appeared to express skepticism about the potential benefits of the keystone xl pipeline with respect to domestic crude supplies , stating: "understand what this project is .

it is providing the ability of canada to pump their oil , send it through our land , down to the gulf , where it will be sold everywhere else. .

however the keystone xl pipeline's developer , and a number of industry analysts disagree with the president's assertion .

they argue that , when accounting for crude oil prices , marine transportation costs , and refinery configurations , "american refineries would be the primary buyers of crude oil transported through the keystone xl pipeline , by a vast margin. .

in addition to the disagreement about the amount of crude oil carried on keystone xl that would be exported to foreign refineries , there is ongoing debate about the volumes of petroleum products refined from keystone xl crude that would be shipped overseas .

for example , one prominent industry analysis has concluded that "about 70 percent" of products refined from keystone xl crude oil would be consumed in the united states .

pipeline opponents have disputed such conclusions , arguing that recent market data from gulf coast refineries suggest much higher exports of refined products from crude carried on keystone xl .

the volume of keystone xl crude oil — or derived refined products — that may ultimately be exported is dependent upon many constantly changing economic and operational factors .

thus , predicting domestic versus export volumes over the life of the pipeline is highly uncertain .

however , whether keystone xl is viewed as primarily serving domestic or export markets may continue to be a factor in debate about whether the pipeline is in the national interest .

refineries in the gulf coast region have been increasingly optimized to process heavy crude oils , with a particular focus on crudes from alberta given the growing supplies there .

increasing the share of supply from canada could be viewed as concentrating , rather than diversifying , the u.s. crude oil supply portfolio , and thus exposing the refining sector to greater supply risk associated with any problems with canadian supply .

it is worth noting that even if keystone xl is built , prices for the oil it carries as well as for domestically produced oil will continue to be affected by international events .

furthermore , as refineries continue to upgrade for the processing of heavy crude , additional heavy crude supplies from canada may serve to augment , rather than displace , historic crude supplies from countries like venezuela .

thus u.s. refinery exposure to market volatility or supply disruptions from key non - canadian suppliers may remain whether or not keystone xl is constructed .

the energy security implications of increased canadian crude supplies in a global market are , therefore , somewhat unpredictable .

the economic impacts of the keystone xl pipeline have been the subject of considerable debate .

in light of the ongoing recovery from the recent u.s. economic recession , a particular focus has been the prospect of new jobs directly associated with the pipeline's construction and operation , as well as jobs that may be created indirectly or otherwise induced due to the pipeline's construction or due to an increase in crude oil supplies .

other economic considerations include property tax revenues to local jurisdictions , although they are more straightforward .

regarding economic impact , the state department's final eis for the keystone xl project application concludes: during construction , proposed project spending would support approximately 42,100 jobs ( direct , indirect , and induced ) , and approximately $2 billion in earnings throughout the united states.... construction of the proposed project would contribute approximately $3.4 billion ( or 0.02 percent ) to the u.s. gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

the proposed project would generate approximately 50 jobs during operations .

property tax revenue during operations would be substantial for many counties , with an increase of 10 percent or more in 17 of the 27 counties with proposed project facilities .

because job projections , in particular , involve numerous assumptions and estimates , the state department's job estimates for keystone xl have been a source of disagreement .

one challenge to state's analysis is that different definitions ( eg , for temporary jobs ) and interpretations can lead to different numerical estimates and "fundamental confusion" about the final eis numbers .

consequently , it may be difficult to determine what overall economic and employment impacts may ultimately be attributable to the keystone xl pipeline or to the various alternative transport scenarios if the pipeline is not constructed .

it is beyond the scope of this report to try to evaluate specific job calculations and methodology .

nonetheless , stakeholders and analysts have asserted lower and higher job estimates in support of their positions regarding the pipeline .

in a july 2013 interview , president obama stated considerably lower job estimates for the keystone xl pipeline than those presented by the state department's final eis: my hope would be that any reporter who is looking at the facts would take the time to confirm that the most realistic estimates are this might create maybe 2,000 jobs during the construction of the pipeline — which might take a year or two — and then after that we're talking about somewhere between 50 and 100 jobs in an economy of 150 million working people president obama's remarks appeared to focus on a subset of direct jobs , although the specific source for the presidents' estimates is unclear .

a white house spokesperson subsequently acknowledged that "there are a range of estimates out there about the economic impact of the pipeline. .

nonetheless , the president's remarks were interpreted by some as minimizing the job potential creation of the project .

 ( a low job estimate would be consistent with president obama's other statements that greenhouse gas emissions would be a key factor on which he would base his decision regarding the pipeline permit. ) .

other groups and studies have similarly downplayed or otherwise disputed the pipeline's potential job benefits , some assuming that potential job creation would simply take place within the alternative transport scenarios cited in the state department's market analysis ( eg , the freight rail and tanker sectors ) , and others even arguing that the pipeline could destroy jobs .

the general thrust of these arguments has been that purported job benefits , particularly the limited number of "permanent" jobs , do not justify other costs and risks associated with the keystone xl pipeline's development .

many keystone xl pipeline proponents support the project based on its economic benefits , and specifically jobs , often citing much higher job estimates than those in the final eis .

a 2010 study by the energy policy research foundation , for example , concluded that "the keystone expansion would provide net economic benefits from improved efficiencies in both the transportation and processing of crude oil of $100 million - $600 million annually , in addition to an immediate boost in construction employment. .

a 2009 report from the canadian energy research institute ( ceri ) commissioned by the american petroleum institute similarly concluded that as investment and production in oil sands ramps up in canada , the pace of economic activity quickens and demand for us goods and services increase rapidly , resulting in an estimated 343 thousand new u.s. jobs between 2011 and 2015 .

demand for u.s. goods and services continues to climb throughout the period , adding an estimated $34 billion to us gdp in 2015 , $40.4 billion in 2020 , and $42.2 billion in 2025 .

these ceri estimates apply to the entire oil sands industry , however , not only the keystone xl project , and they are derived from a proprietary economic analysis which has not been subject to external review .

nonetheless , studies such as these , as well as the state department's analysis , have been used by pipeline proponents to emphasize the purported employment benefits of keystone xl .

proponents generally argue that thousands of jobs created by keystone xl , even if they are temporary jobs , will indeed be significant at a time of relatively high national unemployment .

debate about the environmental impacts of the keystone xl pipeline have focused largely on its potential to induce greater oil sands crude production and associated emissions of greenhouse gases .

however , concerns about oil spills from the pipeline , and the impact of pipeline construction in environmentally sensitive areas along the route , have also been important considerations .

on june 25 , 2013 , president obama announced a national "climate action plan" to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) and other greenhouse gases ( ghg ) , as well as to encourage adaptation to expected climate change .

during his speech , the president made reference to the proposed keystone xl pipeline and stated that the "net effects of the pipeline's impact on our climate" would factor into the state department's national interest determination , examining whether the project would "significantly exacerbate the problem of carbon pollution. .

among the various impacts identified in the project's environmental impact statement are those involving ghg emissions .

as required under nepa , the final eis identifies anticipated direct and indirect impacts of the project as proposed by transcanada as well as various project alternatives , including analysis of the "no action alternative" ( i.e. , an assessment of the impacts associated with denying transcanada's permit application ) .

the final eis finds: the ghg emissions released during the construction period for the project would be approximately 0.24 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalents ( mmtco 2 e ) due to land use changes , electricity use , and fuels for construction vehicles ( equivalent to 0.004% of u.s. annual ghg emissions ) ; the ghg emissions released during normal operations would be approximately 1.44 mmtco 2 e / year due to electricity use for pumping stations , fuels for maintenance and inspection vehicles , and fugitive emissions ( equivalent to 0.2% of u.s. annual ghg emissions ) ; the total , or gross , life - cycle ghg emissions ( i.e. , the aggregate ghg emissions released by all activities from the extraction of the resource to the refining , transportation , and end - use combustion of refined fuels ) attributable to the oil sands crude transported through the proposed pipeline would be approximately 147 to 168 mmtco 2 e per year ( equivalent to 2.2% to 2.6% of u.s. annual ghg emissions ) ; the incremental , or net , life - cycle ghg emissions ( i.e. , ghg emissions over - and - above those from the crude oils expected to be displaced in u.s. refineries ) is estimated to be 1.3 to 27.4 mmtco 2 e per year ( equivalent to 0.02% to 0.4% of u.s. annual ghg emissions ) ; but according to the state department's market analysis , "approval or denial of any one crude oil transport project , including the proposed project , is unlikely to significantly impact the rate of extraction in the oil sands or the continued demand for heavy crude oil at refineries in the united states based on expected oil prices , oil - sands supply costs , transport costs , and supply - demand scenarios. .

the crude oil market analysis in the final eis is presented separately from the ghg emissions assessment .

by determining that the most likely scenario is one in which oil sands production would be unaffected by expected market conditions , the final eis implies that the "incremental" life - cycle ghg emissions attributable to the oil sands crudes transported through the proposed pipeline are negligible .

with this determination , the only difference in estimates between competing scenarios would be attributable to the operational ghg emissions of the alternative modes of transportation ( eg , ghg emissions from rail cars , trucks , or tankers ) .

the final eis reports that the annual operational emissions attributed to the "no action" alternatives range from 4.0 to 4.4 mmtco 2 e per year ( an increase of 29% - 42% over the 3.1 mmtco 2 e per year in operational emissions for the proposed project inclusive of the existing southern leg ) .

some stakeholders have questioned many of the conclusions in the final eis and argue that the project may have greater climate change impacts than projected by the state department .

they contend that there is nothing presumed or inevitable about the rate of expansion for the canadian oil sands .

current oil sands projects face a challenging financial environment , and up - front production costs and price differentials are comparatively higher for oil sands crudes , making new investment sensitive to changes in supply costs and global prices .

opponents stress that oil market projections and transportation options are rife with uncertainty , and that the proposed keystone xl pipeline could have a much more significant impact on oil sands expansion if a number of key variables differ from the state department's assumptions .

proponents of the proposed pipeline support a market analysis as outlined in the final eis .

they argue that as long as there is strong global demand for petroleum products , resources such as the canadian oil sands will be produced and shipped to markets using whatever route necessary .

furthermore , they estimate that ghg emissions intensities for the canadian oil sands are currently within the range of many other heavy crude oils , and that in the future canadian oil sands emissions intensities will only decrease ( due to efficiency improvement and technological advances ) , while those of other crudes around the world will likely increase ( due to a heavier resource base ) .

each mode of oil transportation involves some risk , and each has historically resulted in oil spills .

although pipelines and oil tankers transport the vast majority of oil within the united states , other modes of transportation have increased in recent years .

in particular , the volume of crude oil carried by rail increased from approximately 4 million barrels in 2010 to approximately 87 million barrels in 2013 , a 20-fold increase .

some portion of the recent increase is related to the increase in canadian oil sands crude production and pending status of the keystone xl pipeline .

in its final eis for keystone xl , the state department used pipeline and hazardous material safety administration as well as coast guard data to compare oil spill frequency and volume by mode of transportation .

between 2002 and 2009 , the state department found: pipeline transport has the highest number of barrels released per ton - mile compared to rail and marine transport ; and rail transport has the highest number of reported releases per ton - mile compared to pipeline and marine transport .

although the capacity of an individual rail car is relatively small , around 700 barrels ( 29,400 gallons ) , a major derailment could involve releases from multiple tank cars , resulting in a substantial spill .

for example , in 2013 , train derailments in aliceville , al , and casselton , nd , each spilled over 10,000 barrels ( 420,000 gallons ) of crude oil .

by comparison , the 1989 grounding of the exxon valdez oil tanker in prince william sound , alaska released 260,000 barrels ( 10.9 million gallons ) of crude oil .

the largest u.s. pipeline oil spill ( that crs can document ) discharged approximately 40,000 barrels ( 1.7 million gallons ) in 1991 near grand rapids , mn .

nonetheless , spill volume is arguably a relatively unimportant factor in terms of impacts and cleanup costs .

location matters more: a major spill away from shore will likely cost considerably less to abate than a minor spill in a populated location or sensitive ecosystem .

depending on timing and location , even a small spill can cause significant harm to individual organisms and entire populations .

although some might equate rejection of the keystone xl permit with avoiding oil spills , a more accurate tradeoff would be the risk of spills from this particular pipeline compared to spills from other modes of oil transportation which may be used as alternatives .

keystone xl pipeline proponents and opponents , including those in the rail industry , have cited their own interpretations of spill data to argue that one transportation mode is significantly riskier than others .

however , any such conclusion is open to debate .

during the first keystone xl permit and eis process , a primary topic of debate among stakeholders was whether particular properties of oil sands crude would impose a greater risk of a pipeline oil spill than other crude oil pipelines .

to examine these issues , congress enacted p.l .

112-90 , which ultimately resulted in a 2013 report from the national research council ( nrc ) .

the central findings of the report included the following: the committee does not find any causes of pipeline failure unique to the transportation of diluted bitumen [oil sands crude] .

furthermore , the committee does not find evidence of chemical or physical properties of diluted bitumen that are outside the range of other crude oils or any other aspect of its transportation by transmission pipeline that would make diluted bitumen more likely than other crude oils to cause releases .

however , the nrc report did not examine how spills of oil sands crude may differ from spills of conventional crude oil .

crs is not aware of an authoritative study that has assessed this topic , but the recent oil sand crude spills may offer some insights .

the 2010 pipeline spill ( 850,000 gallons ) that reached michigan's kalamazoo river has demonstrated particular cleanup challenges .

according to epa , the oil will not appreciably degrade and it has mixed with sediment on the river bottom .

the pipeline owner , enbridge , estimated cleanup costs would be approximately $1.2 billion , substantially higher than the average cost of cleaning up a similar amount of conventional oil .

during the national interest determination period for the 2008 presidential permit application , it became clear that changes to nebraska law would require the selection of a pipeline route that would avoid the sand hills region of nebraska .

the region is unique due to its high concentration of wetlands , extensive areas of very shallow groundwater , and its sensitive ecosystem .

the highly porous soil of the sand hills makes it a significant recharge zone in the northern ogallala aquifer .

that is , the sandy , porous soil of the sand hills allows a significant amount of surface water to enter ( recharge ) the aquifer system .

water from the aquifer also accounts for a significant amount of water use — 78% of the region's public water , 83% of irrigation water in nebraska , and 30% of water used in the united states for irrigation and agriculture .

along the preferred route of the originally proposed pipeline configuration , areas in the sand hills region were identified as locations where the water table may be close to the surface .

the depth to groundwater is less than 10 feet for approximately 65 miles of the preferred pipeline route in nebraska .

both the soil porosity and the close proximity of groundwater to the surface increase the potential that a release of oil from the pipeline could contaminate groundwater in the region .

when the 2008 permit application was denied , transcanada announced it would work with the nebraska deq to identify a potential pipeline route that would avoid the sand hills .

on january 13 , 2013 , the governor of nebraska approved a proposed reroute of the keystone xl pipeline through nebraska , as noted above .

however , as stated earlier , a nebraska district court ruled that the 2012 state law authorizing the governor to approve transcanada's pipeline route violated the nebraska constitution .

prior to the passage of the 2012 law , that authority rested exclusively with the state's public service commission ( psc ) .

as a result of the court's decision , the governor's approval of the pipeline siting in 2013 was temporarily declared null and void pending appeal .

however , on january 9 , 2015 , the nebraska supreme court vacated the lower court's ruling , effectively clearing the way for the keystone xl pipeline to be constructed through the state on the route already authorized by the governor .

oil production and exports are a major source of economic development and revenue for canada .

continued expansion of canada's oil production is , therefore , a high national priority for prime minister stephen harper's government ( see below ) , although not all canadians share this view .

as canada's largest crude oil customer , the united states has anchored canada's energy trade .

historically , the energy relationship between the united states and canada , while intertwined , has been straightforward — taking the form of a steadily growing southward flow of crude oil to u.s. refineries .

energy products have been traded freely back and forth between the two countries under the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and energy transportation infrastructure generally has been constructed as needed with little fanfare .

but the u.s. permitting process for the keystone xl pipeline has greatly complicated that energy relationship , creating new tensions between the u.s. and canadian governments as well as within canada .

partly as a result of delays in the keystone xl permit process , the canadian federal government has been advocating the construction of the northern gateway pipeline through british columbia to export oil to asia , as well as the energy east pipeline for export or domestic consumption in eastern canada .

like the keystone xl , these routes have drawn opposition from environmentalists ; however , first nations tribes , over whose land much of the northern gateway pipeline would be constructed , also generally oppose the pipelines .

on october 29 , 2014 , trans - canada submitted its application for the energy east pipeline .

this proposal would repurpose portions of an existing , yet unused , natural gas pipeline along with some new construction into a cross - country oil artery that could potentially ship 1.1 million bpd eastward .

it would supply eastern canadian refineries with crude that is currently imported from the united states or elsewhere , and could allow for seaborne exports from its terminus at the port of saint john , new brunswick .

on june 14 , 2014 , the canadian federal government approved the northern gateway pipeline , conditioned on obtaining provincial permits and consultation with the first nations tribes , through whose land the pipeline would traverse .

the governments of british columbia ( b.c. ) .

and alberta have quarreled over the pipeline .

b.c .

premier christy clark had laid out five conditions for b.c .

's assent to construction of the pipeline: successful completion of an environmental review ; "world - leading" marine spill response and land oil - spill prevention ; addressing aboriginal legal requirements ; treaty rights and opportunities ; and a "fair share" of economic benefits .

many in british columbia believe that the province would be subject to most of the risks associated with the pipeline , but the monetary benefit would flow primarily to alberta .

in november 2013 , after months of negotiations between the two provinces , the premiers of both provinces announced a framework agreement on inter - provincial energy movement .

however , this agreement does not represent approval of northern gateway by the b.c .

provincial government .

whether or not the keystone xl is approved , it appears canadian federal government officials will also continue to argue for the approval of the cross - canada pipelines .

beyond the debates about the proposed keystone xl pipeline's impacts on oil sands production and greenhouse gases , some stakeholders have expressed a broader concern about whether the approval or denial of the project could set a precedent for u.s. energy policy .

they argue that while many of the decisions that may affect the development of the oil sands will ultimately be made by the market and the national and provincial governments of canada , the choice of whether or not to approve the permit for the project is an opportunity for the u.s. government to signal its future direction .

some stakeholders have pushed for a national energy policy that moves the united states away from a reliance on fossil fuels .

they see the decision to build the proposed pipeline as a 50-year - long commitment to a carbon - based economy and its resulting ghg emissions .

some observers contend that with meaningful action on climate policy slowed or stalled in congress , the courts , and , to some extent , the regulatory agencies ( i.e. , local , state , and federal environmental and land - use agencies ) , the sole remaining outlet to leverage a low - carbon energy policy is case - by - case action on such items as infrastructure permits .

some of these stakeholders have actively opposed the permit for the project believing that it may set a precedent .

if the pipeline is allowed to go forward , they say , it may be the case that no future infrastructure project would be held accountable for its incremental contribution to cumulative ghg emissions .

others recognize that the project could affect u.s. energy policy by setting a precedent and sending a signal , but they reach a different conclusion .

many regard the project as one element of a revitalized energy production sector in north america and urge that u.s. policy should support investment in such infrastructure for economic and national security reasons .

in this view , since canadian oil sands will be developed regardless of the transportation mode used , the public policy interest lies in supporting north american energy suppliers rather than those overseas .

the executive branch has exercised permitting authority over the construction and operation of "pipelines , conveyor belts , and similar facilities for the exportation or importation of petroleum , petroleum products" and other products at least since the promulgation of executive order 11423 in 1968 .

executive order 13337 amended this authority and the procedures associated with the review , but did not substantially alter the exercise of authority or the delegation to the secretary of state in e.o .

11423 .

however , the source of the executive branch's permitting authority is not entirely clear from the text of these executive orders .

generally , powers exercised by the executive branch are authorized by legislation or are inherent presidential powers based in the constitution .

e.o .

11423 makes no mention of any authority , and e.o .

13337 refers only to the "constitution and the laws of the united states of america , including section 301 of title 3 , united states code. .

section 301 simply provides that the president is empowered to delegate authority to the head of any department or agency of the executive branch .

the legitimacy of this permitting authority has been addressed by federal courts .

in sisseton v. united states department of state , the plaintiff tribes filed suit and asked the court to suspend or revoke the presidential permit issued under e.o .

13337 for the transcanada keystone pipeline .

the u.s. district court for the district of south dakota found that the plaintiffs lacked standing because they would be unable to prove their injury could be redressed by a favorable decision .

the court determined that even if the plaintiff's injury could be redressed , "the president would be free to disregard the court's judgment," as the case concerned the president's "inherent constitutional authority to conduct foreign policy," as opposed to statutory authority granted to the president by congress .

the court further found that even if the tribes had standing , the issuance of the presidential permit was a presidential action , not an agency action subject to judicial review under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

the court stated that the authority to regulate the cross - border pipeline lies with either congress or the president .

the court found that "congress has failed to create a federal regulatory scheme for the construction of oil pipelines , and has delegated this authority to the states .

therefore , the president has the sole authority to allow oil pipeline border crossings under his inherent constitutional authority to conduct foreign affairs. .

the president could delegate his permitting authority to the u.s. department of state , but delegation did not transform the permit's issuance into an agency action reviewable under the apa .

in sierra club v. clinton , the plaintiff sierra club challenged the secretary's decision to issue a presidential permit authorizing the alberta clipper pipeline .

among the plaintiff's claims was an allegation that issuance of the permit was unconstitutional because the president had no authority to issue the permits referenced in e.o .

13337 ( in this case , for the importation of crude oil from canada via pipeline ) .

the defendant responded that the authority to issue presidential permits for these border - crossing facilities "does not derive from a delegation of congressional authority ... but rather from the president's constitutional authority over foreign affairs and his authority as commander in chief. .

the u.s. district court for the district of minnesota agreed , noting that the defendant's assertion regarding the source of the president's authority has been "well recognized" in a series of attorney general opinions , as well as a 2009 judicial opinion .

the court also noted that these permits had been issued many times before and that "congress has not attempted to exercise any exclusive authority over the permitting process .

congress's inaction suggests that congress has accepted the authority of the president to issue cross - border permits. .

based on the historical recognition of the president's authority to issue these permits and congress's implied approval through inaction , the court found the presidential permit requirement for border facilities constitutional .

