the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( h.r .

4980 , p.l .

113-183 ) is an omnibus bill , including child welfare and child support provisions .

as enacted the bill seeks to ensure that child welfare agencies are responsive to particular issues for children and youth in foster care or those who otherwise have contact with the child welfare system , including identifying and determining appropriate services for child sex trafficking victims ; supporting "normalcy" for children in foster care ; and improving opportunities for older children in foster care to establish permanent connections and make a successful transition to adulthood .

the law also reauthorizes two child welfare programs: adoption incentive payments ( for three years , fy2014-fy2016 ) and the family connection grants program ( for one year , fy2014 ) .

the child support provisions in the bill are intended primarily to increase the effectiveness of the child support enforcement ( cse ) program where a noncustodial parent lives in a foreign country .

the bill also includes additional child support provisions to improve cse operations by tribal governments , support standardized data exchange , and require electronic withholding of child support .

development of the bill's provisions was informed by input from multiple congressional hearings and roundtables featuring the perspective of foster youth , foster parents , state child welfare agency administrators , private agencies , social service providers , and youth and child welfare advocates .

both the house ways and means and senate finance committee also solicited and received public comments on draft versions of the legislation .

the final bill ( h.r .

4980 ) , which passed the house of representatives by voice vote ( under suspension of the rules ) on july 23 , 2014 , and the senate , by unanimous consent on september 18 , 2014 , represented a compromise between multiple bills acted on by the house of representatives and the senate finance committee earlier in the 113 th congress .

president obama signed the bill into law on september 29 , 2014 , as p.l .

113-183 .

this report begins with an overview and topical summary of the provisions of h.r .

4980 , as enacted , and follows this with a review of the congressional budget office ( cbo ) cost estimate for h.r .

4980 and the legislative origins of the enacted bill .

as enacted , the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) responds to concerns about sex trafficking of children in foster care , including responding to those who run away from that care and those who otherwise come into contact with the child welfare agency ; encouraging "normalcy" for children in foster care ; supporting successful transitions to adulthood for older children in foster care ; ensuring strong , permanent families for children who enter or are at risk of entering foster care ; and improving child support enforcement activities .

the law establishes new requirements for state child welfare agencies , state child support enforcement agencies , and the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) which administers federal programs providing funding to those agencies .

overall , the law addresses five basic topics: addressing sex trafficking of children who are served by the child welfare agency and children who run away from foster care .

the law requires state child welfare agencies to develop and implement procedures that respond to concerns about sex trafficking of children in foster care ( including those who are not in foster care but are served by the agency ) , to separately develop protocols to locate and serve children who run away from foster care , to report information about victims of sex trafficking and those who run away from foster care to various entities ; and directs hhs to provide information on the numbers of sex trafficking victims identified by state child welfare agencies , establish a national advisory committee concerning sex trafficking of children in the united states , and prepare a report on children who run away from foster care. .

n ormalcy" for children in foster care .

the law requires changes to state licensing laws intended to enable and ensure foster caregivers use a "reasonable and prudent parenting standard" when determining foster children's participation in age - appropriate social , extracurricular and other enrichment activities ; requires state child welfare agencies to provide training on the standard for foster caregivers ; and directs hhs to provide technical assistance to states on this issue .

s uccessful transitions to adulthood for older children in foster care .

for children in foster care under the age of 16 , the law prohibits the use of the permanency plan "another planned permanent living arrangement" as an alternative to seeking reunification , adoption , legal guardianship , or placement with a fit and willing relative ; requires state child welfare agencies to continue efforts to find permanent connections for youth age 16 or older who are assigned appla as their permanency plan ; requires state child welfare agencies to involve children in foster care at age 14 or older in their own case and permanency planning and to inform these children of certain rights , including their right to specified key document ( eg , birth certificate , driver's license ) when they are "aging out" of foster care .

extension of c hild welfare programs and other changes to support strong and permanent families for children .

the law extends funding authorization for the adoption incentives payment program for three years and revises the incentive payments to include incentives for achieving permanence via legal guardianship ; extends funding for family connection grant program for one year ; requires states to spend an amount equal to at least 30% of certain adoption assistance "savings" for services to strengthen families , including provision of post - adoption supports ; ensures that children receiving federal guardianship assistance with a legal relative guardian can continue to do so if that guardian becomes ill or incapacitated and the child is placed with a previously named successor guardian ; requires state child welfare agencies to notify the parent ( s ) of siblings of children who are entering foster care ; and directs hhs to report on the number of children who are placed in foster care as a result of a legal guardianship or adoption that has been disrupted or has dissolved .

improv ed child support collections .

the law provides for implementation of the hague convention on the international recovery of child support and other forms of family maintenance ( and any other related treaties ) to increase effectiveness of child support collections in cases where noncustodial parents live in foreign countries ; seeks to improve child support collections involving tribal governments ; requires state child support enforcement agencies to adopt certain data standardization measures and to implement electronic withholding of child support payments ; and directs hhs to report on additional measures to improve child support enforcement .

these provisions have various effective dates , mostly ranging from the date of enactment to one or more years after that date as described below .

the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( h.r .

4980 ) was introduced by representative dave camp on june 26 , 2014 , with representatives sander levin , dave reichert and lloyd doggett , as co - sponsors .

the bill's introduction on june 26 , 2014 , was jointly announced by representatives camp and levin , along with senators wyden and hatch , and was described as "bipartisan legislation [that] reflects agreements reached between the house and senate negotiators. .

on july 23 , 2014 , the house approved h.r .

4980 by voice vote , under suspension of the rules .

on september 18 , 2014 , the senate passed the bill by unanimous consent .

the bill's three main titles each draw on earlier legislation approved by the overall house or the senate finance committee .

the title i provisions on protecting children at risk of sex trafficking were drawn from the protecting youth at risk for sex trafficking act ( s. 1877 ) , introduced by senator baucus in december 2013 , the provisions of which were the same as included in title ii of the supporting at - risk children act ( s. 1870 ) , as approved by the senate finance committee that same month ; and the preventing sex trafficking and improving opportunities for youth in foster care act ( h.r .

4058 ) , which was introduced by representative reichert in february 2014 , reported by the house ways and means committee on may 7 , 2014 , and passed by the full house ( under suspension of the rules and with a voice vote ) on may 20 , 2014 .

the title ii provisions , reauthorizing and amending adoption incentive payments , extending family connection grants for one year , and making some related changes , were drawn from the promoting adoptions and legal guardianships for children in foster care act ( h.r .

3205 ) , which was introduced by representative camp on september 27 , 2013 , and approved by the house ( under suspension of the rules and with a voice vote ) on october 22 , 2013 ; and the strengthening and finding families for children act ( s. 1876 ) , introduced by senator baucus in december 2013 , the provisions of which were the same as those included in title i of s. 1870 , as approved by the senate finance committee that same month .

the title iii provisions focus on improving international child support recovery and the child support enforcement program and were drawn from the international child support recovery improvement act of 2013 ( h.r .

1896 ) introduced by representative reichert may 8 , 2013 , and passed in the house ( by a vote of 394 to 27 ) on june 18 , 2013 ; and the child support improvement and work promotion act ( s. 1877 ) , introduced by senator baucus in december 2013 , the provisions of which were the same as those included in title iii of s. 1870 , as approved by the senate finance committee that same month .

concerns addressed in p.l .

113-183 have been at the forefront of a variety of congressional hearings , round tables , and other events held by congressional committees or caucuses over the past five years .

the following list , arranged chronologically , illustrates these activities but is not necessarily exhaustive .

in october 2010 , the senate caucus on foster youth , co - chaired by senators grassley and landrieu , issued a white paper that drew on its series of meetings with foster youth and other stakeholders to discuss policy and practice changes that could improve outcomes for children in foster care .

among a wide range of policy options , the white paper discussed restricting the use of another planned permanent living arrangement ( appla ) , requiring states to make youth aware of their rights while in foster care , improving access to appropriate social and extracurricular activities , and improving data collection on children in foster care .

more recently , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources and the senate finance committee convened hearings and roundtables to review some of these same issues as well as on improvements for collecting child support .

in march 2012 , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources held a hearing that focused on implementation legislation to ensure u.s. compliance with an international treaty on recovering child support and making improvements to the child support enforcement ( cse ) program .

in april 2012 , the senate finance committee convened a roundtable discussion that focused on a number of issues pertaining to the well - being of children in foster care , including the need to normalize the experiences of foster children and improve permanency for older youth in care .

in february 2013 , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources held a hearing concerning increasing adoptions out of foster care .

witnesses from various private organizations discussed the importance of achieving permanency for older children or those with other factors making them harder to place and emphasized the importance of pre - adoption training as well as post - adoption services .

in february 2013 , the senate finance committee held a roundtable discussion entitled , "child support enforcement: addressing immediate and future challenges for child support enforcement agencies. .

the committee heard a number of recommendations to improve collection and delivery of payments and services to custodial and noncustodial parents .

in april 2013 , the senate committee on finance held a hearing to consider reauthorization of the adoption incentives program , to extend funding for family connection grants and , more broadly , to consider the kinds of changes necessary to make further improvements in the provision of foster care .

in may 2013 , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources held a hearing to discuss efforts to ensure that children in foster care can have the same experiences as their peers generally .

the committee heard from a current foster youth and a foster parent regarding limitations on participation in age - appropriate activities and barriers to exercising parenting judgment for children in foster care , as well as from program administrators and advocates on the ways that states and other jurisdictions are promoting "normalcy" for children in care while balancing concerns for safety and liability .

in june 2013 , the senate finance committee held a hearing on child welfare's role in preventing and intervening in the sex trafficking of children .

witnesses included representatives from state and local jurisdictions who testified about how the child welfare system is responding to child sex trafficking and coordinating with other entities ( i.e. , children's advocacy center , juvenile justice system , probation department , medical and mental health professionals ) as part of this response .

similarly , in october 2013 , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources held a hearing to review the needs of sex trafficking victims and how federal laws and policies might be improved to better ensure the safety of children who are in foster care or those are at risk of entering care .

in a field hearing in february 2014 , that subcommittee also heard from witnesses about efforts by groups in washington state to end child sex trafficking , including sex trafficking that involves children in foster care .

both the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee sought public comment on draft bills to reauthorize the adoption incentives program and make other , related changes to child welfare policy .

separately , the house ways and means committee also solicited public comment on a draft bill to address sex trafficking of children in the child welfare system .

many comments from organizations and interested citizens were received and played a part in shaping the final bill .

ultimately , close to 50 advocacy , research , professional , tribal , and other groups offered their support of h.r .

4980 .

