the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) , enacted in 1938 , is the federal legislation that establishes the general minimum wage that must be paid to all covered workers .

the flsa mandates broad minimum wage coverage .

it also specifies certain categories of workers who are not covered by general flsa wage standards , such as workers with disabilities or certain youth workers .

in 1938 , the flsa established a minimum wage of $0.25 per hour .

the minimum wage provisions of the flsa have been amended numerous times since then , typically to expand coverage or raise the wage rate .

since its establishment , the minimum wage rate has been raised 22 separate times .

the most recent change was enacted through p.l .

110-28 in 2007 , which increased the minimum wage from $5.15 per hour to its current rate of $7.25 per hour in three steps ( the final step occurring in 2009 ) .

states generally have three options in setting their minimum wage policies: ( 1 ) they can set their own minimum wage provisions that differ from those in the flsa , ( 2 ) they can explicitly tie their minimum wage provisions to the flsa , or ( 3 ) they can include no specific minimum wage provisions in state law .

this report begins with a brief discussion of flsa minimum wage coverage .

it then provides a summary of state minimum wage laws , followed by an examination of rates and mechanisms of adjustments in states with minimum wage levels above the flsa rate ( table 1 provides summary data ) .

next , the report discusses the interaction of federal and state minimum wages over time , and finally , the appendix provides detailed information on the major components of minimum wage policies in all 50 states and the district of columbia .

the state policies covered in this report include currently effective policies and policies enacted with an effective date at some point in 2019 .

while most states' scheduled state minimum wage rate changes ( due to inflation adjustments or statutorily scheduled changes ) occurred on january 1 of each year , a few states have rate increases scheduled for later in the year .

effective dates of rate increases are noted in table 1 and in the appendix .

the flsa extends two types of minimum wage coverage to individuals: "enterprise coverage" and "individual coverage. .

an individual is covered if they meet the criteria for either category .

state policymakers may also choose to set labor standards that are different from federal statutes .

the flsa establishes that if a state enacts minimum wage , overtime , or child labor laws more protective of employees than those provided in the flsa , then state law applies .

in the case of minimum wages , this means flsa - covered workers are entitled to the higher state minimum wage in those states with rates above the federal minimum .

on the other hand , flsa - covered workers would receive the flsa minimum wage in states that have set minimum wages lower than the federal rate .

given the generally broad minimum wage coverage of the flsa , it is likely that most workers in states with minimum wages below the federal rate are covered by the flsa rate .

in 2019 , the range of state minimum wage rates is as follows: 29 states and the district of columbia have enacted minimum wage rates above the federal rate of $7.25 per hour ; 2 states have minimum wage rates below the federal rate ; 5 states have no state minimum wage requirement ; and the remaining 14 states have minimum wage rates equal to the federal rate .

in the states with no minimum wage requirements or wages lower than the federal minimum wage , only individuals who are not covered by the flsa are subject to those lower rates .

the appendix provides detailed information on state minimum wage policy in all 50 states and the district of columbia , including the legislation authorizing the state minimum wage and the relevant legislative language regarding the rate and mechanism of adjustment .

the remainder of this report focuses on states with minimum wages above the federal rate .

in states with minimum wage rates above the federal rate , variation occurs mainly across two dimensions: the rate and the mechanism of adjustment to the rate .

this section ( including data in table 1 ) summarizes these two dimensions for the states with rates currently above the federal minimum .

state rates range from $0.25 to $6.75 above the federal rate , with a majority of these states using some sort of inflation measure to index the state minimum wage .

because federal and state minimum wages do not change in regular intervals or by regular increments , the number of states and the share of the labor force covered by higher minimum wages changes annually .

in general , during periods in which the federal minimum wage remains constant , more states enact higher minimum wages and the share of the workforce for which the federal rate serves as the floor likewise decreases .

when the federal rate increases , some state rates become equal to or less than the federal rate .

table 1 presents a snapshot of minimum wage rates in the 29 states and the district of columbia with minimum wages above the federal rate from 2018 through 2024 , while figure 3 shows the changes in the coverage of the federal minimum wage .

specifically , figure 3 plots the percentage of the civilian labor force residing in states in which the federal wage serves as the floor .

if no state had a minimum wage above the federal rate , then the federal minimum wage would be the floor for states in which 100% of the labor force resides .

similarly , if every state had a minimum wage above the current rate of $7.25 , then the federal rate would not be binding for the labor force .

instead the interaction of federal and state rates has led to the federal minimum wage playing a fluctuating , but generally decreasing , role in establishing a wage floor for the civilian labor force , particularly during periods in which the federal rate is not increased .

examining the specific time periods around changes in the federal minimum wage ( see figure 1 for the history of federal minimum wage rate changes ) , data in figure 3 show a general trend toward a lower share of the labor force being covered by the federal minimum wage only .

federal rate increases in 2007 through 2009 mitigated this reduction , as did earlier changes in the federal rate .

in the period from 1983 through 1989 , the federal minimum wage remained constant at $3.35 per hour .

prior to the federal increases in 1990 and 1991 , the number of states with higher minimum wages rose from 3 in 1984 to 16 in 1989 and the share of the u.s. civilian labor force in states for which the federal rate was the floor fell from 98% to 70% .

following a two - step federal increase in 1990 and 1991 from $3.35 to $4.25 per hour , the number of states with higher minimum wages fell to 8 in 1992 , which meant that the federal rate was the floor for states comprising 92% of the civilian labor force .

the next federal minimum wage increase occurred in two steps in 1996 and 1997 , increasing from $4.25 to $5.15 per hour .

prior to that increase , in 1995 , there were 10 states , representing 10% of the civilian labor force , with minimum wages above the federal rate .

after the second increase in 1997 , the number of states with higher minimum wages dropped to 8 , but the share of the labor force in states for which the federal rate served as a floor decreased to 82% .

the federal minimum wage did not increase after 1997 until 2007 .

during much of that period the number of states with higher minimum wages stayed somewhat steady , increasing from 8 ( comprising 18% of the civilian labor force ) in 1998 to 12 ( comprising 21% of the civilian labor force ) in 2003 .

however , by 2006 , 22 states representing 50% of the civilian labor force had minimum wage rates above the federal rate .

this increase was due in part to a few populous states , such as florida , michigan , and new york , adopting minimum wage rates above the federal rate in this period .

following the three - step increase in the federal minimum wage from $5.15 to the current $7.25 ( 2007-2009 ) , 15 states , comprising 33% of the civilian labor force , had rates above the federal minimum wage in 2010 .

by 2019 , this rose to 29 states and the district of columbia , which means that the federal rate is the wage floor in states representing 39% of the civilian labor force .

for the 29 states and the district of columbia with state minimum wage rates above the federal rate as of 2019 , table 1 and much of the text above summarizes information on those states' minimum wage policies , highlighting minimum wage rates and mechanisms used to establish and adjust wage rates .

as discussed previously , for those states with current or scheduled minimum wages above the federal rate , three main mechanisms are in place to adjust future rates: ( 1 ) scheduled increases , ( 2 ) indexation to inflation , or ( 3 ) reference to the federal rate plus an add - on ( i.e. , a state minimum wage is a percentage or dollar amount above the federal rate ) .

for the 21 states with minimum wage rates equal to or below the federal rate , however , there are no mechanisms in place to move rates above the federal rate .

thus , the main difference within this group of states is the relationship of the state rate , if any , to the federal rate .

for those 21 states with minimum wages equal to or below the federal rate , the state rate may be set in four ways: no state minimum wage provisions: in five states — alabama , louisiana , mississippi , south carolina , and tennessee — there are no provisions for state minimum wage rates .

in practice , this means that most workers in these states are covered by the flsa minimum wage provisions since coverage is generally broad .

state minimum wage provisions with no reference to the flsa: five states have state minimum wage rates but do not reference the flsa .

two of these states — georgia and wyoming — have state rates below $7.25 , while three of these states — kansas , north dakota , and wisconsin — have rates equal to $7.25 .

however , because there is no reference to the flsa rate or other provision for adjustment in any of these states , the state rate does not change unless the state policy is changed .

state minimum wage equals the flsa rate: six states — idaho , indiana , new hampshire , oklahoma , texas , and virginia — set the state rate equal to the flsa rate .

thus , when the flsa rate changes , the state rates in these six states change to equal the flsa rate .

state minimum wage equals flsa rate if flsa is greater: in four states — iowa , kentucky , north carolina , and pennsylvania — the state rate is specified separately but includes a provision to equal the flsa rate if the latter is above the state specified rate .

table a - 1 provides detailed information about minimum wage policies in the 50 states and the district of columbia , including those summarized in a more concise manner in table 1 .

