domestic drug enforcement involves controlled substances that are prohibited and controlled substances that are diverted from their intended medical purpose .

the federal government prohibits the manufacturing , distribution , and possession of many intoxicating substances that are solely intended for recreational use ( notable exceptions are alcohol and tobacco ) ; however , the federal government also allows for and controls the medical use of many intoxicants .

federal authority to control these substances primarily resides with the attorney general of the united states .

in 1970 , congress found that many drugs have a legitimate medical purpose and are necessary to sustain the health and welfare of the american people ; however , congress also found that illegal actions involving and improper use of these drugs have a detrimental effect on the health and welfare of the american people .

among other findings that congress included in the controlled substances act ( csa ; p.l .

91-513 ) , it found that federal control of drug trafficking that occurs within states ( i.e. , intrastate drug trafficking ) is essential to the effective control of drug trafficking that occurs across state lines ( i.e. , interstate drug trafficking ) .

congress relies on its power to regulate interstate commerce as a basis for drug control .

in order to restrict and reduce availability of illicit drugs in the united states , a practice referred to as "supply reduction," the federal government emphasizes domestic drug enforcement .

as a result of enforcement actions , illicit drugs are more difficult , expensive , and risky to obtain .

federal law enforcement agencies cooperate with state and local agencies to dismantle and disrupt criminal organizations involved in illicit domestic drug production and distribution .

in practice , federal law enforcement agencies generally target large drug trafficking organizations rather than low - level drug offenders .

over the last several years , congress and the administration have confronted multiple domestic drug enforcement issues .

these issues include state marijuana legalization , prescription drug and heroin abuse , and evolving synthetic drugs .

synthetic compounds have been created across the various classes of drugs , and different synthetic drugs have gained and lost popularity among illicit drug users over the last several decades .

this report reviews federal domestic drug enforcement .

first , it provides a history and background of drug enforcement in the united states including how drugs came under the control of federal justice authorities and how legislation and administrative actions changed domestic drug enforcement .

it then provides a brief overview of drug enforcement in the united states and summarizes u.s. drug policy .

finally , the report presents trends in federal drug enforcement and concludes with a discussion of drug enforcement issues going forward .

this section outlines historic development and major changes in federal drug enforcement to help provide an understanding of how and why certain laws and policies were implemented and how these developments and changes shaped current drug enforcement policy .

trends in federal drug enforcement may reflect changes in the nation's drug problems and changes in the federal response to these problems .

these trends also may reflect the federal government's enforcement priorities .

for example , as shown in figure 4 , the number of drug cases filed by u.s .

attorneys steadily increased in the late 1990s and early 2000s .

while this may reflect a higher drug crime incidence rate , it also may reflect a federal enforcement focus on drug crimes .

this section provides a snapshot of federal enforcement trends over the last several decades .

u.s. federal drug enforcement policies will continue to generate debates among policy makers , law enforcement officials , scholars , and the public .

even prior to the federal government's move in 1970 to criminalize the manufacture , distribution , dispensation , and possession of controlled substances , there were significant discussions over the morality and efficacy of criminal drug enforcement .

as discussed in this report , federal law enforcement has generally not targeted individuals for drug possession ( as state and local law enforcement have ) , but rather has aimed to disrupt and dismantle organizations involved in illicit drug trafficking .

drug trends will evolve along with law enforcement response to drug crimes , but the same fundamental issues will likely continue to confront lawmakers .

these issues include the social impact of the criminalization of drugs and federal involvement in domestic drug control .

in the coming years , congress may opt to address current drug uses , including prescription drug and heroin abuse , synthetic drugs , and state legalization of marijuana , through changes to the controlled substances act or other legislative means .

