the recent increase in the number of unaccompanied alien children ( uacs ) apprehended at the border between mexico and the united states has raised questions about the role that gang - related violence in central america may play in determining eligibility for refugee status and asylum .

gang activity is wide - spread in el salvador , guatemala , and honduras , and attempts by these governments to control such activity have been seen as ineffective , at best , or as violating the civil rights of persons perceived as gang members or associates , at worst .

the office of the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) repeatedly noted this gang - related violence in its 2014 report , children on the run: unaccompanied children leaving central america and mexico and the need for international protection .

subsequently , in discussing the "surge" in the number of uacs arriving at the u.s. - mexican border in fy2014 , the unhrc reiterated that 58% of these children cite "violence" in their home countries as "at least one key reason" for leaving .

refugee status and asylum are two forms of discretionary relief that could enable uacs to enter or remain in the united states , and the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) relies upon the same definition in determining eligibility for both .

in both cases , to be eligible , aliens must prove that they have experienced past persecution , or have a well - founded fear of future persecution , on account of race , religion , nationality , political opinion , or membership in a particular social group .

however , refugee status may only be granted to aliens outside the united states , while asylum may only be granted to aliens arriving at a port of entry or the u.s. border , or within the united states .

applicants for refugee status are also barred from appealing denials of their applications , while applicants for asylum are not .

thus , an equivalent to the extensive body of case law construing and applying the ina's definition of refugee in the context of asylum is lacking in the context of refugee status .

instead , the meaning of refugee for purposes of refugee status is typically construed in light of asylum cases , and asylum is the focus of this report .

the report provides an overview of the basis for asylum in u.s. law .

it also discusses how key elements of the ina's definition of refugee have been construed and applied in gang - related asylum cases .

the report briefly notes , in relevant places , related forms of relief from removal , such as withholding of removal under section 241 of the ina or the convention against torture and other cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment or punishment , but does not provide a comprehensive treatment of these topics .

it is also important to note that many potentially relevant decisions — namely , those by asylum officers within u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) and immigration judges within the executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) at the department of justice ( doj ) — are not published .

there are reasons to believe that uscis and eoir may be more receptive to gang - related asylum claims than the decisions by the board of immigration appeals ( bia ) and the federal courts of appeals discussed here .

however , uscis and immigration judge decisions are not publicly available in the same way that published bia decisions and federal court decisions are .

the ina's current protections for refugees and asylees are grounded in the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees and the 1967 protocol relating to the status of refugees .

the convention generally defined a refugee as any person who [a]s a result of events occurring before 1 january 1951 and owing to well - founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race , religion , nationality , membership of a particular social group , or political opinion , is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or , owing to such fear , is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country , although persons who had "committed a crime against peace , a war crime , or a crime against humanity" were expressly excluded from this definition .

most notably , the convention barred nations which are parties to it from returning refugees to their home country ( or another country ) where they feared persecution .

it also obligated these nations to grant refugees freedom of religion and movement , the right to work and public education , and access to identity papers and travel documents , among other things .

conversely , it required refugees to respect the laws and regulations of their country of asylum .

the united states was involved in drafting the convention , but did not sign on as a party to it .

however , it did sign on as a party to the protocol , which amended the convention by removing the temporal restrictions ( i.e. , "events occurring before 1 january 1951" ) from its definition of refugee .

the refugee act of 1980 ( p.l .

96-212 ) is widely recognized as having been enacted to bring u.s. domestic law into conformity with the united states' commitments under the protocol .

among other things , the refugee act amended section 101 ( a ) ( 42 ) of the ina to define refugee in largely the same terms used by the convention and protocol: the term "refugee" means ... any person who is outside any country of such person's nationality or , in the case of a person having no nationality , is outside any country in which such person last habitually resided , and who is unable or unwilling to return to , and is unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of , that country because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

the refugee act also added the current sections 207 , 208 , and 209 to the ina , which , respectively , address refugee admissions , the granting of asylum , and the adjustment of refugees' and asylees' status to that of lawfully permanent resident aliens ( lprs ) .

in addition , the refugee act amended then - section 243 of the ina to generally bar the return of aliens to countries where the "alien's life or freedom would be threatened ... on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion. .

subsequently relocated to section 241 of the ina , this prohibition forms the basis for what is referred to as withholding of removal .

withholding of removal under section 241 of the ina represents the u.s.'s primary obligation under the convention and protocol .

that is , as a party to the protocol , the united states is barred from removing aliens , including aliens arriving at the u.s. border , to a county where he or she would be persecuted .

the united states is not required , by the protocol or otherwise , to admit refugees to the united states , grant asylum to persons in the united states , or permit refugees or asylees to adjust to lpr status or obtain citizenship .

to the contrary , the ina expressly notes that the granting of asylum is discretionary , and courts have upheld its denial even when an alien fulfills the requirements of the statutory definition of refugee .

it is also important to note that , even though the united states signed on as a party to the protocol , and the ina's definition of refugee generally corresponds to that in the convention and protocol , it is u.s. domestic law — not international law — that governs u.s. obligations as to individual aliens .

relatedly , the same terms ( eg , persecution , particular social group ) may be construed differently when used in the convention and protocol than when used in the ina .

aliens seeking asylum in the united states have the burden of establishing , by a preponderance of the evidence , that they are "refugees" under the ina's definition of this term .

this means showing that they ( 1 ) have suffered persecution , or ( 2 ) have a well - founded fear of persecution ( 3 ) on account of ( 4 ) a protected ground ( i.e. , race , religion , nationality , political opinion , or membership in a particular social group ) .

however , the meaning of certain of these terms — such as persecution and particular social group — is not established by convention or protocol , or by the ina and its implementing regulations .

instead , their meaning has been determined by the board of immigration appeals ( bia ) — the highest administrative tribunal for interpreting and applying immigration law — through case - by - case adjudication , with the federal courts generally deferring to the bia's interpretation so long as it is based on a "permissible construction" of the ina .

in other cases , such as with the meaning of well - founded fear , the executive branch has interpreted particular language within the ina's definition of refugee through the promulgation of regulations .

these regulatory interpretations are also afforded deference by the courts insofar as they are based on "permissible" constructions of the statutory language .

in yet other cases , congress has enacted legislation that affects how particular terms within the refugee definition are construed .

perhaps the most notable example of this is the real id act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-13 ) , which amended the ina to require that a protected ground ( eg , race , religion , nationality ) "was or will be at least one central reason" for the persecution .

the application of the ina's definition of refugee to aliens seeking asylum in the united states due , in whole or in part , to gang - related violence is , thus , complicated because it involves consideration of an extensive body of statutes , regulations , and administrative and judicial decisions .

in addition , the federal courts of appeals can sometimes have differing opinions on whether particular interpretations advanced by the bia are "permissible" and , thus , entitled to deference .

such differences of opinion can result in aliens' applications for asylum faring differently depending upon the territorial jurisdiction in which they are made ( eg , some courts are willing to consider former gang members as a particular social group , while others are not ) .

the ina also articulates certain bars to asylum , expressly prohibiting the executive branch from granting asylum to aliens who ordered , incited , assisted , or otherwise participated in the persecution of any person on account of race , religion , nationality , political opinion , or membership in a particular social group .

also barred are aliens who may otherwise meet the requirements of the refugee definition , but ( 1 ) having been convicted of a "particularly serious crime," constitute a danger to the u.s. community ; ( 2 ) committed a "serious nonpolitical crime" outside the united states prior to arriving here ; ( 3 ) are reasonably believed to be a danger to u.s. security ; ( 4 ) are inadmissible or deportable on certain terrorist grounds ; or ( 5 ) were firmly resettled in another country prior to coming to the united states .

the ina further provides that aliens who have been convicted of "aggravated felonies" — which the ina defines to mean certain specified crimes ( eg , murder , rape , sexual abuse of a minor ) , as well as "crimes of violence" for which the term of imprisonment is at least one year — are considered to have been convicted of particularly serious crimes .

these bars can present potentially significant issues for former gang members , as to whom there could be "serious reasons" to believe they have committed "serious nonpolitical crimes" outside the united states .

those who are not former gang members are generally less likely to be affected by such bars .

