benefits for retired employees are of particular interest to policymakers , who often are concerned with the income security of retirees , a large and fast - growing population .

one aspect of this congressional concern is what happens when bankrupt employers are unable to provide promised pension and health benefits to their retired employees .

this report explores the protections of benefits awarded retirees and future retirees of bankrupt private - sector employers under current law .

although there are many types of employee benefits , active employees , retirees , and the employers themselves are often especially concerned with postretirement pensions and health insurance benefits , usually the two largest components of these so - called legacy costs .

this analysis provides examples from two industries of interest to congress where competitive pressures resulted in changes in each sector's business outlook: automobiles and coal .

automotive industry .

the bankruptcy of the general motors corporation ( old gm ) in 2009 was the fourth - largest bankruptcy in u.s. history , and it was accompanied by a period of federal aid to the automotive industry .

two distinctive features of the old gm bankruptcy were that federal financing was important to the ultimate outcome ( and subsequent retiree benefits ) and that the outcome was associated with a particularly strong labor union — the united auto workers ( uaw ) .

the report also focuses on the delphi corporation , an automobile parts supplier whose salaried retirees attempted to receive the benefits that hourly uaw retirees received .

hourly uaw hourly employees at delphi had received contractual promises regarding their benefits from old gm in the pre - bankruptcy period .

salaried workers at delphi had received no such contractual promises .

to facilitate increasing their benefits , salaried retirees formed their own labor association , the delphi salaried workers association ( dsra ) .

coal industry .

the united mine workers of america ( umwa ) represents more than 73,000 coal miners .

congress has periodically passed legislation covering retiree benefits for coal miners since at least the 1940s .

in october 1992 , passage of the coal act protected health benefits for some retired coal miners .

in 2006 , trust funds covering health insurance for retired miners received federal assistance .

various proposals dealing with pensions and health benefits provided by bankrupt coal employers have been advanced over the last several years .

these proposals were influenced by the july 2012 bankruptcy of the patriot coal corporation , an employer with coal mines in west virginia .

these three case studies are not necessarily representative of all chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings of large , unionized firms .

indeed , as case studies , they are not necessarily representative of all bankruptcy proceedings of large , unionized firms in industries in which congress has become involved .

nevertheless , they do provide some evidence of how the federal government deals with retiree benefits in industries in which competitive pressures have changed .

this report begins with a discussion of whether bankrupt firms can invalidate previous commitments covering retiree pensions and health insurance .

it next discusses the specific protections accorded to retiree pensions and health insurance benefits .

certain types of pensions are guaranteed by a quasi - public agency , but no such guarantee exists for retiree health insurance .

the report concludes with brief case studies of the bankruptcies of old gm , delphi , and patriot .

whether retirees and future retirees receive their promised pensions and health insurance benefits depends on many factors .

four are discussed in this section: ( 1 ) the type of bankruptcy ( eg , chapter 7 or chapter 11 ) and the relevant provisions of the bankruptcy code ; ( 2 ) the type of labor organization ( eg , union , association , or not organized ) ; ( 3 ) the type of employee ( eg , active employee or retired employee ) ; and ( 4 ) the legal relationship between the bankrupt employer , any subsidiaries , and any parent company .

erisa does not require retiree health insurance benefits to be prefunded .

in practical terms , even if a retiree was contractually promised $400 a month in health insurance benefits , the employer is not required to have $400 a month available .

in addition , retiree health insurance claims are neither a secured nor a priority claim in bankruptcy .

therefore , retirees have no guarantee that they actually will receive any of the benefits they were promised in a cba .

one way to guarantee at least some funding for health insurance benefits is for the ( active and / or retired ) employees to form a voluntary employees' beneficiary association ( veba ) .

vebas are tax - advantaged trust funds , first created by the revenue act of 1928 ( p.l .

70-562 ) .

vebas can finance many types of employee benefits , including retiree health insurance benefits ( but not pensions ) .

vebas historically were owned by a single employer .

however , some vebas now are structured as a trust independent of the employer .

these trusts sometimes are termed independent vebas , new vebas , or stand - alone vebas .

an independent veba must be controlled by its membership , by independent trustees , or by other fiduciaries designated by the membership .

trustees chosen by a cba are considered designated by the membership .

vebas have been created or modified both as part of bankruptcy proceedings and as part of the normal course of business in healthier entities .

in all cases , the trust acts in the fiduciary interest of the employees .

nevertheless , the creation of a veba cannot be characterized across - the - board as a victory for either the employer or the employees ; each individual veba differs with respect to funding levels and other terms , and the funding levels and other terms themselves depend on the relative bargaining power of the employer and employees .

apart from the pbgc , no federal programs provide pension benefits to retirees whose former employer cannot meet its pension obligations .

however , retirees may have a number of additional health insurance options available to them .

retirees who no longer have access to health insurance through their former employer ( s ) may be able to obtain coverage through medicare or medicaid , receive federal subsidies to purchase coverage in the private health insurance market , or , in the case of some chapter 11 bankruptcies , obtain coverage through title x of the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( cobra ; p.l .

99-272 ) .

retired individuals who have end - stage renal disease as well as those who are disabled or aged 65 or older generally are eligible for medicare .

some lower - income individuals may be eligible for medicaid .

additionally , individuals can purchase private nongroup ( individual ) coverage .

nongroup coverage can be purchased through health insurance exchanges , as established by the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended by p.l .

111-152 ) or in the private market outside of exchanges .

individuals who purchase nongroup coverage through the exchanges may be eligible for premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies .

under cobra , employers are required to permit employees and family members to continue their group health insurance coverage at their own expense if they lose coverage because of designated work - or family - related events .

these individuals must pay the full cost of coverage , including 100% of the premium plus an administrative fee .

among the qualifying events that trigger cobra's continuation coverage is an employer's filing a case under the bankruptcy code .

the retired employee is eligible for cobra continuation coverage for life , and his or her spouse and dependents are eligible for continuation coverage for 36 months .

this continuation coverage , however , is contingent upon the employer maintaining a health insurance plan for active employees .

two additional congressionally authorized programs have provided retiree funding in the past few years but have expired .

first , section 1102 of the aca authorized $5 billion in funding for the early retiree reinsurance program ( errp ) .

the errp reimburses employers for especially high health insurance claims incurred by early retirees .

the early retirees themselves do not receive any reimbursements from this program .

rather , the reimbursements are used to fund various cost - savings and other improvements to the employer's provision of health insurance .

the errp began accepting for reimbursement claims incurred on or after june 1 , 2010 , and was closed to new enrollees as of may 6 , 2011 , because expenditure projections indicated that the $5 billion would be exhausted by the employers already enrolled .

the authorization for the errp ended on january 1 , 2014 .

second , the health coverage tax credit ( hctc ) , a federal income tax credit , has subsidized 72.5% of the cost ( premiums ) of qualified health insurance for eligible taxpayers and their family members .

eligibility for the hctc is limited to three groups of taxpayers , two of which are individuals eligible for the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) program .

the third group consists of individuals whose pension plans were taken over by the pbgc .

this credit expired on january 1 , 2014 , and new enrollees must have registered before october 1 , 2013 .

the remainder of this report provides three examples of bankruptcy proceedings in unionized entities where the retirees' pensions and health insurance benefits received substantial federal attention .

the first example is old general motors and the united auto workers , the second example is delphi and the delphi salaried retirees association , and the final example is patriot and the united mine workers of america .

federal involvement in retiree pensions and health insurance in the coal industry has a long history in the united states .

following world war ii , the united mine workers of america ( umwa ) demanded health and retirement benefits from coal employers .

when these benefits were not forthcoming , the miners staged a walkout .

to avoid a shutdown of american coal production , president harry truman signed an executive order seizing all of the nation's bituminous coal mines .

the secretary of the interior , julius krug , was ordered to negotiate an agreement with the umwa president john l. lewis .

the krug - lewis agreement , signed on may 29 , 1946 , established the umwa health and retirement funds .

congress has been involved in the retiree benefits of coal miners ever since .

the current structure of pension and retiree health benefits in the coal industry is spelled out in the most recent national bituminous coal wage agreement ( nbcwa ) , a cba between the umwa ( a multiemployer union ) and the bituminous coal operators association ( bcoa ) , whose members represent the owners of the coal mines .

the most recent nbcwa was negotiated in 2011 and extends through 2016 .

it includes , among other terms and conditions of employment , details covering the pension plan and three retiree health funds used by signatory employers .

all plans contain an "evergreen clause" or "continuing contributions clause" to provide for the long - term financing of pensions and health benefits for retired employees and orphan retirees .

thus , all employers who are ( or ever were ) members of the pension plan or any health plan must contribute , including employers who are not current members of the bcoa .

in other words , employers who were once signatory employers to any nbcwa must continue to contribute to all pension and health insurance trust funds until the cba is changed .

employers are therefore responsible for maintaining benefits for miners who may never have been their employees .

patriot filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in july 2012 and emerged from bankruptcy in december 2013 .

patriot was formed in 2007 as a spin - off company from peabody energy .

the following year , patriot purchased magnum coal , itself a spin - off of arch coal .

consequently , patriot entered bankruptcy with about three times as many retirees , inherited from arch and peabody , compared to active employees .

the two parent employers had an improved financial picture following the spin - off ; for example , the present value of peabody's retiree health obligations was reduced by $637.6 million .

patriot , however , was left with an estimated present value of over $1.6 billion in retiree health obligations , an amount the bankruptcy court called "astronomical. .

in addition , patriot had been receiving funding from the early retiree reinsurance program , but additional funding from this source is no longer available .

the 1974 pension trust ( the trust ) was established by collective bargaining and covers all employees whose employer was a signatory employer to the nbcwa one or more times .

the trust documents detail the required contributions of the employers and the benefits received by the eligible retirees under a wide variety of conditions .

this trust pre - dates the coal act .

patriot is now the trust's second - largest contributor .

at the time of the patriot bankruptcy filing , the trust was less than 73% funded and had a status of seriously endangered .

the trust is now in critical status .

the patriot bankruptcy negotiations ended with patriot remaining a participant in the 1974 pension trust .

patriot covers current retirees , surviving spouses , and dependents under the existing terms .

in addition , active employees hired before january 1 , 2012 , are covered .

employees hired on or after january 1 , 2012 , are not eligible for the 1974 ( defined benefit ) pension trust but have a ( defined contribution ) 401 ( k ) retirement plan .

as with the automotive industry , the coal industry provides generous health benefits .

the umwa says that it sacrifices wage increases for employees in exchange for better health insurance because miners face many occupational health challenges .

coal employers usually maintain their own retiree health plans .

however , some employees , especially those whose former employers are no longer mining coal or are bankrupt , have access to one of three umwa retiree health care funds .

each fund has its own trustees , and the trustees are responsible for paying premiums and benefits and for investing the assets of their respective trust fund .

the combined benefit fund ( cbf ) is a trust fund created by the coal act .

it provides retiree health benefits for umwa employees ( and their surviving spouses and dependents ) who retired on or before july 20 , 1992 , and did not have another source of retiree health benefits because they were orphan retirees .

the currently proposed legislation ( discussed below ) does not affect the cbf .

the 1992 benefit trust is a trust fund created by the coal act .

it provides retiree health benefits to those employees ( and their surviving spouses and dependents ) who retired from the coal industry after july 20 , 1992 , but before september 30 , 1994 , and do not have another source of retiree health benefits .

the major difference between the 1992 benefit trust and the cbf is that under the 1992 benefit trust , the premiums paid by each signatory coal company are adjusted each year to meet the expected health care costs of the beneficiaries .

the 1992 trust is therefore better able to keep pace with increases in health care costs than the cbf .

the 1993 benefit trust covers employees who retired on or after october 1994 .

in addition , new , inexperienced miners hired after january 1 , 2007 , cannot receive benefits from this trust unless they are disabled as a result of a mine accident .

the 1993 benefit trust is therefore almost entirely closed to new enrollees .

the 1993 benefit trust was created through negotiation between the umwa and the bcoa as part of the nbcwa of 1993 .

retired miners are eligible for the 1993 benefit plan if their past employers either went out of business or defaulted in providing retiree health benefits .

the nbcwa specifies the required contributions of the bcoa members for active employees , retired employees , and orphan employees .

note that the bargained level of funding need not correspond with the funding level required to maintain the contractual level of health care benefits for its members .

at the start of the chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings , patriot spoke of eliminating retiree health insurance benefits entirely .

the umwa's section 1114 committee started negotiations , but the bankruptcy court ruled in favor of patriot's section 1113 and section 1114 motions .

therefore patriot no longer had to honor the existing nbcwa , and no longer had to honor previous commitments to provide retiree health insurance to umwa retirees ( or any other current or future retirees ) .

the court's ruling was viewed unfavorably by the umwa , and the union threatened to strike .

patriot and the umwa then began negotiations that included contributions to a new veba .

these negotiations became irrelevant when the united states bankruptcy appellate panel for the 8 th circuit reversed an earlier bankruptcy court decision .

the original bankruptcy court would have allowed peabody energy to stop paying the health care benefits for certain retirees that it had agreed to at the time of the patriot spin - off .

the appellate decision requires peabody to take responsibility for paying the health care benefits for these retirees .

after another round of negotiations , the peabody case was settled with peabody contributing $90 million to the veba in 2014 , $75 million in 2015 , $75 million in 2016 , and $70 million in 2017 , in addition to other requirements .

as of the cover date of this report , no bills explicitly covering retiree health benefits have been introduced in the 114 th congress .

several bills introduced in the 113 th congress would have changed the benefits awarded to current and future retirees in the coal industry .

h.r .

980 and s. 468 ( 113 th congress ) , coal accountability and retired employee ( care ) act of 2013 , would have transferred part of the interest earned on a coal mine land reclamation fund to the 1974 umwa pension trust to be used to pay pension benefits required under this plan without regard to whether pension trust participation is limited to individuals who retired in or after 1976 .

the act would have made those who were eligible to receive benefits from the 1974 umwa pension trust following an insolvency proceeding relating to a coal operator eligible for the 1992 trust .

h.r .

2627 ( 113 th congress ) , the caring for coal miners act , would have made retired miners who were not receiving benefits they were otherwise entitled to because of a bankruptcy commencing in 2012 eligible for the 1993 benefit trust .

benefits made available by this act would have been reduced by the amount actually paid by the veba on behalf of a covered beneficiary , so that no beneficiary would receive a greater benefit than would have been payable before the establishment of the veba .

h.r .

2918 ( 113 th congress ) , the coal healthcare and pensions protection act of 2013 , would have made retired miners who were not receiving benefits they were otherwise entitled to because of a bankruptcy commencing in 2012 eligible for the 1993 benefit trust .

benefits made available by this act would have been reduced by the amount actually paid by the veba on behalf of a covered beneficiary .

any additional monies ( except the amount needed to cover administrative costs ) would have been transferred from the veba to the 1993 trust .

any remaining excess monies would have been transferred to the 1974 umwa pension trust .

all four bills introduced in the 113 th congress would have increased the health benefits available to patriot retirees .

the care act of 2013 would have allowed patriot retirees to join the 1992 benefit trust and thus to receive the most generous benefits available to any orphan retiree .

the caring for coal miners act would have allowed those who became orphan retirees as a result of a bankruptcy proceeding commencing in 2012 to join the 1993 benefit trust .

however , the 1993 benefit fund would have been prohibited from covering expenses on behalf of a beneficiary that was already covered by the veba .

the coal healthcare and pensions protection act of 2013 would have allowed those who became orphan retirees as a result of a bankruptcy proceeding commencing in 2012 to join the 1993 benefit trust and would have transferred all monies from the veba to this trust .

any extra funding after health care obligations had been fully met would have been transferred to the 1974 umwa pension trust .

of the four bills introduced in the 113 th congress , only two definitely would have increased the funding available to the 1974 pension trust .

the care act of 2013 would have moved some of the interest earned on a coal mine land reclamation fund to the 1974 pension trust .

this move , however , would have reduced the funds available to two health benefit trust funds .

the coal healthcare and pensions protection act of 2013 would have transferred any extra funding after health care obligations had been fully met to the 1974 umwa pension trust .

the president's fy2016 budget would make those retirees whose health benefits were denied or reduced as a result of a bituminous coal industry bankruptcy commencing in 2012 eligible for the 1993 umwa health plan .

the budget also would transfer funds through the pbgc to the trustees of the 1974 umwa pension plan to "ensure the plan's long - term solvency. .

