over the past several years , the number of unaccompanied children from the "northern triangle" of central america ( el salvador , guatemala , and honduras ) attempting to enter the united states has increased significantly .

this mixed migration flow was particularly heavy during the 2014 fiscal year ( fy ) , when the u.s. border patrol apprehended nearly 52,000 unaccompanied minors from the region at the southwest border — a 150% increase compared to fy2013 and a more than 1,200% increase compared to fy2011 ( see figure 1 ) .

u.s. authorities noted similar increases in apprehensions of central american families and single adults .

although the number of central americans reaching the u.s. border has declined since fy2014 , u.s. apprehensions of unaccompanied children remain at elevated levels , placing strains on government resources and raising concerns domestically and internationally about the safety and protection of the children .

there is little consensus among analysts regarding why the number of central american minors abandoning their homes in hope of entering the united states has increased so significantly .

nevertheless , most analysts maintain that the problem is complex , involving interactions between so - called push factors , such as high levels of violence and poverty in central america , and pull factors , such as the desire to join family members in the united states and perceptions about u.s. immigration policies .

many analysts warn that elevated levels of migration from the region are likely to continue until policymakers in the countries of origin and the international community address the poor security and socioeconomic conditions in the northern triangle .

members of congress have expressed significant concerns about the influx of unaccompanied minors and have taken some steps designed to address the situation .

this report focuses on the foreign policy dimensions of increased migration from central america .

it begins by examining u.s. policy in the region , including a brief historical background , the current policy framework , and the u.s. and regional response to the surge in unaccompanied minors .

the report then discusses a variety of issues congress might take into consideration as it continues to formulate policy toward central america .

these issues include the humanitarian implications of the migration situation , the international humanitarian response , the capacity of central american nations to receive and reintegrate unaccompanied children removed ( deported ) from the united states , the capacity of central american nations to address the root causes of the exodus , and the role of mexico as a transit country .

the report concludes with an outlook for u.s. policy .

the increased flow of unaccompanied minors from central america to the united states over the past several years has led some policymakers to reevaluate u.s. relations with the region .

as members of congress debate potential changes in policy toward central america , they might consider how u.s. policy has influenced the region in the past , the framework for u.s. engagement , and the steps the u.s. government has taken thus far to address mixed migration flows .

as congress debates the administration's fy2017 budget request and other legislative options to address the foreign policy dimensions of increased migration from central america , it might take into consideration a variety of interrelated issues .

these issues include the humanitarian implications of the current situation , the international humanitarian response , the capacity of central american nations to receive and reintegrate unaccompanied children deported from the united states , the capacity of central american nations to address the root causes of the exodus , and the role of mexico as a transit country .

u.s. policymakers continue to face difficult decisions about how to respond to the increase in unaccompanied children and other central americans attempting to enter the united states .

u.s. authorities apprehended nearly 52,000 unaccompanied minors from the region in fy2014 , straining u.s. government resources and creating a complex crisis with humanitarian implications .

although u.s. apprehensions of unaccompanied children from the northern triangle declined by 45% in fy2015 , they have increased again in the first five months of fy2016 .

the obama administration's initial response to the fy2014 surge was focused on efforts to deter irregular migration .

it included public awareness campaigns , anti - human smuggling operations , and the establishment of an in - country refugee / parole program in the northern triangle countries .

although those initiatives likely have deterred some potential migrants , the mexican government's increased immigration enforcement efforts under the u.s. - backed southern border plan appear to have played the most significant role in preventing central americans from reaching the u.s. border .

mexico's increased enforcement efforts have also raised humanitarian concerns , however , as they have pushed migrants to take more dangerous routes to the united states and the m exican government has less capacity than the u.s. government to screen migrants for protection concerns .

moreover , the recent increase in u.s. apprehensions suggests that the initial reductions achieved with mexico's southern border plan may not be sustainable .

given the administration's intention to push forward with deportations of unaccompanied minors who have not been granted asylum , strengthening central american nations' capacities to receive and reintegrate deportees is another major focus of the short - term policy response .

the u.s. government has provided some assistance to support such efforts , and various international organizations are offering additional assistance to northern triangle governments as they expand services for repatriated citizens .

nevertheless , reports that some minors have faced persecution and even death upon their return to central america raise questions as to whether governments in the region will be able to provide adequate attention and protection for a new influx of deportees .

many analysts think the united states is likely to continue to receive significant mixed migration flows of refugees , asylum - seekers , and migrants until citizen security and socioeconomic opportunities for citizens of the northern triangle improve substantially .

the obama administration has echoed this assessment and introduced a new , whole - of - government u.s. strategy for engagement in central america to promote economic prosperity , strengthen governance , and improve security in the region .

congress appropriated $750 million in assistance to support implementation of the strategy in fy2016 .

improving security and socioeconomic conditions in central america will be a long - term and difficult endeavor , however , and likely will require extensive international support over an extended period of time .

while many analysts maintain that central american nations will require external support to address their challenges , they acknowledge that significant improvements in security and socioeconomic conditions in the region ultimately will depend on central american leaders carrying out substantial internal reforms .

northern triangle nations will need to raise revenues , reduce corruption , strengthen institutions , and expand educational and economic opportunities .

leaders in the region have committed to such reforms as part of their plan of the alliance for prosperity in the northern triangle , and congress has provided additional incentives to implement those reforms by placing stringent conditions on u.s. assistance .

as members of congress consider additional assistance for the region , they are likely to closely track the progress made by the northern triangle governments , recognizing that u.s. initiatives will likely fail to produce their desired results unless the region's leaders follow through on their commitments .

