recent high - profile incidents of sexual violence on campus have heightened congressional and administrative scrutiny of the policies and procedures that institutions of higher education ( ihes ) use to address such violence .

the obama administration has taken steps to facilitate the reporting of sexual violence and to help ensure that appropriate procedures and services are in place .

meanwhile , legislators have introduced several bills that seek to strengthen or build on existing laws pertaining to campus sexual violence , including , in the 114 th congress , the campus accountability and safety act ( casa , h.r .

1310 / s. 590 ) , sos campus act ( sos , h.r .

1490 / s. 706 ) , halt campus sexual violence act ( halt , h.r .

2680 ) , safe campus act of 2015 ( safe act , h.r .

3403 ) , and fair campus act of 2015 ( fair act , h.r .

3408 ) .

currently , there are two federal statutes that address sexual violence on college campuses: the jeanne clery disclosure of campus security policy and campus crime statistics act , as amended ( clery act ) , and title ix of the education amendments of 1972 ( title ix ) .

the department of education ( ed ) has primary responsibility for enforcing these laws .

this report provides background information on sexual violence on campus and its prevalence , descriptions of the clery act and title ix , and an analysis of prominent policy and legal issues related to these two statutes .

it also includes a brief description of a related third statute focused on educational privacy .

both the clery act and title ix contain provisions intended to protect students at ihes from sexual violence .

indeed , the obama administration's 2014 initiative to combat sexual violence on college campuses emphasizes the responsibilities of ihes under the two statutes .

nevertheless , it is important to remember that the clery act and title ix are two different laws with two different purposes .

those purposes happen to overlap in the context of sexual violence on college campuses .

because an ihe's mishandling of sexual violence incidents may lead to violations of one or both laws , there has been some confusion about the comparative scope and applicability of the clery act and title ix .

some of the differences between the two laws are described below .

the primary purpose of the clery act is disclosure of campus crime statistics and policies .

under clery , all public and private ihes that participate in hea title iv student financial assistance programs must track crimes in and around their campuses , and report these data to their campus community and to ed .

notably , the clery act requires such reports for all types of crimes and offenses enumerated in the law , not just crimes of sexual violence .

the clery act also requires that ihes develop and publish certain policies relating to campus crime and safety , including policies related to sexual violence , as well as those that relate to emergency response , evacuation , and related topics .

in contrast , title ix is a civil rights law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex under any education program or activity that receives federal funding .

under title ix , sexual harassment , which includes sexual violence , is a form of unlawful sex discrimination .

unlike the clery act , whose coverage is limited to ihes that receive student financial aid funds under the hea , title ix is applicable to education programs or activities that receive any type of federal funding , including any public or private elementary , secondary , and postsecondary school that receives such funds .

title ix and the clery act differ not only in their purpose and coverage , but also in their enforcement and remedies .

ed's federal student aid ( fsa ) office oversees educational institutions' compliance with the student financial aid requirements under title iv of the hea , including requirements related to the clery act .

in this role , fsa conducts program reviews of institutions' compliance with title iv student financial aid requirements , including compliance with the clery act .

after conducting a review of an ihe's compliance with the clery act , the fsa may impose a fine of up to $35,000 per clery act violation .

fsa also has authority to suspend institutional participation in federal financial student aid programs for violations of the clery act , although it appears that this penalty has never been imposed .

meanwhile , for purposes of enforcing title ix at the administrative level , federal agencies are responsible for ensuring that education programs or activities that receive federal funding are complying with title ix .

although each agency enforces title ix compliance among its own recipients , ed , which administers the vast majority of federal education programs , is the primary agency conducting administrative enforcement of title ix .

such enforcement by ed's office for civil rights ( ocr ) may occur as part of a routine compliance audit or in response to a complaint filed by an individual .

the administrative sanction for violating title ix is suspension or termination of federal funding , although such a penalty is the last resort , and may occur only if ocr has first sought an informal resolution with the ihe in question .

both the clery act and title ix are discussed in greater detail below .

ferpa ( p.l .

93-380 ) guarantees students access to their education records , while limiting the disclosure of those records to third parties .

ferpa privacy protections that extend to an alleged perpetrator , therefore , may conflict at times with the title ix rights afforded to an alleged victim of sexual violence .

as noted above , an educational institution is required under title ix to take steps to preserve a complainant's confidentiality if so requested .

an alleged perpetrator , however , has the right to review the complaint if it is an educational record within the meaning of ferpa .

under such circumstances , an educational institution must provide the alleged harasser with access to the information contained in the complaint but should , to the extent possible , avoid revealing the complainant's name or other identifying information .

ferpa also prohibits educational institutions that receive federal funds from releasing students' educational records without prior written consent .

on its face , this prohibition would appear to prevent a school from disclosing the results of a disciplinary hearing that are part of a perpetrator's educational record .

however , ferpa contains a number of exceptions .

for example , a postsecondary institution may disclose to an alleged victim of any crime of violence or nonforcible sex offense the final results of any disciplinary proceeding conducted by the institution against the alleged perpetrator .

likewise , an institution may disclose to anyone the final results of any disciplinary proceeding conducted against a student who is an alleged perpetrator of any crime of violence or nonforcible sex offense if the institution determines as a result of the proceeding that the student committed a violation of the institution's rules or policies with respect to such crime or offense .

thus , ferpa permits , but does not require , a school to publicly disclose the results of a disciplinary hearing involving sexual violence .

this section discusses several policy and legal issues that have arisen with respect to the clery act and title ix .

ihes have come under increasing scrutiny due to allegations that some may be underreporting crimes of sexual violence at their campuses as required by the clery act .

in addition , the lack of consistency in the way crimes are reported across ihes has raised questions about the usefulness of these statistics in assessing the extent of sexual violence and how it is being handled across ihes .

the american association of university professors has stated that "[w]hile a small number of institutions have put in place rigorous procedures for obtaining , collating , tracking , processing , and reporting clery statistics , a standardized model for the overall process does not yet exist. .

ihes that are the most rigorous in monitoring and collecting statistics on campus sexual violence may report more complaints of sexual violence than ihes that are not as diligent in monitoring and reporting such complaints .

thus , in press accounts and in their asrs , ihes that may be in compliance with clery reporting requirements may appear to have a more serious sexual violence problem than ihes that may not be in compliance ( and may actually have a more serious sexual violence problem ) .

these potential discrepancies are important for ihes because press accounts and asr data on campus sexual violence may be viewed by current and prospective students and their families to evaluate the safety of ihes .

the possibility that some ihes may be underreporting incidents of sexual violence , as well as the inconsistency across ihes in the rigor with which sexual violence is monitored and reported , have prompted some to suggest that more objective measures of sexual violence at ihes , such as school climate surveys , might be useful to get a clearer picture of the extent of sexual violence across ihes .

as noted above , the title ix guidance requires schools to adopt a preponderance of the evidence standard for disciplinary hearings involving sexual violence .

this requirement has proved controversial .

indeed , some critics contend that use of this standard is unfair , arguing that alleged perpetrators who are subject to this standard are being deprived of their due process rights .

from a legal perspective , however , it is well established that different rights and corresponding procedures attach in the administrative versus judicial setting , and that it is common for an individual to be subject to both criminal and civil proceedings based on the same incident .

in general , the standard of proof is higher in the criminal context because more is at stake , while a lesser standard of proof is permitted in civil proceedings because the potential loss of rights is less significant .

the concept of procedural due process has its origins in the due process clause of the u.s. constitution , which prohibits government action that would deprive any person of "life , liberty , or property , without due process of law. .

the premise behind due process is that the government , for reasons of basic fairness , must provide certain procedures before taking any of these important interests away from protected parties .

the supreme court has stated that due process "is a flexible concept that varies with the particular situation," and has made it clear that "something less than a full evidentiary hearing is sufficient prior to adverse administrative action. .

ultimately , the degree of procedural protection that is due depends on the nature of the individual and governmental interests at stake and varies significantly in the civil and criminal context .

it is also important to note that the due process clause applies only to governmental actors , not private entities .

thus , public ihes must provide due process protections to students who are subject to disciplinary proceedings , but private ihes are not subject to the same requirement .

although it is possible that state statutory or common law due process protections may apply in the private setting , the relationship between private ihes and their students is generally governed by contract law .

under this arrangement , a student who accepts an offer of admission to an ihe agrees to abide by a school's rules and policies regarding attendance .

such rules and policies , which are generally established at the institution's discretion , may or may not include certain procedural protections for students who violate the school's code of conduct .

thus , a private ihe is under no obligation to provide due process rights when sanctioning students unless it has specified that it will do so .

however , ed's title ix guidance does clarify that if an educational institution provides procedural rights to one party , such as the right to present witnesses or have an attorney present , then these rights must be available to both parties .

likewise , although title ix does not require schools to have a process for appealing disciplinary decisions , the guidance recommends that schools adopt such a process and notes that if an appeals process is provided , it must be made available to both parties .

another issue that has arisen under title ix involves questions about whether the current remedies are sufficient .

as noted above , suspension or termination of federal funding is currently the only enforcement mechanism available to ed or other federal agencies when an agency cannot reach a voluntary resolution agreement with an institution that it has found to be noncompliant .

on the one hand , the threat of losing federal funding appears to motivate institutions to reach compliance agreements with ed , but some institutions have complained that this potential loss of federal aid is coercive , leading them to enter into such agreements even when they disagree with ed's findings of non - compliance .

at the same time , some critics allege that ed relies too heavily on informal title ix resolutions due to the severe consequences that would attach if the agency suspended or terminated a school's financial aid .

according to this critique , because an educational institution may simply enter into a new compliance agreement with ed if it fails to comply with an existing resolution , these informal agreements are ineffective deterrents that effectively allow schools to violate title ix without incurring significant penalties .

it is also important to note that penalties involving suspension or termination of federal funding have rarely , if ever , occurred in the title ix context .

as a result , several legislative proposals would create new penalties , including fines , under title ix .

recently , at least two legislators have raised questions about ed's legal authority to issue title ix guidance related to sexual violence at institutions of higher education .

specifically , senator lankford alleged in a letter to ed that , among other things , the agency's sexual violence guidance does not merely offer an interpretation of title ix , but rather functions as a legally binding regulation would and therefore should have been promulgated in accordance with the procedures established under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

federal agencies are generally responsible for implementing , interpreting , and enforcing the statutes that they administer .

thus , ed has the initial duty to determine how to apply the statutes under its jurisdiction .

typically , an agency communicates its interpretation regarding a statute's implementation via regulations and informal agency guidance .

although regulations are legally binding , informal guidance is not .

rather , such guidance aids agencies in establishing consistent policies and enforcement priorities , as well as in informing affected parties of the agency's current thinking about how such parties can comply with the law in question .

although agency use of guidance documents is common practice , some critics argue that agencies use guidance documents to effectively change the law or expand the scope of their delegated regulatory authority .

in general , the apa imposes various procedural requirements when agencies issue rules , subject to several exceptions .

while "legislative" or "substantive" rules that bind the public or an agency must comply with these procedural requirements , "interpretive rules" and "general statements of policy," often known as guidance documents or "nonlegislative rules" are exempt from these strictures .

if , however , there is disagreement with an agency's interpretation or enforcement of the statute , an affected party can challenge the agency's action in court .

in the event of a legal challenge , the amount of deference that an agency interpretation of its own statute will receive from a reviewing court "has been understood to vary with the circumstances. .

although courts will generally defer to an agency's interpretation of an ambiguous statute , such deference is warranted only in instances where that interpretation was formally established via notice - and - comment rulemaking , agency adjudications , or other agency actions that have the force of law .

where an interpretation is presented informally , a lesser form of deference will generally apply .

indeed , in skidmore v. swift & co . , the supreme court held that the deference granted to an agency's informal interpretation "will depend upon the thoroughness evident in its consideration , the validity of its reasoning , its consistency with earlier and later pronouncements , and all those factors which give it power to persuade , if lacking power to control. .

absent a definitive judicial ruling on the subject , it is currently unclear whether ed's sexual violence guidance constitutes informal agency guidance that would be exempt from the apa's procedural requirements and subject to a lesser degree of judicial deference in the event of a legal challenge .

however , in response to senator lankford's letter , ocr asserted that , although ed "does not view such guidance to have the force and effect of law," the guidance reflects the agency's interpretation of the title ix statute and regulations .

indeed , under title ix , federal funding recipients have a duty to prevent and remedy all aspects of sex discrimination .

many of the detailed requirements in ed's guidance appear to have evolved from this basic obligation .

it is also important to note that in many instances , ed's guidance appears to be informed by case law .

in other words , rather than being derived from statute , many of the title ix requirements contained in ed's sexual violence guidance are derived instead from judicial decisions involving challenges under these laws , and federal funding recipients who wish to avoid liability under these statutes would be well advised to take these rulings into account .

thus , ed typically incorporates this case law into its guidance documents at least in part to inform affected parties about these non - statutory legal obligations .

ultimately , ed's guidance , which reminds federal funding recipients of their obligation to comply with these civil rights statutes , generally appears to be based on current law , but a final decision regarding any enforcement action that ed might take pursuant to this guidance — or whether the guidance itself complies with the apa — would be up to a reviewing court .

appendix a. clery act data and enforcement this appendix includes data on the number of reported crimes under the clery act , and a list of ihes that received final program review determinations in response to claims of a violation of the clery act .

 ( see " overview of the clery act " for more information. ) .

clery act data as previously noted , ihes must submit data on reported campus crimes to ed annually .

ed publishes these data via the campus safety and security data analysis cutting tool .

the tool is searchable by individual or groups of institutions ; and by state , enrollment , type of institution ( eg , public , four - year ) , and instructional program .

it also allows users to limit by year and category ( eg , hate crimes on campus in 2012 , non - campus arrests in 2011 , etc. ) .

table a - 1 includes the number of selected crimes ( related to sexual violence ) reported to ihes that , in turn , were reported to ed under the provisions of the clery act in 2014 .

some analysts have questioned the reliability of clery act data .

these issues are discussed at greater length in " reliability of clery statistics . .

final program review determinations under the clery act table a - 2 lists ihes that received a final program review determination in response to claims of a violation of the clery act , by year .

appendix b. ocr title ix enforcement data there are limited data regarding ocr's enforcement efforts with respect to sexual violence .

as a preliminary matter , it is important to note that ocr has enforcement duties under multiple civil rights statutes , meaning that title ix enforcement constitutes only a portion of the agency's portfolio .

in addition , ocr's responsibility to enforce title ix extends beyond sexual violence to encompass all forms of sex discrimination in education .

according to the most recent data published by ed , over a period of two years ( fy2013-14 ) , ocr "received over 5,800 title ix - related complaints and launched 20 systemic , proactive investigations.... " of the 5,845 title ix complaints , 854 were related to sexual harassment and sexual violence .

the figures do not indicate whether these complaints of wrongdoing occurred in the elementary and secondary education context or in the higher education setting , nor is a precise breakdown by institution or complaint type available for the investigations begun during this period .

however , ed did report that ocr resolved 90 sexual violence - related title ix investigations , including 25 that resulted in resolution agreements , during the two - year period covered by the report .

overall , the number of title ix sexual violence complaints that ocr received represented 9% of the total number of civil rights complaints that ocr received in fy2013-fy2014 , and the number of sexual violence compliance reviews represented 19% of the total number of civil rights compliance reviews that ocr conducted during this period .

although a comprehensive source of more recent data does not appear to be publicly available , ed has indicated that the number of audits and investigations related to sexual violence has increased in the years since the agency released its 2011 guidance .

reportedly , ocr received 11 sexual violence complaints in fy2009 , a figure that increased to 30 in fy2013 .

ed has also publicly released information regarding institutions currently under investigation for violating title ix's prohibition against sexual violence .

according to ed , as of may 1 , 2014 , 55 institutions of higher education were under investigation for title ix violations involving sexual violence .

that figure had reportedly risen to 221 cases of sexual violence under investigation at 175 ihes as of april 6 , 2016 .

meanwhile , data regarding the duration and outcome of title ix investigations do not appear to be publicly available , although it does appear that the length of such investigations may vary widely depending on a number of considerations , including the complexity of the allegations , the cooperation of the parties , and other factors .

according to one analysis of title ix sexual harassment complaints filed with ocr between 2003 and 2013 , ed dismissed or closed the majority of the complaints it received .

ed may opt to make the results of its investigation and any resolution agreement that might result available online .

appendix c. selected related federal programs and activities although the main focus of this crs report is on department of education laws and policies governing ihe response to sexual violence — and on legislative efforts to improve those laws and policies — the departments of justice and health and human services administer relevant programs designed to address sexual violence .

some of these programs are included herein in order to provide background for ed's activities , as well as broad context for bills introduced in the 114 th congress .

campus program .

this doj , office on violence against women ( ovw ) program provides grants to ihes to adopt comprehensive response to sexual assault , domestic violence , dating violence , and stalking .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) provided $20.0 million for these activities in fy2016 .

ovw's fy2017 congressional budget justification states that grantees reported serving an average of 850 victims during each six - month period in 2014 .

the most frequently provided services were victim advocacy , crisis intervention , counseling and support groups , academic advocacy , and legal advocacy .

grantees reported providing 794 trainings during the year , mostly to student affairs staff , educators , and peer educators .

additionally , grantees reported convening 1,538 events to educate incoming students about preventing sexual and domestic violence .

for fy2016 , ovw reports that it estimates it will issue 45 awards ( out of 242 applicants ) .

rape prevention and education ( rpe ) program .

the purpose of this cdc program is to strengthen sexual violence prevention efforts at the state , local , and national level .

according to the cdc's fy2017 congressional budget justification , the rpe program supports implementation of proven , culturally relevant rape prevention and education activities .

in fy 2014 , cdc began a five - year cooperative agreement cycle for all 50 states , washington , d.c. , and four territories .

award amounts were determined based on population after providing base funding of $150,000 per state or $35,000 per territory .

grantees use cdc funding to operate state and community hotlines , implement statewide sexual violence prevention plans , and address local needs .

campus sexual violence has been a focus of rpe program activities .

the program received $44.4 million in funding in fy2016 .

