research on former foster youth is limited and most of the studies on outcomes for these youth face methodological challenges .

for example , they include brief follow - up periods ; have low response rates , non - representative samples , and small sample sizes ; and do not follow youth prior to exit from foster care .

few studies include comparison groups to gauge how well these youth are transitioning to adulthood in relation to their peers in the foster care population or general population .

however , two studies — the northwest foster care alumni study and the midwest evaluation of the adult functioning of former foster youth — have tracked outcomes for a sample of youth across several domains , either prospectively ( following youth in care and as they age out and beyond ) or retrospectively ( examining current outcomes for young adults who were in care at least a few years ago ) , and compared these outcomes to other groups of youth , either those who aged out and / or youth in the general population .

nonetheless , these studies focus only on youth who were in foster care in four states .

the 1999 law ( p.l .

106-169 ) authorizing the chafee foster care independence program ( cfcip ) required that hhs develop a data system to capture the characteristics and experiences of certain current and former foster youth across the country .

the law directed the department of health and human services ( hhs ) to consult with state and local public officials responsible for administering independent living and other child welfare programs , child welfare advocates , members of congress , youth service providers , and researchers to ( 1 ) "develop outcome measures ( including measures of educational attainment , high school diploma , avoidance of dependency , homelessness , non - marital childbirth , incarceration , and high risk behaviors ) that can be used to assess the performances of states in operating independent living programs" ; and ( 2 ) identify the data needed to track the number and characteristics of children receiving independent living services , the type of services provided , and state performance on the measures .

in response to these requirements , hhs created the national youth in transition database ( nytd ) .

the final rule establishing the nytd became effective april 28 , 2008 , and it required states to report data to hhs on youth beginning in fy2011 .

this report provides summary and detailed data for fy2011 through fy2013 .

hhs uses nytd to engage in two data reporting activities .

first , states report information twice each fiscal year on eligible youth who currently receive independent living services regardless of whether they continue to remain in foster care , were in foster care in another state , or received child welfare services through an indian tribe or privately operated foster care program .

these youth are known as served youth .

independent living services refer to the supports that youth receive — such as academic assistance and career preparation services — to assist them as they transition to adulthood .

second , states report information on foster youth on or about their 17 th birthday , two years later on or about their 19 th birthday , and again on or about their 21 st birthday .

in this second group , foster youth at age 17 are known as the baseline youth , and at ages 19 and 21 they are known as the follow - up youth ( and are also referred to as tracked youth in this report ) .

these current and former foster youth are tracked regardless of whether they receive independent living services at ages 17 , 19 , and 21 .

states may track a sample of youth who participated in the outcomes collection at age 17 to reduce the data collection burden .

information is to be collected on a new group of foster youth at age 17 every three years .

 table 1 includes an overview of data on the served youth who received an independent living service and the type of services they received for each of fy2011 through fy2013 .

the number of youth receiving an independent living service in each of those years ranged from about 97,500 to nearly 102,000 .

across all three years , youth were 18 years old , on average , and more than half were female ( 51% to 52% ) .

the largest share of youth were white ( 41% - 42% ) followed by black ( 29% - 31% ) and hispanic youth ( 19% ) .

about 7 out of 10 youth were in foster care when they reported receiving a service .

youth generally had less than a 12 th grade level of education , and about one out of five received special education instruction during a given fiscal year .

in addition , nearly one out of five had been adjudicated delinquent , meaning that a court has found the youth guilty of committing a delinquent act .

among the most frequently received services in most of the three years were academic support to assist the youth with completing high school or obtaining a general equivalency degree ( ged ) , such as academic counseling and literacy training ; career preparation services that focus on developing a youth's ability to find , apply for , and retain appropriate employment , including vocational and career assessments and job seeking and job placement support ; and an independent living needs assessment to identify the youth's basic skills , emotional and social capabilities , strengths , and needs to match the youth with appropriate independent living services ( see figure 1 ) .

about 60% of youth received three or more independent living services .

 table 2 summarizes the characteristics and outcomes of the 19-year - old follow - up youth in fy2013 .

these youth — part of the follow - up population — were initially surveyed in fy2011 ( at "baseline" ) when they were 17 years of age .

the table displays information for the entire surveyed group of 19-year - olds ( youth overall ) as well as four sub - categories of these youth: those who were in foster care and those who were not , and those who had received at least one independent living service and those who had not .

these categories are not mutually exclusive .

most of the 19-year - old youth who were in foster care also received at least one independent living service .

therefore , the data for these two groups are similar .

in total , 7,536 youth participated in the survey at age 19 ( this is compared to 15,597 who participated at age 17 ) .

those who did not participate had declined to participate , were considered to be on runaway or missing status ; could not be otherwise located ; were incapacitated or incarcerated ; or were deceased .

figure 2 includes data on selected outcomes for youth in foster care and those who are no longer in foster care .

slightly more than half of the 19-year - old youth participants were male .

the largest share of youth were white ( 42% ) , followed by black ( 31% ) and hispanic ( 19% ) youth .

youth were asked about their outcomes across six areas — financial self - sufficiency , educational ( academic or vocational ) training , positive connections with adults , homelessness , high - risk behaviors , and access to health insurance .

about one - third of youth were working full - time and / or part - time at age 19 ; however , youth in foster care were more likely to be working part - time and youth not in foster care or not receiving any independent living service were slightly more likely to be working full - time .

approximately 30% of youth had completed an apprenticeship , internship , or other type of on - the - job training in the past year .

 ( for comparison , approximately 13% of these youth were working full - time and / or part - time and 20% had completed employment - related skills training when they were surveyed at age 17 ) .

the 19-year - old youth were about equally likely to receive social security benefits , either supplemental security income ( ssi ) or social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) ( 12% to 14% ) , regardless of foster care status or receipt of independent living services .

 ( about the same share of these youth was receiving social security at age 17. ) .

youth not receiving any independent living services were slightly less likely to report receiving other ongoing financial support ( 11% versus 13% - 17% ) .

youth who were in foster care at age 19 did not qualify for public supports such as financial assistance , food assistance , and public housing .

the other groups of 19-year - old youth — those not in care , those receiving at least one independent living service ( and not in care ) , and youth not receiving any independent living services ( and not in care ) — were equally likely to receive such public supports .

overall , youth were most likely to have a high school diploma ( 56% ) or its equivalent .

educational outcomes were notably distinct for follow - up youth at age 19 depending on whether or not they were in foster care or whether they received an independent living service .

youth who were in foster care at age 19 and / or who received at least one independent living service were also slightly more likely to have a high school diploma or equivalent than those youth who were not in care or had not received at least one independent living service ( 58% - 60% versus 52% - 53% ) .

overall , 54% of youth were enrolled in school at age 19 , which could include high school , college , or vocational school .

among youth in foster care , 70% were currently enrolled .

this is compared to 44% - 62% of youth in the other three subgroups ( youth not in care , youth receiving at least one independent living service , and youth not receiving at least one such service ) .

 ( also for comparison , when these youth were age 17 , almost all ( 93% ) were attending school and 8% had obtained a high school diploma or its equivalent. ) .

almost all youth at age 19 — regardless of foster care status or receipt of independent living services — said that they had a positive connection to an adult who could serve in a mentoring or substitute parent role , including a relative , former foster parent , birth parent , or older member of the community .

 ( nearly all youth had reported the same when they were surveyed at age 17. ) .

most of the 19-year - old youth had not experienced homelessness in their lifetime , and youth in foster care were much less likely to report being homeless than the other groups ( 11% versus 18% - 24% ) .

 ( this is compared to 16% of youth overall when they were surveyed at age 17. ) .

youth in care at age 19 were also less likely to report having been incarcerated ( 14% versus 20% - 29% ) .

about the same share of youth ( 13% - 17% ) self - referred or were referred for an alcohol or drug abuse assessment or counseling during the fiscal year , regardless of foster care or independent living status .

youth in care and / or receiving at least one independent living service were slightly less likely to report that they had ever given birth to , or fathered , any children ( 9% - 10% versus 13% - 14% ) .

in general , nearly 9 out of 10 youth had medicaid or some other health insurance at age 19 ( about the same share of youth had health insurance coverage at age 17 ) .

youth in care and / or youth receiving at least one independent living service were more likely to report having health insurance ( 95% - 99% ) , compared to youth not in care nor receiving independent living services ( 74% - 88% ) .

most youth in care or receiving at least one independent living service received medicaid coverage ( 81% - 85% ) .

about the same share of youth ( 14% to 17% ) , regardless of foster care status or their receipt of independent living services , had other health insurance .

among youth who had health insurance , youth receiving at least one independent living service and / or not in foster care were slightly more likely than youth in foster care and / or not receiving any independent living services to have insurance coverage for at least some prescription drugs ( 77% - 78% versus 70% - 72% ) .

