section 420 of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , hereinafter the stafford act ) authorizes the president to "declare" a fire management assistance grant ( fmag ) .

the current fmag system was established by regulation in october of 2001 .

these grants provide federal assistance for fire suppression activities .

this authority has been delegated to the federal emergency management agency's ( fema's ) regional administrators .

once issued , the fmag declaration authorizes various forms of federal assistance such as the provision of equipment , personnel , and grants to state , local , and tribal governments for the control , management , and mitigation of any fire on certain public or private forest land or grassland that might become a major disaster .

this federal assistance requires a cost - sharing component such that state , local , and tribal governments are responsible for 25% of the expenses .

this report discusses the most frequently asked questions received by the congressional research service on fmags .

it addresses questions regarding how fmags are requested , how requests are evaluated using thresholds , and the types of assistance provided under an fmag declaration .

fema assistance through fmags is a direct relationship with the states to assist the state in fighting the fire on state lands .

fmags are employed so a disaster declaration may not be necessary .

the forest service and other federal agencies do provide other types of assistance related to wildfire management , such as postfire recovery assistance , or assistance planning and mitigating the potential risk from future wildfires .

most of these programs provide financial and technical assistance to state partners .

in addition , other usda agencies administer various other programs to provide disaster recovery assistance to nonfederal forest landowners , including the emergency forest restoration program and the emergency watershed program .

this depends on the type of assistance being provided by the forest service .

fmag assistance is not generally available in conjunction with emergency suppression assistance from the forest service , or any other federal agency engaged in suppression operations .

fmags provide assistance for suppression operations on nonfederal lands , whereas suppression operations on federal lands are the responsibility of the federal agency with jurisdiction .

limited exceptions may occur for declared fires on lands in which the ownership is comingled federal and nonfederal , and the costs incurred by the eligible entity are not entitled to any other type of federal reimbursement .

however , fmags may be provided in conjunction with other forest service assistance programs , such as any technical and financial assistance provided through the agency's state and volunteer fire assistance programs or state and private forestry office .

fmag and other federal assistance may potentially occur in conjunction when there is a cooperative agreement between federal , state , and other governmental or tribal partners to coordinate emergency wildfire protection and response activities .

the cooperative agreement often delineates different geographic areas where the state government is responsible for initial suppression operations , regardless of land ownership , and vice versa , where the federal government may be responsible for providing suppression operations in lands under nonfederal ownership .

the cooperative agreements ( sometimes referred to as "fire compacts" ) specify how costs are to be apportioned among the partners , including provisions allowing for reimbursement , in accordance with applicable federal and state statutes .

in the circumstance where a state ( or other eligible entity ) conducted suppression operations on federal land and the costs were not reimbursable , an fmag may potentially be applied for and used to cover eligible costs .

no , most fires that begin on federal land are the responsibility of the federal agency that owns or manages the land , and are not eligible to receive fmag assistance .

there are some exceptions , however .

for example , fmags may be available to assist with declared fires that occur in areas with a mix of federal and nonfederal land , if the state has a responsibility for suppression activities under a cooperative agreement with the applicable federal agency , and those costs are not reimbursable under another federal statute .

