t he u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) ensures the safety of all food except for meat , poultry , and certain egg products over which the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) has regulatory oversight .

under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , the fda has the authority to regulate the manufacturing , processing , and labeling of food , with the primary goal of promoting food safety .

congress has granted the fda with the authority to take both administrative and judicial enforcement actions .

the agency initiates and carries out administrative enforcement actions while judicial enforcement actions , including seizures and injunctions , require some type of involvement by the courts .

additionally , administrative enforcement actions , such as inspections and warning letters , tend to precede any judicial enforcement action .

the food safety modernization act ( fsma ) expanded the fda's enforcement authority with new and broader measures .

the fda's implementation of fsma and related delays in the rulemaking process , in addition to general oversight of fsma's new food safety provisions , are of continuing interest to congress .

this report focuses on the fda's statutory authority to initiate the following administrative enforcement actions: inspections , warning letters , recalls , suspension of registration , administrative detention , and related legal issues .

section 301 of the ffdca prohibits the violation of any of the substantive provisions of the act and serves as the basis for the fda's enforcement actions .

under section 301 , "causing" any of the prohibited acts as well as the act itself is prohibited .

the specific enforcement mechanisms available to the agency to enforce the ffdca are found throughout the act .

private citizens do not have the right to sue to enforce the ffdca .

section 310 ( a ) states that "all ... proceedings for the enforcement , or to restrain violations , of this [act] shall be by and in the name of the united states. .

the fda conducts inspections of regulated facilities in order to oversee a firm's compliance with the ffdca and corresponding regulations .

the ffdca grants the agency with the enforcement authority to inspect both facilities and records .

however , courts have generally held that inspections properly executed under the ffdca do not violate the fourth amendment rights against search and seizure of the facility owners .

this section examines the inspection enforcement authority of both facilities and records .

because of fsma's mandate to increase the number of inspections by the fda , this section also discusses the tools and methods used by the agency to target inspection resources effectively and efficiently .

the section concludes by analyzing the fourth amendment protections embedded within this particular enforcement authority .

section 309 of the ffdca permits the fda to decline to institute formal enforcement proceedings for "minor violations of this [act] whenever [the agency] believes that the public interest [would] be adequately served by a suitable written notice or warning. .

these warning letters give recipient firms an opportunity to take voluntary corrective actions before the fda initiates more formal enforcement action .

a warning letter sent by the fda also establishes prior notice and documents prior warning if adequate corrections are not made and further enforcement action is necessary .

the fda may consider issuing a warning letter if the agency has found evidence that a firm or product violates the ffdca and that failure to correct such a violation may lead to the agency's consideration of further formal enforcement action .

the agency may favor a warning letter as a more efficient enforcement option if the agency reasonably expects that the responsible firm or persons would take prompt corrective action after receiving such a letter .

warning letters include two types of correspondence: a regulatory letter and a report of investigation finding .

a regulatory letter warns the violator that formal enforcement is likely in the absence of voluntary compliance .

a report of investigation finding ( also referred to as an information letter ) requests voluntary correction by the addressee .

both methods of communication are informal and advisory .

an fda warning letter typically is labeled as such and includes the dates of the inspection during which the agency discovered the statutory violation ( s ) .

the letter would also request the recipient to institute corrective action ( s ) and to return a written response to the agency's warning letter .

the fda generally includes a warning in the letter that failure to correct the violation promptly may result in additional enforcement action .

fda warning letters are informal and advisory .

a warning letter may communicate the fda's position on a certain issue but does not commit the agency to taking any further enforcement action .

thus , the fda has concluded that a warning letter does not qualify as a final agency action subject to judicial review under the administrative procedure act .

courts generally agree with this interpretation of the legal status of warning letters .

in holistic candlers and consumers ass'n v. fda , the d.c .

circuit found that the agency's warning letters requesting that the addressee take prompt action to correct certain ffdca product violations did not qualify as final agency action , and thus could not serve as the basis for the addressee's legal claim against the agency .

the d.c .

circuit further articulated that in order for any agency action to be "final" the action must mark the beginning of the agency's decision - making process , and that the action must be one from which "legal consequences will flow. .

according to the court , an fda warning letter is not final because it provides firms with an opportunity to take voluntary corrective action before the fda decides to initiate any enforcement action .

additionally , the court concluded that "legal consequences" cannot arise from warning letters due to their informal and advisory nature .

similarly , the ninth circuit in biotics research corp. v. heckler emphasized the point that fda regulatory letters do not constitute final administrative determinations subject to judicial review due to the absence of any commitment on behalf of the fda to follow the correspondence with additional enforcement actions .

the recall process permits the fda to enforce the adulteration and misbranding provisions of the ffdca by encouraging industry participants to remove the product and correct the violation .

this section addresses this fda recall enforcement authority by first analyzing the various triggers of the recall process and then by examining the fda recall process itself .

this section concludes with an analysis of the due process concerns related to the mandatory recall enforcement authority .

the ffdca requires all food facilities to register with the fda and to renew such registration biennially so that the agency may effectively oversee all areas of food production .

to register , facilities must submit the following information to the fda: the name ( including trade names ) , address , and phone number of the facility , and the food product categories associated with that facility .

all food facilities that manufacture , process , pack , or hold food for consumption in the united states must complete this registration process .

however , fda regulations exempt foreign facilities , where the food from such facility undergoes further manufacturing or processing by another facility outside the united states .

farms , retail food establishments , restaurants , and meat and egg facilities that are regulated exclusively by the usda are also exempted from these requirements .

the ffdca authorizes the fda to suspend the registration of a food facility to enforce the public health and safety provisions of the act .

if the fda determines that a food manufactured , processed , packed , received , or held by a facility has a reasonable probability of causing serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or animals , the agency may suspend the registration of a facility that created , caused , or was otherwise responsible .

the agency may also order a registration suspension of a facility that knew of or had reason to know of such reasonable probability of harm and packed , received , or held such food .

with its registration suspended , a facility cannot import or export food into the united states or introduce food into interstate or intrastate commerce in the united states .

any distribution of food products from such facility violates the ffdca and may lead to the fda taking further enforcement action .

food facility registration and the suspension of such registration enable the agency to determine the location and source of an outbreak of food - borne illnesses and thus notify facilities that may be affected quickly and efficiently .

similar to other enforcement actions , the suspension provision in the ffdca offers due process protections for a facility subject to a registration suspension .

the fda must provide a registrant with the opportunity for an informal hearing no less than two business days after issuing a suspension order .

the hearing gives the registrant an opportunity to present reasons for reinstating the registration .

if at the hearing , the fda determines that a suspension is necessary , the registrant must then submit a corrective action plan to the agency .

the fda will reinstate a registration if the agency determines , based on the evidence presented at the hearing , that adequate grounds do not exist to continue the suspension of the registration .

when the fda determines that adequate grounds do not exist to continue the suspension , the fda will then vacate the order suspending the facility's registration and reinstate the registration for that particular facility .

under section 304 of the ffdca , a designated fda employee may order the detention of any article of food that is found during an fda inspection if the employee has reason to believe that such article is adulterated or misbranded .

under this administrative detention authority , fda may prevent holders of illegal articles from moving the food before a federal district court issues a warrant permitting the agency to seize the food .

this enforcement authority also permits the agency to prevent consumption of the illegal articles in an effort to ensure public safety .

the fda may detain the food under an administrative detention for a reasonable period , generally measured by the time necessary to institute a seizure action .

the ffdca states that such period cannot exceed 30 days .

any person , who is entitled to claim the article , may file an appeal of the detention order .

the claimant must file the appeal within two calendar days upon receipt of the detention order for perishable food and within four calendar days upon receipt of the detention order for nonperishable food .

upon such appeal , the fda must then grant the claimant the opportunity for an informal hearing .

at the informal hearing , the agency can either terminate or confirm the order , which serves as a final agency action .

generally , federal courts lack jurisdiction over agency actions committed under the agency's discretion as granted by law , including , for example , most of the statutory enforcement authorities discussed in this report .

however , a federal court may exercise judicial review of an agency's activities , if such an activity is a final agency action ; the party subject to the agency action has exhausted the procedures provided by the agency ; and no other remedies at law are present .

therefore , the agency's termination or confirmation of an administrative detention order may be subject to judicial review .

