t here is growing attention to elder abuse as a public policy issue in the united states .

while the extent of such abuse is largely unknown , there is some indication that the problem is serious and that many incidents of abuse are never reported .

a 2010 study of the extent of elder abuse in the united states found that 11% of individuals ages 60 and older who reside in the community reported some type of abuse in the past year .

another 2008 study found that 9% of community - residing older adults ages 57 to 85 reported verbal mistreatment ; 3.5% reported financial mistreatment ; and 0.2% reported physical mistreatment by a family member in the past year .

yet , studies such as these are likely to underestimate the full extent of elder abuse as they do not include all categories of abuse , exclude individuals who reside in institutional settings such as nursing facilities , and generally exclude individuals with significant cognitive impairment ( for more information see text box "what is elder abuse ? " ) .

in addition , incidents of elder abuse may go unreported as older individuals can be reluctant to report abuse by an individual they also rely upon for their personal care and well - being .

moreover , a number of studies have associated physical and mental health problems among victims of elder abuse as well as inadequate social supports that , if present , may assist individuals in prevention , detection , and treatment .

elder abuse is a complex issue that often requires a multifaceted policy response which combines public health initiatives , social services programs , and criminal law enforcement for abusive behavior .

to address this complexity , the elder justice act was enacted on march 23 , 2010 , as part of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

it attempts to provide a coordinated federal response by emphasizing various public health and social service approaches to the prevention , detection , and treatment of elder abuse .

it also represents congress's first attempt at comprehensive legislation to address abuse , neglect , and exploitation of the elderly at the federal level .

enactment of the elder justice act places the issue of elder abuse on par with similar legislation congress has enacted with respect to child abuse and neglect , under the child abuse prevention and treatment act , and domestic violence , under the violence against women act .

similar to other newly authorized grant programs under the aca , implementation of new grants and activities under the elder justice act has been hampered by the lack of federal discretionary spending for authorized activities , which is subject to the annual appropriations process .

agency implementation of some elder justice programs and activities has moved forward with limited funding .

however , a coordinated federal response to the issue as envisioned by the elder justice act has been challenging ; in part due to actions congress has taken since fy2010 to curb federal discretionary spending .

the extent of elder abuse has the potential to grow in scope as the older population continues to increase in size , and individuals live longer post - retirement .

in 2015 , an estimated 14.9% of the total u.s. population was age 65 and older ; more than one in every seven americans .

by 2030 , the census projects that one in every five , or 20.6% of the u.s. population , will be age 65 or older .

thus , congress will likely have a continued interest in shaping the federal role and response to elder abuse going forward .

this report provides a brief legislative history of the elder justice act , summarizes elder justice provisions enacted as part of aca and any administrative efforts related to implementation and funding .

the report then describes several issues for congress with respect to the act's reauthorization .

congressional interest in the issue of elder abuse spans more than a quarter of a century with numerous hearings and reports concerning the need for a federal response to abuse , neglect , and exploitation of the elderly .

prior to enactment of the elder justice act as part of the aca , congress took a number of steps towards addressing elder abuse , including authorizing federal assistance to state adult protective services ( aps ) programs through the social services block grant ( ssbg ) program and amendments to the older americans act ( oaa ) to provide separate funding for elder abuse prevention and vulnerable elder rights protection activities , including establishment of the long - term care ombudsman program ( ltcop ) .

provisions regarding elder justice were also incorporated in the oaa reauthorization of 2006 ( p.l .

109-365 ) .

in 2002 , the 107 th congress first introduced the elder justice act ( s. 2933 ) by then senator john breaux .

after that , elder justice act legislation was re - introduced in subsequent congresses with senate finance committee action on bills in the 108 th , 109 th , and 110 th congresses .

in the 111 th congress , senator orrin hatch introduced the elder justice act of 2009 ( s. 795 ) which addressed public health and social services approaches to the issue .

a separate bill ( h.r .

2006 ) was introduced in the house by representative peter t. king , which , in addition to the public health and social services provisions also included criminal justice provisions .

the senate bill ( s. 795 ) was incorporated into the senate finance committee's health reform bill ( s. 1796 ) and subsequently adopted in the senate health reform bill ( h.r .

3590 ) which became the aca ( p.l .

111-148 ) .

it is important to note that the elder justice provisions enacted under the aca did not achieve the multidisciplinary approach ( public health , social services , and criminal justice ) fully envisioned in earlier versions of introduced legislation .

enactment of the elder justice act under the aca contains provisions that address certain public health and social services approaches to prevention , detection , and treatment of elder abuse primarily under the department of health and human services ( hhs ) authorities and administration .

it does not include a criminal justice response which would address the prevention , detection , and prosecution of elder abuse crimes under various department of justice ( doj ) authorities and administration .

earlier versions of the elder justice act included such a multidisciplinary approach that incorporated criminal justice provisions .

with enactment of the elder justice act under the aca , criminal justice provisions have been subsequently introduced as separate stand - alone legislation .

in the 114 th congress , these bills included s. 3270 , the elder abuse prevention and prosecution act ; s. 2747 / h.r .

5018 , the elder protection and abuse prevention act ; s. 1663 , the robert matava elder abuse victims act of 2015 ; and h.r .

4963 the elder abuse victims act of 2016 .

in addition , one bill was introduced to reauthorize the elder justice act in the 114 th congress .

the elder justice reauthorization act ( h.r .

988 ) , introduced by representative peter king would have extended the authorization of appropriations under the act through fy2019 .

none of these bills were enacted into law in the 114 th congress .

the elder justice act provisions enacted under the aca authorize entities and programs that address federal coordination of elder abuse and administration of new grant activities , as well as certain protections for residents of long - term care facilities , and other specified studies .

the following describes these provisions in greater detail .

to date , most programs and activities authorized under the elder justice act have not received funding .

for the first time , congress appropriated $4 million for elder justice / adult protective services activities in fy2015 .

another $8 million was appropriated for these activities in fy2016 .

prior to these annual appropriations , the president's budget request in each of fiscal years 2012 through 2014 requested funding for adult protective services grants .

however , congress did not provide discretionary funding for this activity through the annual appropriations process in these years .

despite the lack of discretionary appropriations , in fy2012 and fy2013 some elder justice activities received funds transferred from mandatory appropriations to the prevention and public health fund ( pphf ; see table 1 ) .

under the aca , congress provided the pphf with a permanent annual appropriation .

pphf funds are to be transferred by the hhs secretary for prevention , wellness , and public health activities and are available on october 1 , the beginning of each new fiscal year .

for fy2012 , the hhs secretary transferred $6.0 million to acl from the pphf for new grants to states and tribes to test elder abuse prevention strategies ( authorized under ssa section 2042 and oaa section 751 ) .

acl awarded grants to states , tribal organizations , and for an evaluation of the state grantees under the elder abuse prevention interventions program .

projects included using forensic accountants to prevent elder financial exploitation , increasing medication adherence to prevent elder self - neglect , and developing screening tools to identify elder abuse .

in addition to grants to states , three tribal organizations received grant funding for the development of a multi - disciplinary team to address elder abuse in indian country ; development and testing of culturally appropriate evidence based screening tools ; and culturally appropriate train - the - trainer modules to improve skills on addressing and intervening with elder abuse issues .

for fy2013 , $2.0 million was transferred to acl from the pphf for elder justice activities which funded development of the national adult maltreatment report system ( see text box below ) .

no pphf or other funds were transferred to acl for elder justice activities for fy2014 or subsequent fiscal years .

to further assist state aps programs , acl has also established the national adult protective services technical assistance resource center ( aps tarc ) as well as voluntary consensus guidelines for state aps systems .

these initiatives provide some assistance to states in developing efficient and effective state aps programs .

in addition , in fy2015 and fy2016 funding was awarded to 24 state grantees to address innovations and improvements in the practice , services , data collection , and reporting under the state grants to enhance adult protective services demonstration grant program .

in fy2016 , acl established the elder justice innovation grants program , which funded eight competitive grants to various entities ( eg , higher education institutions , non - profit organizations , local government entities ) to increase knowledge about effective ways to address prevention or intervention of abuse , neglect , and exploitation of older adults .

grants were awarded for forensic center innovation , to address abuse in indian country , to address abuse in guardianship , and to understand self - neglect .

for fy2017 , the president's budget requested $10 million in discretionary funding for elder justice / adult protective services , which would be used to fund implementation of a nationwide adult protective services data system , research , and evaluation activities .

the 2017 budget request did not specify an intended transfer of funding from the pphf to acl for elder justice activities .

for fy2017 , the senate appropriations committee recommended $10.0 million for the elder justice initiative in its fy2017 departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( lhhs ) appropriations bill .

the house appropriations committee recommended $8.0 million in its fy2017 lhhs appropriations bill .

neither house nor senate floor consideration of the bill occurred in the 114 th congress .

since the start of the fiscal year ( october 1 , 2016 ) , funding for lhhs programs and activities has been provided by two continuing resolutions ( cr ; p.l .

114-223 and p.l .

114-254 ) .

the second fy2017 cr provides continuing appropriations for lhhs appropriations through april 28 , 2017 , or until full year appropriations are enacted .

the aca created several new discretionary programs , including those authorized under the elder justice act , and provided for each an authorization of appropriations .

most elder justice programs and activities have yet to receive funding through the annual congressional appropriations process limiting the administration's response to implementation .

it is also anticipated that the 115 th congress will consider legislation to change the aca .

while opposition to the law has primarily focused on changes to the private health insurance market and the expansion of the medicaid program , the aca included other health - related provisions such as those enacted under the elder justice act .

a broad repeal of the law could have a wide range of effects on the health care system , including eliminating federal authority to address prevention , detection , and treatment for elder abuse .

in addition , the authorizations of appropriations for most elder justice act provisions expired on september 30 , 2014 ( see table a - 1 of appendix a for information on specific elder justice act authorizations of appropriations ) .

in the 114 th congress , representative peter king introduced the elder justice reauthorization act ( h.r .

988 ) , which would have extended the authorizations of appropriations under the act through fy2019 .

the bill was referred to the house ways and means , energy and commerce , judiciary , and education and the workforce committees and saw no further action .

in considering reauthorization of the elder justice act , congress faces a decision whether or not to extend the authorizations of appropriations associated with existing programs and activities .

some policymakers may consider new language to modify or delete existing authorities as well as authorize new programs or activities .

congress may also want to consider the relationship between elder justice act authorities and other similar or related authorities in other statutes .

for example , the oaa establishes the ltc ombudsman program , administered by aoa within acl .

the elder justice act authorizes grants under the social security act to improve capacity and provide assistance to state ltc ombudsman programs as well as provide training to ombudsman .

as authorized these programs have different committees of jurisdiction responsible for program authorization and oversight .

in the context of these actions , policymakers may look to existing state and federal administrative activities for areas of continued legislative emphasis .

a discussion of selected issues follows .

the elder justice act represents one set of policies that exist in the broader context of domestic social policy to address the complex issue that is elder abuse .

that is , as a federal legislative response , the elder justice act may best serve as a catalyst for further federal coordination and action that can bring about greater public awareness and attention to the needs of a growing , and potentially vulnerable , aging population .

according to gao , the elder justice act "provides a vehicle for setting national priorities and establishing a comprehensive , multidisciplinary elder justice system in this country. .

such a response touches on a range of domestic policy programs and issues that are not specific to one congressional committee's jurisdiction or area of expertise .

furthermore , congressional oversight into federal administration , implementation , and related activities must rely on different committees of jurisdiction as well as the experience of select committees such as the senate special committee on aging .

according to subject matter experts , elder abuse is not an easy problem to address as it is a complex cluster of distinct but related phenomena involving health , legal , social service , financial , public safety , aging , disability , protective services , and victim services , aging services , policy , research , education , and human rights issues .

it therefore requires a coordinated multidisciplinary , multi - agency , and multi - system response .

achieving such a response will likely require congressional interest in overseeing the range of elder justice programs and activities that currently exist across federal agencies .

in addition , further research may assist policymakers to address areas where service delivery is either fragmented or lacks sufficient resources , or both .

according to stakeholders , there are numerous challenges in responding to elder abuse , including lack of coordination , data , and resources .

addressing these challenges could assist in developing an informed strategic and coordinated federal response .

appendix a .

elder justice act: authorizations of appropriations table a - 1 provides a section - by - section list of those elder justice act provisions with an authorization of appropriations .

appendix b .

elder justice resources the resources below provide further information on elder justice issues .

national center on elder abuse ( u.s. administration on aging ) https: / / ncea.acl.gov / the national center on elder abuse ( ncea ) compiles and publishes resources for policymakers , consumers , researchers , and social service , justice , and health care workers on elder abuse and neglect .

the website includes frequently asked questions and research briefs on topics such as the mistreatment of lgbt elders and the abuse of people with dementia .

state resources ( national center on elder abuse ) https: / / ncea.acl.gov / resources / state.html a directory of state hotlines and agencies for reporting suspected elder abuse , neglect , or exploitation .

if the situation is serious , threatening , or dangerous , constituents should call 911 or the local police for immediate help .

this directory also lists state laws , agencies , and statistics related to elder abuse and neglect .

elder abuse ( centers for disease control and prevention ) http: / / www.cdc.gov / violenceprevention / elderabuse / includes statistics , prevention strategies for practitioners , and the consumer fact sheet "understanding elder abuse. .

elder justice initiative ( u.s. department of justice ) http: / / www.justice.gov / elderjustice / a collection of elder justice resources for victims and families ( including a state and local directory for reporting elder abuse ) , prosecutors ( including sample federal pleadings and corporate integrity agreements , state pleadings , and elder justice statutes ) , and researchers ( including a bibliographic database of elder justice article summaries ) .

consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) http: / / www.consumerfinance.gov / provides consumer tools , education resources , data , and other research to protect consumers in the financial marketplace , and includes information for older americans and prevention of financial exploitation .

key issues: elder abuse ( u.s. government accountability office ) http: / / www.gao.gov / key_issues / elder_abuse / issue_summary a summary of types of elder abuse , and diagrams of federal agency missions and responsibilities to combat elder financial exploitation .

click the "key reports" tab for gao reports on elder justice issues .

participating federal departments and agencies : mission statements and agency activities relevant to elder justice ( elder justice interagency working group , may 2013 ) https: / / aoa.acl.gov / aoa_programs / elder_rights / ejcc / docs / agencydescriptions.pdf describes federal elder justice programs , initiatives , web pages , and other activities within the u.s. department of health and human services , the u.s. department of justice , the consumer financial protection bureau , the federal trade commission , the social security administration , the u.s. department of housing and urban development , the u.s. department of the treasury , the u.s .

postal inspection service , and the u.s. securities and exchange commission .

statute compilations ( u.s. house of representatives , office of the legislative counsel ) http: / / legcounsel.house.gov / holc / resources / comps_alpha.html the statutory text of the elder justice act appears at title vi , subtitle h , sections 6701 through 6703 of the patient protection and affordable care act , which is listed under "p" on this web page .

