since november 1986 , the commemorative works act ( cwa ) has provided the legal framework for the placement of commemorative works in the district of columbia .

the cwa was enacted to establish a statutory process for ensuring "that future commemorative works in areas administered by the national park service ( nps ) and the general services administration ( gsa ) in the district of columbia and its environs ( 1 ) are appropriately designed , constructed , and located and ( 2 ) reflect a consensus of the lasting significance of the subjects involved. .

areas administered by other agencies are not subject to the cwa .

responsibility for overseeing the design , construction , and maintenance of such works was delegated to the secretary of the interior or the administrator of the gsa , the national capital planning commission ( ncpc ) , and the u.s. commission of fine arts ( cfa ) .

additionally , the cwa restricts placement of commemorative works to certain areas of the district of columbia based on the subject's historic importance .

pursuant to the cwa , locating a commemorative work on federally owned and administered land in the district of columbia requires the federal government to maintain the memorial unless otherwise stipulated in the enabling legislation .

in some cases , however , authorized memorials are ultimately sited on land that falls outside of cwa jurisdiction and outside the boundaries of the district of columbia and its environs .

for example , the air force memorial was authorized by congress for placement on land owned and administered by either nps or gsa in the district of columbia .

memorial organizers , however , chose a site near the pentagon in arlington , va , that is owned and administered by the department of defense .

consequently , the department of defense , not the nps or gsa , is responsible for maintenance .

this report highlights in - progress works and memorials with lapsed authorizations since the passage of the cwa in 1986 .

the report provides information — located within text boxes for easy reference — on the statute ( s ) authorizing the work ; the sponsor organization ; statutory legislative extensions , if any ; and the memorial's location or proposed location , if known .

a picture or rendering of each work is also included , when available .

the cwa divides areas administered by the nps and the gsa in the district of columbia and its environs into three sections for the placement of memorials: the reserve , area i , and area ii .

for each area , the standards for memorial placement are specified in law , and congressional approval of monument location is required .

of the 37 commemorative works authorized for placement in the district of columbia since 1986 , 19 ( 51% ) have been completed and dedicated , 12 ( 32% ) are in progress , and 6 ( 16% ) have lapsed authorizations .

several factors may affect a memorial foundation's ability to complete a memorial .

these include settling on a desired site location , getting design approval , and raising the funds necessary to design and build a commemorative work .

since the passage of the commemorative works act ( cwa ) in 1986 , congress has authorized 37 commemorative works to be placed in the district of columbia or its environs ; 32 of these have been sited on land governed by the cwa .

of these works , 12 are in progress and 6 have lapsed authorizations .

table 1 lists commemorative works authorized by congress since 1986 that are in progress or whose authorization has lapsed .

currently , 12 commemorative works are in various stages of development .

these include the following: in - progress memorials dwight d. eisenhower memorial ; memorials being designed slaves and free black persons who served in the revolutionary war memorial ; memorials being planned with a site location world war ii prayer plaque , world war i memorial , korean war memorial wall of remembrance , second division memorial modifications , desert storm and desert shield memorial , and peace corps memorial ; memorials being planned and evaluating site locations gold star mothers memorial , john adams and his family's legacy memorial , global war on terrorism memorial , and emergency medical services memorial .

since 1986 , six commemorative works authorized by congress were not completed in the time allowed by the commemorative works act and were not granted subsequent extensions by congress .

these memorials were to be constructed to honor thomas paine , benjamin banneker , frederick douglass , brigadier general francis marion , to create a national peace garden , and to build a vietnam veterans visitor center .

the following section describes the initial authorization for each of these memorials and congressional extensions of memorial authorization , if appropriate .

in june 1987 , congress authorized the director of the national park service to enter into an agreement with the peace garden project to "construct a garden to be known as the 'peace garden' on a site on federal land in the district of columbia to honor the commitment of the people of the united states to world peace. .

in remarks during debate on the bill ( h.r .

191 , 100 th congress ) , representative steny hoyer summarized the need for a memorial to peace: no one or nation can ever doubt the commitment of the american people to protecting our freedoms when threatened by foreign aggressors .

our nation's capital rightfully honors our heroic defenders of freedom — americans who served their country courageously , gallantly , and at great risk to their lives .

our citizens have also exhibited an equal commitment for world peace and international law and justice .

the creation of a peace garden is an appropriate symbol of our efforts to continuing to seek peaceful resolution of world conflict and the institution of the rule of law .

certainly , this century has been one of bloodiest and most violent in man's history .

we have seen countless battles , wars , rebellions , massacres , and civil and international strife of all kinds — continuing examples of man's inhumanity toward his fellow man .

at the same time , against this terrible backdrop , there have been encouraging strides toward world peace .

as we honor those who have made sacrifices in war , through monuments , so , too , should we honor them by striving to ensure that the world they have left us will be a peaceful one .

a garden would be a living monument to our efforts .

in 1988 , a site was approved for the peace garden at hains point in southwest washington , dc .

since its initial authorization in 1987 , the national peace garden was reauthorized twice .

the authorization expired on june 30 , 2002 .

in october 1992 , congress authorized the thomas paine national historical association to establish a memorial to honor revolutionary war patriot thomas paine .

in remarks summarizing the need for a memorial to thomas paine , representative william lacy clay stated: thomas paine's writings were a catalyst of the american revolution .

his insistence upon the right to resist arbitrary rule has inspired oppressed peoples worldwide , just as it continues to inspire us .

it is time that a grateful nation gives him a permanent place of honor in the capital of the country he helped build .

since its initial authorization in 1992 , the authorization for the thomas paine memorial was extended once .

authorization for the memorial expired on december 31 , 2003 .

in november 1998 , congress authorized the washington interdependence council of the district of columbia to establish a memorial to "honor and commemorate the accomplishments of mr. benjamin banneker. .

adopted as part of a larger bill to create a national heritage area in michigan , the authorization for the benjamin banneker memorial passed the house and senate without debate and by voice vote in october .

in 2001 , the national park service reported that the memorial was to be sited on the l'enfant promenade in southwest washington and be under the jurisdiction of the district of columbia .

since its initial authorization , the washington interdependence council has not been granted an extension to its original authorization , which expired in 2005 .

a bill ( s. 3886 ) was introduced in the 111 th congress ( 2009-2010 ) to reauthorize a benjamin banneker memorial .

s. 3886 was referred to the senate committee on energy and natural resources , but no further action was taken .

in november 2000 , congress authorized the frederick douglass gardens , inc. , "to establish a memorial and gardens on lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the secretary of the interior in the district of columbia or its environs in honor and commemoration of frederick douglass. .

during debate , representative james hansen provided a summary of why a memorial to frederick douglass was important: mr. speaker , frederick douglass was one of the most prominent leaders of the 19 th century abolitionist movement .

born into slavery in eastern maryland in 1818 , douglass escaped to the north as a young man where he became a world - renowned defender of human rights and eloquent orator , and later a federal ambassador and advisor to several presidents .

frederick douglass was a powerful voice for human rights during the important period of american history , and is still revered today for his contributions against racial injustice .

early in 2001 , the frederick douglass memorial gardens , inc. , expressed its preference for a site location near the douglass memorial bridge in southeast washington , but no further action was taken by congress to approve the site location .

the frederick douglass memorial's authorization expired in 2008 .

one attempt was made to reauthorize a frederick douglass memorial during the 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) , but the bill was not reported by the house committee on natural resources .

in may 2008 , congress authorized the marion park project to establish a commemorative work to honor brigadier general francis marion .

in testimony before the senate committee on energy and natural resources , subcommittee on national parks , daniel n. wenk , deputy director for operations , national park service , supported the enactment of legislation authorizing a brigadier general francis marion memorial and explained why such a memorial meets criteria for commemoration in the district of columbia .

brigadier general francis marion commanded the williamsburg militia revolutionary force in south carolina and was instrumental in delaying the advance of british forces by leading his troops in disrupting supply lines .

he is credited for inventing and applying innovative battle tactics in this effort , keys to an ultimate victory for the american colonies in the revolutionary war .

additionally brigadier general marion's troops are believed to have been the first racially integrated force fighting for the united states .

the marion park project identified its preferred site location for the memorial at marion park in southeast washington , dc .

in december 2014 , the national capital planning commission expressed its support for the marion park site .

since its initial authorization , the marion memorial was reauthorized once .

authorization for the memorial expired on may 8 , 2018 .

in november 2003 , congress authorized the vietnam veterans memorial fund to create a visitor center at the vietnam veterans memorial to "better inform and educate the public about the vietnam veterans memorial and the vietnam war. .

in the house report accompanying the legislation ( h.r .

1442 , 108 th congress ) , the committee on resources summarized the need for a visitor center at the vietnam veterans memorial: since its dedication in 1982 , the vietnam veterans memorial , known to many as simply "the wall," has done much to heal the nation's wounds after the bitterly divisive experience of the vietnam war .

for those who served , that year marked a sea change in the country's view of the vietnam veteran .

americans began to understand and respect the vietnam veterans' service and sacrifice .

today , over 4.4 million people visit the wall every year — making it the most visited memorial in the nation's capital .

today , most visitors to the wall were not alive during the "vietnam era. .

many veterans' organizations and many others believe today's visitor is shortchanged in his / her experience .

many leave the wall not fully understanding its message .

to that end , a visitor center would provide an educational experience for visitors by facilitating self - guided tours , collecting and displaying remembrances of those whose names are inscribed on the memorial , and displaying exhibits discussing the history of the memorial and the vietnam war .

the visitor's center would eventually replace a 168-foot national park service kiosk currently at the site .

the visitor center was to be constructed underground and located across the street from the vietnam veterans memorial and the lincoln memorial .

in 2015 , the ncpc and cfa approved the visitor center's design .

on september 21 , 2018 , the vietnam veterans memorial fund announced their intenti on not to seek an extension to its authorization to build the visitor center , which expired on november 17 , 2018 .

at that time , legislation had been introduced , but not considered , to extend the fund's authorization into 2022 .

previously , the fund had received two statutory extensions .

