since the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , groups claiming allegiance to al qaeda have proliferated in the middle east and africa .

some of these groups have pledged allegiance to al qaeda ( aq ) leader ayman al zawahiri , and others have not .

even among the groups that have formal alliances with al qaeda , there is significant variation in the extent to which they are operationally integrated with al qaeda's senior leadership in practice .

some of these groups , despite the formal alliances , emerged in the context of local conflicts and are self - sustaining .

in other cases , al qaeda and its affiliates have focused on "exploiting local and regional conflicts. .

while many of the groups discussed in this report focus the majority of their attacks on local targets , u.s. officials have identified them as posing a credible threat to the united states or its allies , or to u.s. interests in the middle east and africa .

the rise and rapid expansion of the islamic state ( is , aka isil / isis or the arabic acronym da'esh ) in iraq and syria beginning in 2013 unsettled al qaeda's leadership and followers , who seemed to view is tactics and ideology as a challenge to al qaeda and its putative status as the world's preeminent islamist terror organization .

the state department's 2015 country reports on terrorism stated that , "tensions between aq and isil escalated in a number of regions during 2015 and likely resulted in increased violence in several parts of the world as aq tried to reassert its dominance. .

tensions appear to have dissipated at least somewhat in 2017 as the islamic state has been weakened by the u.s. - led military coalition campaign and other multilateral efforts .

some have speculated that al qaeda may be one beneficiary of the islamic state's decline in terms of recruits , prestige , and / or resources .

however , as the campaign against the islamic state winds down , aq may also become , again , a more significant focus of u.s. counterterrorism efforts .

the campaign against the islamic state has reignited a debate over the type and scope of policies and legislation needed to provide the tools to fully address the threats posed by transnational terrorist groups .

in addition , ongoing debates within al qaeda itself — over leadership and tactics — may prompt a reexamination of u.s. understanding of the group , and the ways in which it may have evolved since the september 11 , 2001 attacks .

for additional information on the islamic state , see crs report r43612 , the islamic state and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

even at the height of is territorial control in syria and iraq , u.s. officials warned that the emphasis on the islamic state does not indicate a reduced focus on the threat posed to the united states by al qaeda and its affiliates .

in september 2016 , then - nctc director nicholas rasmussen stated to congress , the tremendous efforts we are undertaking to counter the isil threat are absolutely warranted , but i want to stress that we still view al - qa'ida and the various al - qa'ida affiliates and nodes as a principal counterterrorism priority [...] we would not tier our priorities in such a way that downgrades al - qa'ida in favor of a greater focus on isil .

when we are looking at the terrorism threats that we face as a nation , including to the homeland , al - qa'ida still figures prominently in that analysis .

in testimony one year later , rasmussen reiterated that , "...as focused as we are on addressing isis , al qaida has never stopped being a primary counterterrorism priority for the ct community ... the various al - qaida groups have also managed to sustain recruitment , maintain relationships and derive sufficient resources to enable their operations .

this is a strikingly resilient organization. .

rasmussen pointed to a number of new trends since 2016 , including the "resurgence of aviation threats , reaching a level of concern that we in the intelligence community have not faced since al qaida in the arabian peninsula's printer package plot in 2010 ... both isis and al qaida - aligned groups have demonstrated a continued capability to conduct aviation attacks. .

director of national intelligence ( dni ) daniel coats stated to congress in early 2017 that while u.s. and global counterterrorism operations have significantly reduced al qaeda's ability to carry out large - scale attacks inside the united states , al qaeda and its affiliates "remain a significant ct [counterterrorism] threat overseas as they remain focused on exploiting local and regional conflicts. .

in december 2017 , rasmussen's successor lora shiao described the evolution in aq methods and organization as "evidence of its resiliency" and stated that the group "retains the intent to carry out attacks" against the u.s. and american interests .

some observers have challenged these and similar assessments , arguing that successive administrations have "followed the same script , one based on false , costly assumptions" and criticizing the trump administration for adhering to "what has become the standard operating procedure in washington. .

many of these analyses contend that certain elements of u.s. counterterrorism strategy have the potential to exacerbate the very problem they aim to confront .

specifically , they criticize what they view as a disproportionate emphasis on counterterrorism , to the detriment of more fundamental deradicalization efforts .

former cia deputy director michael morell was quoted as saying that "for every 100 hours i spent in the situation room talking about how to deal with terrorists that already exist , maybe we spent 10 minutes talking about winning hearts and minds and deradicalization. .

others see u.s. counterterrorism efforts in 2017 as having substantially degraded al qaeda and its affiliates ( described below ) , using these setbacks to question the "overall relevance [of aq] under ayman al - zawahiri's leadership. .

the 2018 national defense strategy suggests a less central role for groups like aq in shaping u.s. policy going forward , stating that "inter - state strategic competition , not terrorism , is now the primary concern in u.s. national security. .

it is not clear whether this stated change in strategic focus presages a reduction in counterterrorism resources relative to those intended to address inter - state threats .

u.s. strategy to combat al qaeda in the middle east and africa combines limited military deployments , training and equipping of local forces , financial sanctions , and programs on countering violent extremism ( cve ) .

the u.s. approach to particular affiliates has varied depending on factors such as the operating environment , the capabilities of local forces , and legal considerations , as discussed below .

al qaeda and its affiliate groups continue to evolve , reflecting internal debates as well as reactions to competitors such as the islamic state .

possible future trends include: increase in small - scale attacks .

then - acting secretary of homeland security elaine duke warned in october 2017 that while aq and other groups still aim to carry out spectacular , 9 / 11-style operations , they are increasingly pursuing small scale attacks to "keep their members engaged. .

other u.s. officials have warned that al qaeda affiliates , seeking to compete with the attention garnered by the islamic state , are countering with high - publicity attacks on soft targets such as hotels .

aqim in 2015-2017 claimed attacks against hotels in ivory coast , burkina faso , and mali .

the group and its offshoots also continue to conduct attacks against members of the u.n. peacekeeping mission in mali , minusma .

potential for aq leadership resurgence in afghanistan .

despite the reportedly reduced capabilities of al qaeda leadership , there is concern that aq leaders could once again find sanctuary with the taliban , which controls or contests more territory in afghanistan as of early 2018 than at any point since 2001 by some measures .

once safely established , aq leadership could reconstitute its capabilities and eventually regain the capacity to conduct large - scale attacks .

zawahiri had previously pledged allegiance to afghan taliban leader akhtar muhammad mansur , and in june 2016 pledged allegiance to mansur's successor , haibatullah akhunzada .

in his islamic spring series , zawahiri offered a general plan for establishing a caliphate , stating that the first step is strengthening the islamic emirate in afghanistan [the taliban] .

stretching of u.s. resources .

observers such as former cia deputy director michael morell have argued that the arab spring has bolstered al qaeda by challenging governance at the local level .

in some cases , this has created safe havens from which the group can operate , and which supply recruits , money , and weapons .

the geographic dispersal of al qaeda - linked groups , morrell has argued , has stretched the diplomatic , intelligence , and military resources of the united states .

to a greater extent than the islamic state , which was at least partially geographically tethered to specific territory it sought to defend , some al qaeda groups are fluid and move across a wide expanse of terrain — arguably increasing their resilience under attack .

to counter them effectively may require the development of u.s. relationships with a range of regional partners , which in turn may implicate other interests or pursuits .

competition and adaptation .

al qaeda's attempt to reassert leadership within the jihadist community could place pressure on the group to accelerate the implementation of what it had previously described as long - term goals .

others argue that , despite competition and conflict between the islamic state and al qaeda , their shared objectives overshadow their differences , suggesting that in the next five years the two groups could establish some degree of tactical cooperation .

despite the heightened focus on the islamic state since its territorial expansion in 2014 , u.s. military and intelligence officials have remained concerned about the threat posed by al qaeda and its affiliated groups , some of which have already attempted attacks inside the united states — notably the multiple foiled airliner attacks attempted by aqap .

those concerns are likely to deepen in the aftermath of the islamic state's collapse in iraq and syria and in light of aq affiliates' growth in africa and elsewhere .

as policymakers examine the broad landscape of terrorist threats , they may consider whether and how the risks posed to the united states and u.s. interests from the islamic state and al qaeda differ , and how u.s. counterterrorism policy can be best positioned to address and balance both threats .

