on june 15 , 2012 , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) announced that certain individuals without a lawful immigration status who were brought to the united states as children and meet other criteria would be considered for relief from removal from the country for two years , subject to renewal .

this initiative is known as deferred action for childhood arrivals , or daca .

dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) began accepting requests for consideration of daca on august 15 , 2012 , and issued its first approvals in september 2012 .

prior to that , from june 15 , 2012 , to august 15 , 2012 , dhs's immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) granted deferred action under the daca process in some cases .

more than 580,000 requests for consideration of daca have been approved through june 2014 .

individuals granted deferred action under the daca process may request renewal of their deferral for another two years , in accordance with uscis procedures .

answers to frequently asked questions about daca and the renewal process are provided below .

the daca recipient must satisfy the following criteria: the individual did not depart from the united states on or after august 15 , 2012 , without first obtaining advance parole ; the individual has continuously resided in the united states since submitting his or her latest approved daca request ; and the individual has not been convicted of a felony , a significant misdemeanor , or three or more misdemeanors , and is not a threat to national security or public safety .

to request a renewal of deferred action under daca , an individual must file the following three forms with dhs / uscis ( the same forms as required for an initial daca request ) : form i - 821d , consideration of deferred action for childhood arrivals form i - 765 , application for employment authorization form i - 765ws , worksheet the forms are available on the uscis website , http: / / www.uscis.gov .

an individual requesting a daca renewal does not have to submit any documents that he or she previously provided to uscis in connection with an approved daca request .

the individual does have to submit any new documents related to removal proceedings or criminal history .

uscis will request additional documentation from the individual , if needed .

an individual who was granted deferred action under daca by ice should file the same three forms to request a renewal as an individual who was initially granted deferred action under daca by uscis ( see " what forms and other materials does an applicant for daca renewal have to file ? .

" ) .

unlike those initially granted deferred action by uscis , however , individuals who were initially granted deferred action by ice and are requesting a renewal should submit documentation evidencing that they satisfy the threshold criteria for daca ( see " what are the eligibility requirements for consideration of daca ? .

" ) .

there is a total fee of $465 , consisting of a form i - 765 filing fee of $380 and biometric services fee of $85 ( the same as for initial daca requests ) .

uscis advises daca recipients to request a renewal 120 days before the expiration date of their current period of deferred action .

requests submitted more than 150 days before the expiration date may be returned by uscis for later resubmission .

no .

the decision on a request to renew daca , like on an initial daca request , is discretionary .

uscis makes determinations about renewals on a case - by - case basis .

no .

an individual granted deferred action ( an initial grant or a renewal ) is not given a lawful immigration status and is not put on a pathway to a lawful immigration status .

unless the individual was under age 18 at the time of submitting the renewal request , he or she would be considered to be unlawfully present during the intervening period ( see " are daca recipients granted lawful immigration status ? .

" ) .

however , if the individual filed the renewal request 120 days before the expiration of the period of deferred action and employment authorization , and uscis was delayed in processing the request , uscis may provide the individual with deferred action and employment authorization on a short - term basis while it completes processing .

