almost four decades since the end of the vietnam war , the controversy surrounding the spraying of an herbicide known as "agent orange" and the exposure of vietnam - era veterans to this herbicide continues .

since the late 1970s , vietnam - era veterans have voiced concerns about how exposure to agent orange may have affected their health and caused certain disabilities , including birth defects in their children , and now their grandchildren .

the department of veterans affairs ( va ) received the first claims asserting conditions related to agent orange in 1977 .

since then , vietnam - era veterans have made efforts to obtain disability compensation and health care from congress and through the judicial system .

in response to issues raised by vietnam - era veterans , congress has passed legislation to research the long - term health effects of agent orange on vietnam veterans and to provide benefits and services to those who may have been exposed to it .

in addition , the courts have addressed some concerns of vietnam - era veterans .

this report provides an overview of how congress and the judiciary have addressed the concerns of vietnam - era veterans and briefly describes some of the current issues raised by vietnam - era veterans .

this report should be read in conjunction with crs report r41405 , veterans affairs: presumptive service connection and disability compensation .

the first part of the report discusses previous legislative efforts to address health care and disability compensation issues of vietnam - era veterans exposed to agent orange .

the second part discusses litigation pertaining to agent orange .

the last part of the report briefly addresses current major issues related to agent orange and vietnam - era veterans .

in addition , the appendixes contain three tables .

table a - 1 provides a summary of congressional action related to health care for vietnam - era veterans .

table b - 1 provides a list of diseases and conditions that are presumptively service - connected with exposure to agent orange .

lastly , table b - 2 provides a list of diseases and conditions not presumed to be service - connected .

as part of a military strategy to remove foliage that provided cover for the enemy , to destroy enemy crops , and to destroy tall grasses and bushes from the perimeters of u.s. military bases , the u.s. military — from 1962 to 1971 — sprayed tactical herbicides in combat military operations in vietnam .

the u.s. air force sprayed nearly 19 million gallons of herbicides in vietnam , of which at least 11 million gallons were agent orange — making it the most widely used herbicide in the war .

"agent orange ( so named because of orange color stripes on the barrels used to store and ship the chemical ) was a 50-50 mixture of the herbicides 2,4,5-t and 2,4-d." this mixture was contaminated with varying concentrations of numerous dioxins , including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo - pdioxin ( tcdd ) during the manufacturing process .

this contaminant was shown to be highly toxic in animals , and it was implicated in birth defects seen in mice .

however , its effects on humans have not been fully understood .

it is important to note that "agent orange" and "dioxin" are not the same .

for simplicity the term agent orange is used throughout this report .

spraying of agent orange occurred over inland forests at the junction of the borders of cambodia , laos , and south vietnam ; inland jungles north and northwest of saigon ; mangrove forests on the southernmost peninsula of vietnam ; and mangrove forests along major shipping channels southeast of saigon .

initially , the department of defense ( dod ) maintained that only a limited number of u.s. military personnel could be positively identified as having been exposed to agent orange in south vietnam ( eg , the crews of aircraft that were used to spray herbicides ) .

however , following the publication of a 1979 general accounting office ( gao , now called government accountability office ) report documenting ground troop exposure , dod acknowledged that ground troops were also exposed to agent orange .

likewise , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) consistently took the position that because the long - term exposure to agent orange was unclear , and because of scientific uncertainty of the evidence linking agent orange to specific illnesses , it could not compensate veterans who alleged that exposure to agent orange had caused their diseases .

in testifying before the house committee on veterans' affairs , the then administrator of veterans affairs stated: unless or until some such latent effects of agent orange or its derivative components are scientifically documented there are intrinsic limitations to va's authority to allow these [agent orange] claims under current law .

though i cannot emphasize enough our policy to resolve reasonable doubt as to service incurrence of disabilities in favor of claimants , there is currently no medical basis upon which adverse health effects of late - post - exposure onset can be reasonably tied to agent orange .

in december 1979 , congress passed the veterans health programs extension and improvement act of 1979 ( p.l .

96-151 ) and directed the va to investigate the long - term effects of dioxin exposure during the vietnam war .

in 1981 , congress passed the veterans' health care , training , and small business loan act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-72 ) and required the va to include the study of other environmental exposures that may have occurred during the vietnam conflict .

however , the va never designed a protocol for conducting the study , and responsibility for conducting the study was transferred to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) .

in 1987 , the cdc ceased attempts to produce a study and never released any findings .

although vietnam - era veterans continued to urge congress to establish policies for health care and disability compensation ( see text box "eligibility for health care and disability compensation" ) for agent orange exposure , a lack of a substantial , scientific consensus on the potential health effects of agent orange in vietnam veterans and their offspring impeded those efforts .

since the late 1970s and early 1980s , disability compensation policies and health care for possible adverse health outcomes pertaining to veterans exposed to agent orange have proceeded on two parallel tracks: through legislation and through the judicial system .

with regard to agent orange exposure and disability compensation , litigation has largely focused on two questions .

first , which diseases are presumed to be caused by exposure to agent orange ? .

second , which veterans have been presumptively exposed to agent orange ? .

these questions have been resolved by two lines of cases .

nehmer claims involve which diseases are presumed to be caused by exposure to agent orange , and haas claims involve which veterans have been presumptively exposed to the herbicide .

this section provides a discussion of the laws , regulations , and court decisions that have emerged from these cases .

currently , three major issues pertain to vietnam - era veterans and their exposure to agent orange: ( 1 ) providing presumptive service - connected disability compensation for those who served in the waters surrounding vietnam and in other areas that agent orange may have been stored or used ; ( 2 ) providing disability compensation and health care for paternally mediated birth defects ; and ( 3 ) researching and providing disability compensation and health care services to biological grandchildren and later generations of vietnam - era veterans .

each of the three issues is briefly discussed in detail .

under current law , veterans who have diseases or conditions listed in table b - 1 are entitled to service - connected disability compensation as long as they ( 1 ) stepped foot on land in vietnam or ( 2 ) served on the inland waterways of vietnam during active duty at any time between january 9 , 1962 , and may 7 , 1975 .

other veterans who have an agent orange - related disease or condition are entitled to these benefits if they can prove they were exposed to agent orange during active duty service .

however , there are some exceptions to this general requirement ( see text box on "presumption of exposure to agent orange in veterans who served in korea" ) .

furthermore , only veterans who served in vietnam are entitled to retroactive benefits .

as discussed under the " blue water veteran litigation " section , some veterans of the vietnam era who served aboard deep - water naval vessels off the coast of vietnam — referred to as "blue water navy" veterans — have been pressing congress and the judicial system to expand the definition of service in vietnam , thereby qualifying this group to receive disability compensation for diseases or conditions presumed to be associated with agent orange .

these veterans contend that they were exposed to agent orange while on board vessels anchored offshore , either directly through contact with aircraft that sprayed agent orange or while handling drums of agent orange or by drinking distilled water .

in late 2009 , the va asked the institute of medicine ( iom ) to conduct a study and prepare a report on whether vietnam - era veterans who served in the waters off vietnam ( "blue water navy" veterans ) or who served on boats or ships that operated on the inland waterways and delta areas of vietnam ( "brown water" navy veterans ) experienced a comparable range of exposures to agent orange as the veterans who served on the ground .

in 2011 , iom announced that it was unable to determine whether "blue water navy" veterans were exposed to agent orange .

iom's report stated: the committee was unable to state with certainty that blue water navy personnel were or were not exposed to agent orange and its associated [2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo - p - dioxin] tcdd .

owing to a lack of data on environmental concentrations of agent orange and agent orange – associated tcdd and an inability to reconstruct likely concentrations , as well as the dearth of information about relative exposures among the ground troops and brown water navy personnel and blue water navy personnel , it is impossible to compare actual exposures across these three populations .

furthermore , the committee concludes that because of the small number of studies and their limitations , there is no consistent evidence to suggest that blue water navy vietnam veterans were at higher or lower risk for cancer or other long - term adverse health effects associated with agent orange exposure than shore - based veterans , brown water navy veterans , or vietnam veterans in other branches of service .

the committee's judgment is that exposure of blue water navy vietnam veterans to agent orange - associated tcdd cannot reasonably be determined .

in addition , several groups of vietnam - era veterans have asserted that they may have been exposed to agent orange based on storage and transportation of agent orange .

for example , veterans have contended that they came into contact with agent orange on guam in the late 1960s during the vietnam war .

moreover , some veterans have asserted that agent orange had been used in testing performed in the panama canal zone in the 1960s and 1970s , and others have contended that they were exposed during storage at johnston island in the north pacific between 1971 and 1977 .

furthermore , some vietnam - era veterans have asserted that they were exposed to agent orange in c - 123 airplanes used after the vietnam war .

all these veterans groups have sought to establish a presumption of exposure , thereby qualifying them to receive disability compensation for diseases or conditions presumed to be associated with agent orange .

the va is reviewing all these claims on a case - by - case basis .

currently , the va provides disability compensation and health care services for only one paternally mediated birth defect: spina bifida in the children of male vietnam - era veterans .

nevertheless , the va provides disability compensation and health care for a range of maternally mediated birth defects in children of female vietnam - era veterans .

this more liberal compensation for female vietnam - era veterans was based on the results of a health study of 8,280 women vietnam - era veterans ( half of whom served in the republic of vietnam and half of whom served elsewhere ) , completed in october 1998 and titled "women vietnam veterans reproductive outcomes health study. .

this study was conducted by the environmental epidemiology service of the veterans health administration of the va .

the most recent 2012 agent orange report from iom stated that there was inadequate or insufficient evidence to determine whether an association exists between exposure to agent orange and birth defects in the offspring of male vietnam - era veterans .

however , some veteran service organizations have asserted that more research should be done regarding paternally mediated birth defects and that eventually disability compensation policies should be developed for disabilities and health conditions that appear in later generations .

some vietnam - era veterans have raised concerns that the genetic effects of agent orange may skip a generation and reappear in third or subsequent generations .

in november 2010 , some veterans made presentations to the iom , requesting that it assess the "transgenerational effects resulting from exposure - related epigenetic changes , either in the parents or exposed fetuses , which would lead to adverse health effects in later generations , such as grandchildren. .

during previous reviews of agent orange studies , the iom focused "only on birth defects ( primarily limited to problems detectable at birth or within the first year of life ) and childhood cancers ( usually restricted to particular cancers that characteristically appear in infants and children and are diagnosed before the age of 18 years ) . .

however , beginning with the 2010 review , the iom extended its focus to include all types of medical conditions occurring in vietnam - era veterans' children , regardless of age , and to include such conditions in successive generations .

according the most recent 2012 agent orange report from iom , there is inadequate or insufficient evidence to determine whether an association exists between exposure to agent orange and specific health issues such as endometriosis ; semen quality ; infertility ; spontaneous abortion ; stillbirth ; late fetal , neonatal , or infant death ; low birth weight or preterm delivery ; birth defects other than spina bifida ; childhood cancers ; or diseases in more mature offspring or later generations .

however , the report from iom states that the committee [the iom agent orange study committee] favors renewed efforts to conduct epidemiologic studies on all the developmental effects in offspring that may be associated with paternal exposure .

in addition , new studies should evaluate offspring for defined clinical health conditions that develop later in life , focusing on organ systems that have shown the greatest effects after maternal exposure , including neurologic , immune , and endocrine effects .

finally , although the committee recognizes that there is evidence that environmental exposures can affect later generations through fetal and germ - line modifications , epidemiologic investigation designed to associate toxicant exposures with health effects manifested in later generations will be even more challenging to conduct than research on adverse effects on the first generation .

appendix a .

health care legislation for vietnam veterans appendix b .

diseases and conditions presumed / not presumed to be service - connected with exposure to agent orang .

