the first amendment to the u.s. constitution provides that "congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech , or of the press. .

this provision limits the government's power to restrict speech .

in 1976 , the supreme court issued its landmark campaign finance ruling in buckley v. vale o .

in buckley , the court found that limits on campaign contributions , which involve giving money to an entity , and expenditures , which involve spending money directly for electoral advocacy , implicate rights of political expression and association under the first amendment .

a number of principles contributed to the court's analogy between money and speech .

first , the court found that candidates need to amass sufficient wealth to amplify and effectively disseminate their message to the electorate .

second , restricting political contributions and expenditures imposes a restriction on the amount of money that a candidate can spend on communications , thereby reducing the number and depth of issues discussed and the size of the audience reached .

this is because almost all modes of communicating ideas in a mass society require the spending of money .

the court further observed that the primary purpose of the first amendment is to increase the quantity of public expression of political ideas .

from these general principles , the court concluded that contributions and expenditures facilitate an interchange of ideas , and cannot be regulated as mere conduct unrelated to their underlying act of communication .

the court in buckley , however , afforded different degrees of first amendment protection to contributions and expenditures .

contribution limits are subject to more lenient review , the court found , because they impose only a marginal restriction on speech and will be upheld if the government can demonstrate that they are a "closely drawn" means of achieving a "sufficiently important" governmental interest .

on the other hand , expenditure limits are subject to strict scrutiny because they impose a substantial restraint on speech .

that is , limits on expenditures must be narrowly tailored to serve a compelling governmental interest .

therefore , in buckley and its progeny , the court has generally upheld limits on contributions , finding that they serve the governmental interest of protecting elections from corruption , while invalidating limits on independent expenditures , finding that they do not pose a risk of corruption .

importantly , the court's recent case law has announced that only quid pro quo corruption or its appearance constitute a sufficiently important governmental interest to justify limits on contributions and expenditures .

quid pro quo corruption involves an exchange of money or something of value for an official act .

although the supreme court's campaign finance jurisprudence has shifted over the years , the basic buckley framework has generally been applied when determining whether a campaign finance limit violates the first amendment .

this report discusses current supreme court and other case law evaluating the constitutionality of limits on contributions and expenditures in various contexts .

first , it examines contribution limits , covering base limits , aggregate limits , limits on candidates whose opponents self - finance , minors , and super pacs .

as noted above , the court has generally upheld limits on contributions , but the report examines exceptions to this general rule .

it also examines a recent case that distinguishes between judicial and political elections in upholding a ban on the personal solicitation of contributions by judicial candidates .

then the report discusses expenditure limits , including limits on expenditures by candidates , political parties , and corporations and labor unions .

the court has determined that limits on expenditures are subject to strict scrutiny review , and accordingly , has found them to be unconstitutional .

throughout the history of its campaign finance jurisprudence , the u.s. supreme court has found that limits on contributions are afforded less rigorous scrutiny under the first amendment than limits on expenditures .

as a result , with some notable exceptions , the trend of the court has been to uphold limits on contributions , but invalidate limits on expenditures .

its most recent rulings , however , have announced that only quid pro quo corruption or its appearance constitute a sufficiently important governmental interest to justify limits on both contributions and expenditures .

spending large sums of money in connection with elections without attempting to control how an officeholder exercises his or her official duties does not give rise to corruption , the court has found .

further , government interests in lessening influence over or access to elected officials have been soundly rejected , as well as interests in lessening the costs of campaigns and equalizing financial resources among candidates .

as a result , in 2014 , the court overturned limits on aggregate contributions .

although the court did not expressly adopt a stricter standard of review for contribution limits , the court's finding may have a doctrinal impact on the constitutionality of contribution limits in future rulings .

