poverty in the united states — and initiatives to address poverty — is a current topic of discussion among policy makers and researchers .

this year marks the 50 th anniversary of the war on poverty , launched in 1964 by president lyndon johnson .

the rate of poverty has declined since then , yet poverty persists .

the number of people officially counted as poor in 2013 was 45.3 million and the official poverty rate was 14.5% .

numerous research articles , editorials , statements by members of congress , and congressional hearings have marked the 50 th anniversary , revealing different viewpoints on the effectiveness of past and current policies , and offering new initiatives for consideration .

the topic of poverty is much broader than a single program or set of programs .

in public policy discussions , the terms "poverty" and "welfare" are often intertwined , with "welfare" generally thought of as cash assistance for the poor .

however , more universal social insurance programs — such as social security , medicare , and unemployment insurance — may be the nation's most important antipoverty programs .

looking more broadly , poverty is affected by many aspects of public policy , ranging from macroeconomic policies to antidiscrimination laws to a national commitment for universal public education .

reducing or ameliorating poverty has not been widely articulated as the explicit goal of major policy debates in many years , although the impact of policy decisions might directly affect the incidence or characteristics of poverty .

for example , the decades - long discussion that resulted in the 1996 welfare reform law focused on moving recipients of cash assistance off the rolls and into jobs , along with related policies designed to "make work pay" better than welfare receipt .

the debate preceding enactment of health reform in 2010 focused on expanding access to health insurance for uncovered populations and making coverage more secure for those who had it , among other things .

both of these initiatives were implicitly related to poverty , but neither was promoted explicitly for antipoverty purposes .

most recently , some members of congress have introduced legislation , or announced elements of potential proposals , framed in the broad context of addressing poverty .

these proposals would touch upon numerous existing federal programs .

while the specifics differ — and in some cases are still being developed , these proposals reflect certain common themes that have characterized discussions of antipoverty policy for many years .

likewise , policies advocated by the obama administration also can be examined in the context of these overarching historic themes .

in 1937 , president franklin roosevelt spoke about "one - third of a nation ill - housed , ill - clad , ill - nourished. .

at that time , there was no official government definition of poverty .

while the concept of poverty had long existed , its definition is not straightforward .

poverty is generally conceived of as deprivation ; however , it can be viewed as deprivation of money or deprivation of access to economic goods that are considered necessities , such as medical care or housing .

poverty has also been viewed in a broader sense , as the lack of capability to achieve certain essential functions — in a physical sense ( being nourished and adequately clothed ) or in a social sense ( taking part in the life of the community ) .

the official measure of poverty that exists today was developed in the 1960s , and measures poverty on the basis of pre - tax money income .

for a family of four ( two adults , two children ) , such income below $23,624 in 2013 classified a family as poor .

census bureau estimates of the official poverty rate are currently available for the years 1959 through 2013 .

figure 1 shows the official poverty rate over this time period for all persons ( overall poverty rate ) , the aged , and children .

as shown , the overall poverty rate declined fairly consistently from 1959 ( overall rate of 22.4% ) to 1973 ( overall rate of 11.1% ) , and then fluctuated , generally in tandem with the health of the economy .

however , the overall poverty rate remained above 12% for the period from 1980 to 1998 .

it fell to 11.3% in 2000 but then increased again during the 2000s , particularly in the period during and following the deep recession of 2007-2009 .

it remained at or slightly above 15% in 2010 through 2012 , before falling to 14.5% in 2013 .

the figure also shows poverty rates separately for the aged ( age 65 and older ) and for children ( under age 18 ) .

in 1959 , the aged had a higher poverty rate than did children ( 35.2% versus 27.3% ) .

poverty rates for both age groups fell until 1973 , when the trends in their poverty rates diverged .

the child poverty rate increased from 14.4% in 1973 to 20% in 1981 , and did not fall below 19% until 1998 .

child poverty in 2012 and the preceding two years exceeded 21% before falling to 19.9% in 2013 .

in contrast , the official poverty rate for the aged continued to decline , reaching single digits ( below 10% ) in the late 1990s and remaining there for much of the 2000s .

in 2013 , the poverty rate for persons aged 65 and older was 9.5% .

technical discussions have long focused on the adequacy of the current statistical measure of poverty .

the official poverty measure depicted in figure 1 does not consider benefits received by families from need - tested noncash programs such as the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) , housing assistance , or the value of medical assistance under medicaid , nor does it consider benefits in the form of tax refunds from the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) or the child tax credit .

a new supplemental poverty measure — which does consider such benefits , as well as certain consumer expenditures including out - of - pocket medical expenses — is available from the census bureau for years 2010 through 2012 .

under this measure , used currently for research purposes , the elderly poverty rate was higher in 2012 ( 14.8% ) than shown by the official rate ( 9.1% ) , reflecting higher out - of - pocket medical expenses for the aged , and the child poverty rate was lower ( 18% ) than the official rate ( 22.3% ) , reflecting the value of noncash benefits and refundable tax credits .

some well - known factors are correlated with the prevalence of poverty .

poverty rates tend to rise during economic slumps and fall during periods of economic growth , although poverty has persisted even during sustained periods of economic growth ( see figure 1 ) .

poverty rates are higher for individuals with certain characteristics , such as racial and ethnic minorities , those with low levels of educational attainment , foreign - born noncitizens , and members of families headed by a single mother .

the development of antipoverty policy is influenced by subjective views about characteristics of the poor and causes of poverty , in addition to statistical measures of poverty .

the poor historically have been characterized as a heterogeneous population , with poverty caused by different forces for different groups .

some of the varied — and interrelated — factors that have been cited as either associated with or causing poverty are: low earnings capacity because of an individual's education , skills , and ability levels ; effects of racial and other forms of discrimination in various sectors of the economy and society , such as housing , schools , and the workplace ; lack of jobs , either because of a poor national economy or a poor local economy ; slow growth in wage rates ; growing up in a single - parent household ; personal behaviors and life choices made by individuals , such as having a child out - of - wedlock or as a teenager , divorce , or substance abuse ; and the design of certain assistance programs that might discourage work or marriage , or encourage out - of - wedlock births .

poverty policy has attempted to address all of these factors at different times , as will be discussed in the next section of this report , which presents a short history of federal policies to address poverty .

the current debate occurs in the aftermath of the increase in poverty during the 2000s and the effects of the 2007-2009 recession .

although the state of the national economy provides the most prevalent explanation for this latest rise in poverty , it has been argued that availability of assistance programs — some of which were expanded in response to the recession — also played a part .

in addition to these explanations , substantial changes have occurred in both the demographic makeup of the nation and the structure of the economy since 1990 , for example: the increasing share of the population and the workforce that is foreign - born ; urban "gentrification" and the growth of suburban poverty ; changes in the composition of jobs available to workers with lower levels of educational attainment , from higher - paying manufacturing jobs to the lower - paying service sector ; and the decline in employment among youths and young adults .

the federal government's policies to address poverty date back to the great depression of the 1930s .

these policies have evolved and been modified many times , with substantial changes occurring in each decade beginning with the 1960s .

this section of the report provides a brief overview of key milestones in the history of federal antipoverty policy .

some themes can be gleaned from the history of federal policies that have addressed poverty .

in addition , policies that were proposed in previous debates but not adopted can also inform discussions of poverty policy .

this section of the report identifies and discusses some of these overarching and recurring themes , which could be used as a framework for today's policy makers as they consider antipoverty policies and priorities .

this section also includes a series of text boxes , labeled as tables , which highlight aspects of current administration and selected congressional proposals , in the context of these themes .

table 1 lists some of the major themes that have been raised in past poverty debates and elements within those themes .

they are discussed more fully below .

the last major debate on antipoverty policy occurred in the 1990s , and the overarching policy goal at the time was to reduce welfare dependency and promote work for cash assistance recipients , not explicitly to reduce poverty .

that debate produced a set of policies intended to promote work .

it established work requirements and time limits for recipients of aid .

however , in recognition that work is sometimes not enough to move a person or family out of poverty , the 1990s also expanded policies to "make work pay" though income supports ( eitc and child care subsidies ) .

these twin policies — work requirements and "make work pay" — continue today and , particularly with regard to cash welfare , are viewed as being effective in meeting their goal .

the current tanf caseload ( 1.7 million families in december 2013 ) is dramatically reduced from its pre - welfare reform high ( 5.1 million families on the afdc rolls in march 1994 ) .

these policies are generally limited to families with children and have focused particularly on single mothers with children , who have been the traditional target group for cash welfare programs ( i.e. , afdc and tanf ) .

the policy consensus created in the mid - 1990s has been challenged by events that correspond to the deep recession of 2007-2009 and its aftermath .

although tanf rolls grew only modestly during the recession and have since declined , the poverty rate — which was increasing even before the downturn — rose sharply during the recession ( see figure 1 ) .

the caseload size and cost of the snap program — which also were growing before the recession — rose to record levels .

five years after the end of the recession , overall unemployment rates have come down , but poverty rates and snap caseloads remain high .

as noted earlier in this report , longer - term changes have occurred in both the demographic makeup of the nation and the structure of the economy , including an increasing share of the population and workforce that is foreign - born , growth of suburban poverty , a decline in manufacturing jobs and growth in the lower - paying service sector , and declining employment among youths and young adults .

attention also has turned toward men , and adults without children , as populations that may need support , with a particular focus on men who have been incarcerated and may face barriers when they re - enter the workforce .

current proposals to address poverty are shaped by recent trends , but also echo many of the recurring themes of past debates .

for example , with regard to the question of universal versus targeted initiatives , most current proposals are focused on low - income populations , although policies supported by the obama administration and congressional democrats include some universal elements ( eg , minimum wage increase and aspirations for universal pre - kindergarten ) .

the pathways out of poverty act revives the concept of direct government job - creation ( the "employment strategy" ) through new programs that would subsidize employment for low - income adults and youth .

all proposals examined in this report would continue the emphasis in the "income strategy" on policies that support work , through expansions of earnings supplements to low - income childless workers .

the ryan proposal emphasizes case management , consistent with the "services strategy. .

proposals from congressional republicans echo past initiatives that would provide greater flexibility to states in administering low - income assistance programs , including provisions that would allow them to consolidate spending under existing programs and design entirely new initiatives .

both democratic and republican proposals include some form of evaluation , performance measurement , or other accountability mechanism .

social science research and evaluations have shown that some policy interventions do achieve their policy goals .

however , those policy goals have typically not included an explicit focus on reducing poverty .

the welfare - to - work evaluations found that mandatory participation in work activities alone , while increasing employment and reducing receipt of assistance , did not raise incomes or reduce poverty .

the interventions that reduced poverty required that work be accompanied by earnings supplements , at a cost to the government .

varied and competing theories about the causes of poverty have emerged over time and are reflected in past initiatives and current proposals .

even with policy makers focused on the same goal of reducing poverty , the complexity of the issue likely guarantees a challenging and multifaceted debate .

constraints include the current environment of a slowly recovering economy and different points of view about the causes of poverty , best approaches for addressing these causes , and the most appropriate level of government to take the lead .

this appendix includes selected additional readings ( beyond the crs reports and other documents cited in the text ) on poverty and poverty policy issues .

it is divided into two parts: ( 1 ) source documents for poverty proposals made by the president and in congress this year ; and ( 2 ) selected major books and reports on poverty and poverty policy issues .

current proposals u.s. council of economic advisors , "the war on poverty 50 year later , a progress report," in economic report of the president , transmitted to congress march 2014 ( washington: u.s. government printing office , 2014 ) .

available online at http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / sites / default / files / docs / erp_2014_chapter_6.pdf u.s. house of representatives .

h.r .

5352 , the pathways out of poverty act , introduced by representative barbara lee , july 31 , 2014 .

u.s. house of representatives .

committee on the budget , chairman paul ryan , house budget committee majority staff , expanding opportunity in america: a discussion draft from the house budget committee , july 24 , 2014 .

available online at http: / / budget.house.gov / uploadedfiles / expanding_opportunity_in_america.pdf u.s. senate .

senator marco rubio , " recl aiming the land of opportunity: conservative reforms for combatting poverty , " remarks as prepared for delivery , u.s. capitol – lyndon b. johnson room , january 8 , 2014 .

available online at http: / / www.rubio.senate.gov / public / index.cfm / press - releases ? id=958d06fe - 16a3-4e8e - b178-664fc10745bf selected books and reports ken auletta , the underclass ( new york: random house , 1982 ) martha bailey and sheldon danziger , legacies of the war on poverty ( new york: russell sage foundation , 2013 ) vincent j. burke and [author name scrubbed] , nixon's good deed: welfare reform ( new york , columbia university press , 1974 ) sheldon danziger and peter gottschalk , america unequal ( new york: russell sage foundation , 1995 ) john kenneth galbraith , the affluent society ( boston , houghton mifflin company , 2 nd ed. , 1969 ) judith m. gueron and howard rolston , fighting for reliable evidence ( new york: russell sage foundation , 2013 ) .

michael harrington , the other america: poverty in the united states ( new york: macmillan , 1 st ed. , 1962 ) ron haskins , work over welfare: the inside story of the 1996 welfare reform law ( washington dc , brookings institution press , 2006 ) mickey kaus , the end of equality ( new york: basic books , 1992 ) lawrence m. mead , beyond entitlement : the social obligations of citizenship ( new york: the free press , 1986 ) pamela a. morris , et al .

how welfare and work policies affect children: a synthesis of research ( new york: mdrc , 2001 ) daniel patrick moynihan , the politics of a guaranteed income: the nixon administration and the family assistance plan ( new york: vintage books , 1973 ) charles murray , losing ground: american social policy 1950-1980 ( new york: basic books , inc. , 1984 ) president's commission on income maintenance programs , poverty amid plenty: the american paradox ( washington , dc: u.s. government printing office , 1969 ) this report is often referred as the "heineman commission report. .

steven m. teles , whose welfare ? .

afdc and elite politics ( lawrence , ks: university press of kansas , 1996 ) william julius wilson , the truly disadvantaged .

the inner city , the underclass , and public policy ( chicago: university of chicago press , 1987 ) william julius wilson , when work disappears: the world of the new urban poor ( new york: alfred a. knopf , 1996 ) u.s. committee on economic security .

report to the president of the committee on economic security ( washington , dc: u.s. government printing office , 1935 ) u.s. council of economic advisors .

"the problem of poverty in america," in economic report of the president , transmitted to congress january 1964 ( washington: u.s. government printing office , 1965 ) to obtain online , see http: / / fraser.stlouisfed.org / docs / publications / erp / 1964 / erp1964_chapter2.pdf u.s. department of labor .

office of policy planning and research .

the negro family , the case for national action ( washington: u.s. government printing office , 1965 ) this report is often referred to as "the moynihan report. .

