the federal child nutrition programs provide assistance to schools and other institutions in the form of cash , commodity food , and administrative support ( such as technical assistance and administrative funding ) based on the provision of meals and snacks to children .

in general , these programs were created ( and amended over time ) to both improve children's nutrition and provide support to the agriculture economy .

today , the child nutrition programs refer primarily to the following meal , snack , and milk reimbursement programs ( these and other acronyms are listed in appendix a ) : national school lunch program ( nslp ) ( richard b. russell national school lunch act ( 42 u.s.c .

1751 et seq .

 ) ) ; school breakfast program ( sbp ) ( child nutrition act , section 4 ( 42 u.s.c .

1773 ) ) ; child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) ( richard b. russell national school lunch act , section 17 ( 42 u.s.c .

1766 ) ) ; summer food service program ( sfsp ) ( richard b. russell national school lunch act , section 13 ( 42 u.s.c .

1761 ) ) ; and special milk program ( smp ) ( child nutrition act , section 3 ( 42 u.s.c .

1772 ) ) .

the programs provide financial support and / or foods to the institutions that prepare meals and snacks served outside of the home ( unlike other food assistance programs such as the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly the food stamp program ) where benefits are used to purchase food for home consumption ) .

though exact eligibility rules and pricing vary by program , in general the amount of federal reimbursement is greater for meals served to qualifying low - income individuals or at qualifying institutions , although most programs provide some subsidy for all food served .

participating children receive subsidized meals and snacks , which may be free or at reduced price .

forthcoming sections discuss how program - specific eligibility rules and funding operate .

this report describes how each program operates under current law , focusing on eligibility rules , participation , and funding .

this introductory section describes some of the background and principles that generally apply to all of the programs ; subsequent sections go into further detail on the workings of each .

unless stated otherwise , participation and funding data come from usda - fns's "keydata reports. .

this section discusses the school meals programs: the national school lunch program ( nslp ) and the school breakfast program ( sbp ) .

principles and concepts common to both programs are discussed first ; subsections then discuss features and data unique to the nslp and sbp , respectively .

in addition to the school meals programs discussed above , other federal child nutrition programs provide federal subsidies and commodity food assistance for schools and other institutions that offer meals and snacks to children in early childhood , summer , and after - school settings .

this assistance is provided to ( 1 ) schools and other governmental institutions , ( 2 ) private for - profit and nonprofit child care centers , ( 3 ) family / group day care homes , and ( 4 ) nongovernmental institutions / organizations that offer outside - of - school programs for children .

 ( although this report focuses on the programs that serve children , one child nutrition program ( cacfp ) also serves day care centers for chronically impaired adults and elderly persons under the same general per - meal / snack subsidy terms. ) .

the programs in the sections to follow serve comparatively fewer children and spend comparatively fewer federal funds than the school meal programs .

two of the child nutrition programs discussed in previous sections , the national school lunch program ( nslp ) and child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) , provide federal support for snacks and meals served during after - school programs .

nslp provides reimbursements for after - school snacks ; however , this option is open only to schools that already participate in nslp .

these schools may operate after - school snack - only programs during the school year , and can do so in two ways: ( 1 ) if low - income area eligibility criteria are met , provide free snacks in lower - income areas ; or ( 2 ) if area eligibility criteria are not met , offer free , reduced - price , or fully paid - for snacks , based on household income eligibility ( like lunches in nslp ) .

the vast majority of snacks provided through this program are through the first option .

through this program , approximately 206 million snacks were served in fy2017 ( a daily average of nearly 1.3 million ) .

this compares with nearly 4.9 billion lunches served ( a daily average of 27.8 million ) .

cacfp provides assistance for after - school food in two ways .

first , centers and homes that participate in cacfp and provide after - school care may participate in traditional cacfp ( the eligibility and administration described earlier ) .

second , centers in areas where at least half the children in the community are eligible for free or reduced - price school meals can opt to participate in the cacfp at - risk afterschool program , which provides free snacks and suppers .

expansion of the at - risk after - school meals program was a major policy change included in hhfka .

prior to the law , 13 states were permitted to offer cacfp at - risk after - school meals ( instead of just a snack ) ; the law allowed all cacfp state agencies to offer such meals .

in fy2017 , the at - risk afterschool program served a total of approximately 242.6 million free meals and snacks to a daily average of more than 1.7 million children .

federal child nutrition laws authorize and program funding supports a range of additional programs , initiatives , and activities .

through state administrative expenses funding , states are entitled to federal grants to help cover administrative and oversight / monitoring costs associated with child nutrition programs .

the national amount each year is equal to about 2% of child nutrition reimbursements .

the majority of this money is allocated to states based on their share of spending on the covered programs ; about 15% is allocated under a discretionary formula granting each state additional amounts for cacfp , commodity distribution , and administrative review efforts .

in addition , states receive payments for their role in overseeing summer programs ( about 2.5% of their summer program aid ) .

states are free to apportion their federal administrative expense payments among child nutrition initiatives ( including commodity distribution activities ) as they see fit , and appropriated funding is available to states for two years .

state administrative expense spending in fy2017 totaled approximately $279 million .

team nutrition is a usda - fns program that includes a variety of school meals initiatives around nutrition education and the nutritional content of the foods children eat in schools .

this includes team nutrition training grants , which provide funding to state agencies for training and technical assistance , such as help implementing usda's nutrition requirements and the dietary guidelines for americans .

from 2004 to 2018 , team nutrition also included the healthierus schools challenge ( hussc ) , which originated in the 2004 reauthorization of the child nutrition act .

hussc was a voluntary certification initiative designed to recognize schools that have created a healthy school environment through the promotion of nutrition and physical activity .

farm - to - school programs broadly refer to "efforts that bring regionally and locally produced foods into school cafeterias," with a focus on enhancing child nutrition .

the goals of these efforts include increasing fruit and vegetable consumption among students , supporting local farmers and rural communities , and providing nutrition and agriculture education to school districts and farmers .

hhfka amended existing child nutrition programs to establish mandatory funding of $5 million per year for competitive farm - to - school grants that support schools and nonprofit entities in establishing farm - to - school programs that improve a school's access to locally produced foods .

the fy2018 appropriations law provided an additional $5 million in discretionary funding to remain available until expended .

grants may be used for training , supporting operations , planning , purchasing equipment , developing school gardens , developing partnerships , and implementing farm - to - school programs .

usda's office of community food systems provides additional resources on farm - to - school issues .

through an administrative review process ( formerly referred to as coordinated review effort ( cre ) ) , usda - fns , in cooperation with state agencies , conducts periodic on - site nslp school compliance and accountability evaluations to improve management and identify administrative , subsidy claim , and meal quality problems .

state agencies are required to conduct administrative reviews of all school food authorities ( sfas ) that operate the nslp under their jurisdiction at least once during a three - year review cycle .

federal administrative review expenditures were approximately $9.9 million in fy2017 .

usda - fns and state agencies conduct many other child nutrition program support activities for which dedicated funding is provided .

among other examples , there is the institute of child nutrition ( icn ) , which provides technical assistance , instruction , and materials related to nutrition and food service management ; it receives $5 million a year in mandatory funding appropriated in statute .

icn is located at the university of mississippi .

usda - fns provides training on food safety education .

funding is also provided for usda - fns to conduct studies , provide training and technical assistance , and oversee payment accuracy .

appendix a .

acronyms used in this report appendix b. per - meal or per - snack reimbursement rates for child nutrition programs this appendix lists the specific reimbursement rates discussed in the earlier sections of the report .

reimbursement rates are adjusted for inflation for each school or calendar year according to terms laid out in the programs' authorizing laws .

each year , the new rates are announced in the federal register .

