section 100121 of p.l .

112-141 , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 , enacted july 6 , 2012 ) provides the authority for a new phased retirement option for certain employees covered by the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) or the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) , the retirement plans that cover most of the civilian federal workforce .

under phased retirement , an eligible federal employee may work a reduced - hour schedule and simultaneously receive a prorated federal retirement benefit ( or annuity ) under csrs or fers .

for eligible federal employees , phased retirement is a voluntary option that requires approval from their employing federal agencies .

employees participating in phased retirement generally must also engage in mentoring activities ( except for u.s .

postal service employees ) .

according to the office of personnel management ( opm ) , which administers phased retirement , "the main purpose of phased retirement is to enhance the mentoring and training of the employees who will be filling the positions or taking on the duties of more experienced retiring employees. .

phased retirement allows certain federal employees who are otherwise eligible for retirement under csrs or fers to work a reduced schedule while receiving a reduced salary as well as a prorated percentage of their retirement benefits .

before p.l .

112-141 , federal law generally prohibited the concurrent receipt of a federal salary and a federal pension ( i.e. , dual compensation ) .

prior to the enactment of phased retirement , the situation of dual compensation arose in the context of current federal retirees who returned to work in federal service ( i.e. , reemployed annuitants ) .

over the past several decades , congress has provided authority for waivers in some circumstances to the general reduction in pay usually required for dual compensation .

these waivers accomplish several policy goals , including hiring for highly skilled or difficult - to - fill positions .

section 100121 of p.l .

112-141 created a phased retirement authority under 5 u.s.c .

§8336a ( csrs ) and 5 u.s.c .

§8412a ( fers ) .

phased retirement provides a new personnel option for certain retirement - eligible federal employees covered by csrs or fers to work a reduced schedule while receiving a reduced salary as well as a reduced percentage of their csrs or fers retirement benefits .

phased retirees , except for phased retirees employed at the u.s .

postal service , are subject to a requirement that they spend at least 20% of their reduced work hours engaged in mentoring activities .

unlike existing waivers for dual compensation in the situation of reemployed annuitants , phased retirement is designed as a human resources instrument to allow eligible employees to reduce their work hours before they separate from federal service and make up for the reduced salary through receipt of prorated retirement benefits .

phased retirement also provides agencies with another tool to transfer knowledge to newer employees through mentoring .

as explained in opm's final rule for phased retirement , published on august 8 , 2014: phased retirement is designed to assist agencies with knowledge management and continuity of operations in the short term... .

phased retirement is simply another tool to enable agencies to manage their workforce , promote best practices , and encourage experienced employees to spend some time mentoring the next generation of experts .

not all current federal employees may be eligible to apply for phased retirement .

federal law and regulation set out several types of requirements for participation in phased retirement related to employment status , retirement eligibility , and mentoring .

currently , phased retirees are authorized to work 50% of their previous work schedules and receive 50% of their previous federal salaries .

in general , a phased retiree is classified as a part - time employee .

for the purposes of employee benefits , phased retirees are considered to be working in their previous positions with reduced work schedules .

in some circumstances , this reduced work schedule means that phased retirees receive the same employee benefits as they did previously in a full - time position .

in other circumstances , the employee benefits of phased retirees are either different or prorated based on their reduced work schedules .

while in phased retirement status , individuals receive a phased retirement annuity , which is calculated based on their previous csrs or fers service .

when phased retirees enter full retirement status , their benefits are recalculated as a composite annuity that incorporates their service while in phased retirement status .

the phased retirement annuity that an individual receives while in phased retirement status is calculated by multiplying the amount of the csrs or fers annuity to which that individual would have been entitled at the time of entrance into phased retirement if he or she had entered full retirement based on years of service to date , expressed using the formula ( high - three pay × benefit accrual rate × years of service ) ; and 50% ( i.e. , 100% minus the reduced work schedule percentage [50%] , which equals 50% ) .

for example , the phased retirement annuity of an individual covered by fers with 20 years of service and a high - three pay measure of $80,000 who enters phased retirement at the age of 62 would be calculated as ( $80,000 × 0.011 × 20 ) × 0.50 = $8,800 per year this phased retirement annuity would be paid in addition to a reduced work schedule salary of $40,000 ( $80,000 × 0.50 ) .

additionally , phased retirement annuities are adjusted for inflation ; they receive automatic cost - of - living adjustments ( colas ) in the same manner as other csrs or fers annuities .

to receive credit for military service under csrs or fers , any deposits must be made by the eligible individual prior to entering phased retirement status .

finally , phased retirement annuities are not subject to any reduction for the provision of survivor annuities and cannot be the basis for any survivor annuity payments .

when phased retirees enter full retirement , their csrs or fers annuities are recalculated as a composite annuity .

this composite annuity is calculated by adding the amount of the phased retirement annuity at the time of full retirement , including any colas ; and the product of 1. the amount of the csrs or fers annuity to which an individual would have been entitled to if he or she had worked as a full - time employee until the date of full retirement , expressed using the formula ( high - three pay × benefit accrual rate × years of service ) ; and 2 .

50% ( i.e. , 100% minus the reduced work schedule percentage [50%] ) .

the composite annuity calculation includes the crediting of any unused sick leave as well as any reductions for the provision of a csrs or fers survivor annuity .

for example , the composite annuity of an individual covered by fers with 20 years of service and a high - three pay measure of $80,000 who entered phased retirement at the age of 62 and was a phased retiree for 1 year with no salary increases , with a cola to his or her phased retirement annuity of 1% , with the equivalent of 1 year of unused sick leave , and without a survivor annuity reduction would be calculated as ( [ ( $80,000 × 20 × 0.011 ) × 0.50] × 1.01 ) + ( [$80,000 × 22 × 0.011] × 0.50 ) = $18,568 per yea .

while in phased retirement status , individuals make the required csrs or fers employee contributions based on part - time salary .

no fers annuity supplement is payable to phased retirees .

in some circumstances , the fers annuity supplement may be paid after a phased retiree fully retires and begins receiving a composite annuity .

phased retirees continue to be eligible to participate in the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) .

they are eligible to make employee contributions and subject to the same restrictions regarding loans and withdrawals as other employees .

phased retirees are not considered retirees for the purposes of making withdrawals from their tsp accounts .

all types of tsp contributions — including employee contributions , agency automatic contributions ( for fers phased retirees ) and agency matching contributions ( for fers phased retirees ) — for phased retirees will be based on pay and not on any portion of the phased retirement annuity payment .

phased retirees are considered to be working full time for the purposes of the federal employees health benefit program ( fehbp ) .

consequently , fehbp coverage continues into phased retirement status .

fehbp premiums also remain the same in phased retirement , as they continue to be based on full - time employment .

employees and employing agencies pay the same amount as they did prior to phased retirement status .

additionally , federal service during phased retirement is creditable toward the five years of service required to continue fehbp as an annuitant .

for the purposes of coverage under the federal employees' group life insurance ( fegli ) , phased retirees are also considered to be working full time .

fegli premiums continue to be based on full - time employment for phased retirees .

additionally , phased retirees receive fegli benefit coverage amounts as if they were full - time employees .

phased retirees accrue leave in the same way as part - time employees ; both annual leave and sick leave accrual are prorated during phased retirement .

because they are required to have more than 15 years of service , phased retirees will accrue 1 hour of annual leave for every 10 hours in pay status and 1 hour of sick leave for every 20 hours in pay status .

working a 50% reduced work schedule , a phased retiree who works 40 hours per pay period would accrue 4 hours of annual leave and 2 hours of sick leave per pay period .

a phased retiree does not receive a lump - sum payment for annual leave when entering phased retirement .

instead , this lump - sum payment is made in full when the phased retiree moves into full retirement status .

consequently , an employee's annual leave balance is maintained upon entering phased retirement status .

unused sick leave is not included in the computation of the phased retirement annuity .

therefore , the balance of an individual's sick leave is maintained upon entering phased retirement status .

sick leave accrued before and during phased retirement is then included in part of the composite annuity calculation when phased retirees enter full retirement status .

