t he scope of the executive's discretion in implementing federal immigration law is a topic of perennial interest to members and committees of congress .

most recently , questions have been raised as to whether particular actions announced by the obama administration in november 2014 are within the executive's authority .

however , similar questions were raised in the past about other executive actions including , but not limited to ( 1 ) suspending enforcement of certain provisions of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) in areas affected by natural disasters ; ( 2 ) granting deferred enforced departure , extended voluntary departure , or other relief from removal to certain aliens who entered or remained in the united states in violation of the ina ; and ( 3 ) "paroling," or permitting the entry of , certain aliens into the united states who were not admissible under current law .

the debate over whether particular actions are within the executive's authority — acting on its own and without the enactment of additional legislation by congress — ultimately reflects the respective roles that the executive and legislative branches play in the nation's constitutional system of government .

article i of the constitution expressly grants the power to legislate to congress , and congress has exercised this power as to immigration , in part , by enacting the ina .

the ina provides a comprehensive set of rules governing the admission of foreign nationals into the united states and the conditions of such aliens' continued presence in the country , including their eligibility to obtain employment and public benefits , change or adjust their immigration status , and become u.s. citizens .

in addition , the ina establishes various mechanisms for enforcing these rules , including by prescribing the removal of aliens found to have entered the united states without permission , or to have violated the terms governing their authorized admission into the country .

it also establishes criminal penalties for certain immigration violations .

on the other hand , the ina expressly or impliedly confers some discretionary authority on the executive branch in matters of immigration enforcement .

for example , the ina authorizes immigration officials to grant certain types of benefits or relief to qualifying aliens who lack lawful immigration status .

moreover , the ina permits immigration officials to waive certain statutory restrictions that might otherwise render an alien ineligible to receive particular immigration benefits .

the exercise of these discretionary authorities may enable some unlawfully present aliens to remain in the united states — through asylum , temporary protected status , cancellation of removal , or some other means — rather than being removed .

in other cases , however , aliens who have entered or have stayed in the united states in violation of ina requirements may be permitted to remain in the country and , in some cases , legalize their status , not as the result of the exercise of expressly delegated authority , but as a result of the executive branch's independent discretion in enforcing the law .

article ii of the constitution specifically tasks the executive to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed," and the executive branch has historically been seen as having some discretion in determining when , against whom , how , and even whether to prosecute apparent violations of the law .

for example , immigration officials m ay opt to give a lower priority to the removal of certain categories of unlawfully present aliens because the removal of other categories ( eg , those convicted of serious crimes ) has been deemed a higher priority in light of resource constraints and other considerations .

congressional enactments could , however , be seen as limiting the executive's discretion not to take particular actions ( eg , by mandating that certain aliens be detained pending removal proceedings ) .

the express adoption of an executive policy that is "in effect an abdication of ... statutory duty" could also be found to be impermissible , but it might be difficult for a court to assess whether an alleged failure to enforce the law constitutes an abdication .

the executive branch's discretion to interpret applicable statutes when congress has not spoken to the precise question at issue may also afford immigration officials some flexibility in determining how ina requirements apply to a particular alien or category of aliens .

this discretion may be relevant in determining how particular statutory grants of discretionary authority are to be applied ( eg , what constitutes "exceptional and extremely unusual hardship" for purposes of cancellation of removal , or "extreme hardship" for purposes of certain waivers of inadmissibility ) .

it can also play a role in determining whether and how particular statutes are seen to circumscribe the executive's enforcement discretion .

that is , where a statute is silent or ambiguous as to the circumstances of its enforcement in particular cases , the executive may have some discretion in determining its application .

this report provides an overview of the three broad types of discretion that the executive can be seen to have as to immigration .

namely ( 1 ) express delegations of discretionary authority ; ( 2 ) discretion in enforcement ( commonly known as prosecutorial or enforcement discretion ) ; and ( 3 ) discretion in interpreting and applying statutes .

in so doing , it provides notable examples of each broad type of discretion , as well as potential constraints upon the exercise of particular types of discretion .

separate reports discuss prosecutorial discretion in immigration enforcement and the take care clause — which some have suggested constrains the executive's exercise of discretion — in greater detail .

see generally archived crs report r42924 , prosecutorial discretion in immigration enforcement: legal issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43708 , the take care clause and executive discretion in the enforcement of law , by [author name scrubbed] .

in several instances , the ina expressly grants immigration officials some degree of discretion over aliens' eligibility for particular immigration benefits or relief , including adjustment to legal immigration status or authorization to work in the united states .

these statutory delegations sometimes provide immigration officials with broad discretion to determine whether and when aliens may be eligible for particular immigration benefits .

in other instances , such delegations may permit immigration officials to waive the application of a statutory requirement that would bar otherwise qualifying aliens from obtaining particular immigration benefits or relief .

the executive is generally recognized as possessing some degree of independent authority in assessing when , against whom , how , and even whether to prosecute apparent violations of federal law ; an authority generally referred to as "prosecutorial discretion" or "enforcement discretion. .

such authority has been seen to exist in the field of immigration , and to grant the executive some discretion in determining , among other things , whether to commence removal proceedings and the nature of the particular charges to lodge against an alien ; whether to cancel a notice to appear ( nta ) or other charging document before jurisdiction vests with an immigration judge ; and whether to appeal an immigration judge's decision or order .

the granting of immigration benefits , in contrast , has historically been seen not as an exercise of prosecutorial or enforcement discretion inherent to the executive branch , but as an exercise of authority expressly delegated by congress .

the exercise of prosecutorial or enforcement discretion in specific cases has historically been based on humanitarian factors , or resources constraints .

a "favorable" exercise of discretion ( eg , one permitting a potentially removable alien to remain in the united states ) generally does not grant the alien a legal immigration status , despite the alien having official permission to remain in the country .

however , by enabling the alien to remain in the united states , a favorable exercise of discretion could permit the alien to acquire a basis for legalization in the future ( eg , the establishment of ties that would provide a basis for adjustment of status under current law , or following the enactment of a legalization measure like the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ) .

another type of discretion that the executive branch may exercise as to immigration law involves the interpretation and application of statutes .

as the supreme court explained in its 1984 decision in chevron u.s.a. v. natural resources defense council , when "congress has directly spoken to the issue , ... that is the end of the matter ; for the court , as well as the agency , must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of congress. .

however , where a statute is "silent or ambiguous with respect to a specific issue," courts will generally defer to an agency interpretation that is based on a "permissible construction of the statute," on the grounds that the executive branch must fill any "gaps" implicitly or explicitly left by congress in the course of administering congressional programs .

the degree of deference afforded to particular executive branch interpretations can vary depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case , including whether the interpretation is a "formal" one adopted through notice - and - comment rulemaking or case - by - case adjudication .

there are a number of places where the ina or other immigration - related statutes are silent or ambiguous on particular issues , and the executive branch has — expressly or practically — adopted an interpretation that significantly affects the implementation of immigration law .

as some commentators have suggested , these executive branch interpretations can be changed to expand ( or restrict ) aliens' ability to enter or remain in the united states , or the conditions of their continued presence here , without the enactment of additional legislation .

whether particular actions within the field of immigration are within the executive's authority has long been of interest to congress .

certain actions announced by the obama administration in november 2014 have prompted particular questions about this topic .

however , similar questions arose in the past as to specific executive actions , and seem likely to recur in the future .

whether particular actions are within the executive's existing authority depends upon whether these actions can be seen to fall within one ( or more ) of the three broad types of discretion that the executive is generally seen to have as to immigration .

namely , ( 1 ) express delegations of discretionary authority ; ( 2 ) discretion in enforcement ( commonly known as prosecutorial or enforcement discretion ) ; and ( 3 ) discretion in interpreting and applying statutes .

each of these three types of authority is subject to certain constraints .

for example , exercises of statutory authority must be consistent with the terms of the delegation ( although the executive branch could have some discretion in interpreting the statute ) .

similarly , the executive's exercise of prosecutorial or enforcement discretion could be limited by specific statutory mandates that the executive take particular actions ( eg , detaining certain aliens pending removal proceedings ) .

the express adoption of a policy that constitutes an abdication of a statutory duty could also be found to be impermissible , although it might be difficult for a court to assess whether an alleged failure to enforce the law constitutes an "abdication. .

likewise , agencies' interpretations and applications of statutes must conform to the "unambiguously expressed intent of congress. .

