medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that , in fy2012 , financed the delivery of primary and acute medical services , as well as long - term services and supports , to nearly 57 million people and cost states and the federal government a total of $431 billion .

each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules .

as a result , there is significant variation across states in terms of who is eligible for coverage , what services are available , and which subgroups of beneficiaries are subject to out - of - pocket costs .

cost - sharing requirements may include participation - related cost - sharing , such as monthly premiums or annual enrollment fees , as well as point - of - service cost - sharing such as co - payments — flat dollar amounts paid directly to providers for services rendered .

similar types of out - of - pocket cost - sharing can apply to individuals enrolled in private health insurance , although the amounts to which such beneficiaries may be subject can be higher than the amounts allowed in medicaid .

the tax equity and fiscal responsibility act of 1982 ( tefra 1982 , p.l .

97-248 , subtitle b ) added to the federal medicaid statute the authority for states to impose enrollment fees , premiums , or similar charges as well as point - of - service cost - sharing .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra , p.l .

109-171 ) made additional , major changes to cost - sharing requirements that could be applied to medicaid beneficiaries , including allowing states to permit providers to deny services when a co - payment requirement is not met .

in july 2013 , the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) issued new regulations for medicaid premiums and cost - sharing .

today , participation - related cost - sharing ( eg , premiums ) in medicaid tends to be limited to certain subpopulations , and states use point - of - service cost - sharing more broadly .

states can require certain beneficiaries to share in the cost of medicaid services , but there are limits on ( 1 ) the amounts states can impose , ( 2 ) the beneficiary groups that can be required to pay , and ( 3 ) the services for which cost - sharing can be charged .

in general , premiums and enrollment fees are often prohibited .

however , premiums may be imposed on enrollees with income above 150% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

a survey by the kaiser family foundation found that in state fiscal year ( sfy ) 2013 , 39 states had at least one group able to participate in medicaid by paying a premium , with a total of 59 different premium programs .

states can also impose point - of - service cost - sharing , such as co - payments , coinsurance , deductibles , and other similar charges , on most medicaid - covered inpatient and outpatient benefits .

however , they cannot impose cost - sharing for emergency services or family planning services and supplies .

some subgroups of beneficiaries are exempt from cost - sharing ( eg , children under 18 years of age and pregnant women ) .

the cost - sharing amounts that can be charged vary with income .

in sfy2013 , 46 states ( including the district of columbia ) reported having co - payment requirements .

higher beneficiary cost - sharing is allowed in certain circumstances , and federal regulations modified some of these provisions .

medicaid premiums and service - related cost - sharing incurred by all individuals in a medicaid household cannot exceed an aggregate limit of 5% of family income applied on either a monthly or quarterly basis , as specified by the state medicaid agency .

states can use either medicaid state plan amendments ( spas ) or section 1115 waiver authority in the social security act to establish both premiums and point - of - service cost - sharing .

this report includes examples of both types of beneficiary out - of - pocket spending in medicaid .

other federal regulations ( issued october 1 , 2013 ) address out - of - pocket costs for medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in medicaid managed care plans .

state contracts with medicaid managed care plans must follow the same federal regulations applicable under the state medicaid plan , and they also must comply with specific regulatory requirements .

to obtain health insurance , certain medicaid enrollees may be subject to monthly premiums , the most common form of participation - related cost - sharing .

such charges are prohibited under medicaid for many eligibility subgroups .

enrollment fees , premiums or similar charges must adhere to the following rules: a minimum charge of at least $1.00 per month is imposed on ( a ) one - or two - person families with monthly gross income of $150 or less , ( b ) three - or four - person families with monthly gross income of $300 or less , and ( c ) five - or more person families with monthly gross income of $350 or less .

any charge related to gross family income that is above these minimums may not exceed the standards shown in table 1 : different federal regulations apply to certain medicaid subgroups for families with income exceeding 150% fpl ( see table 2 ) .

except for premiums applicable to medicaid beneficiaries classified as medically needy , the state medicaid agency may choose to terminate individuals' medicaid coverage on the basis of failure to pay for 60 days or more .

table 2 provides information about optional premiums that states can choose to apply to specific medicaid subgroups with income that exceeds 150% fpl .

for several of these subgroups , states are allowed to set premiums on a sliding scale based on family income .

other caveats apply to specific subgroups , also identified in this table .

as of sfy2013 , a total of 39 states indicated that at least one group participated in medicaid by paying premiums , and 11 states and the district of columbia did not require premiums under medicaid .

beneficiary out - of - pocket payments to providers at the time of service can take three forms .

a deductible is a specified dollar amount paid for certain services rendered during a specific time period ( eg , per month or quarter ) before health insurance ( eg , medicaid ) begins to pay for care .

coinsurance is a specified percentage of the cost or charge for a specific service delivered .

a co - payment is a specified dollar amount for each item or service delivered .

deductibles and coinsurance are infrequently used in medicaid , but co - payments are applied to some services and groups .

federal rules place limits on which services cost - sharing can be applied to ( including which specific services are exempt , discussed below ) and what amounts can be charged .

cost - sharing can be charged for allowed services regardless of income , but the maximum amount can be substantially higher for individuals with incomes greater than 100% fpl .

table 3 provides a comparison of the maximum charges allowed for service - related cost - sharing applicable to outpatient services and inpatient stays for three family income subgroups .

table 4 provides a comparison of maximum allowable charges for service - related cost - sharing for prescription drugs ( preferred and non - preferred ) as well as nonemergency use of an emergency department , also based on family income .

some services are exempt from co - payments , including , for example , emergency use of emergency departments .

apart from point - of - service cost - sharing for drugs and nonemergency services provided in an emergency department ( described in table 4 ) , federal regulations specify that the maximum allowable cost - sharing dollar amounts will increase annually , beginning october 1 , 2015 , for certain medicaid enrollees .

specifically , for individuals with income at or below 100% fpl , the maximum allowable cost - sharing amounts must increase each year by the percentage increase in the medical care component of the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) for the period of september to september of the preceding calendar year , rounded to the next higher 5-cent increment .

federal medicaid regulations allow states to target cost - sharing to specific subgroups .

for example , the state medicaid agency may apply cost - sharing to specific groups with family income above 100% fpl .

the state medicaid agency also may target cost - sharing to specified groups of individuals regardless of income for non - preferred drugs and for nonemergency services provided in a hospital emergency department .

in states without fee - for - service payment rates , individuals at any income level may not be subject to cost - sharing that exceeds the maximum amounts established for individuals with income at or below 100% fpl for both inpatient and outpatient services and at or below 150% fpl for outpatient services , inpatient stays , prescribed drugs , and nonemergency use of the emergency department ( i.e. , the co - payment rates by type of service and family income as shown in table 3 and table 4 ) .

in no case can the maximum cost - sharing established by the state be equal to or exceed the amount the state medicaid agency pays for both inpatient and outpatient services .

certain medicaid subgroups and specific medicaid services are exempt from the application of deductibles , coinsurance , co - payments , or similar charges .

such subgroups include individuals classified as either categorically needy or medically needy who are children under the age of 18 ( or up to the age of 21 at state option ) ; certain pregnant women for services related to the pregnancy or to any other medical conditions that may complicate the pregnancy ; and certain institutionalized individuals who are required to spend all but a minimal amount of their income required for personal needs .

federal statute and regulations prohibit states from requiring out - of - pocket costs for the following exempted services: emergency services ( eg , both inpatient and outpatient services furnished by a qualified provider ) that are needed to evaluate or stabilize an emergency medical condition ; family planning services and supplies for individuals of childbearing age including contraceptives and pharmaceuticals for which the state claims or could claim a 90% federal share of the total cost ; preventive services , including well - baby and well - child care services in either the managed care or fee - for - service delivery systems ; pregnancy - related services ; provider - preventable services ( eg , health care acquired conditions ) .

based on data from the same kaiser family foundation survey noted above , 46 states ( including the district of columbia ) required co - payments in sfy2013 .

five states ( hawaii , nevada , new jersey , rhode island and texas ) had no co - payment requirements .

two states indicated that co - payments were enforceable ( eg , providers are allowed to deny services when a co - payment requirement is not met ) .

in arkansas , such enforceability applies to co - payments for adults with income over 100% fpl ( pending waiver approval ) .

maine plans to make pharmacy co - p ayments enforceable for those with income over 100% fpl .

in addition , maryland will end co - payment enforceability for a waiver group as it transitions to the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 as amended ) expansion coverage .

another kaiser family foundation report noted that , in january 2013 , non - zero co - payment amounts for non - preventive physician visits applicable to children in families with income at 151% fpl ranged from a low of $0.50 in georgia to a high of $25 in utah and texas .

higher co - payment amounts for a non - preventive physician visit applied to children in families with income at 201% fpl and ranged from a low of $0.50 in georgia to a high of $25 in utah and texas .

in addition , a co - payment amount equal to 10% of the cost of a non - preventive physician visit applied to children in families with income at 201% fpl in louisiana .

specific medicaid subgroups are exempt from out - of - pocket costs , including ( 1 ) certain children , ( 2 ) pregnant women , ( 3 ) individuals in nursing homes or who receive services provided in home and community - based settings , ( 4 ) terminally ill individuals receiving hospice care , ( 5 ) indians who receive care through indian health care providers or through what is called contract health services , and ( 6 ) individuals with breast or cervical cancer .

exclusions from the application of both premiums and point - of - service cost - sharing are identified in table 5 below .

federal regulations delineate beneficiary and public notice requirements related to out - of - pocket costs for medicaid beneficiaries .

the state medicaid agency must provide a public schedule describing current premiums and other cost - sharing requirements , including ( 1 ) individuals who are subject to premiums or cost - sharing along with the current amounts ; ( 2 ) the mechanisms for making payments for required premiums and cost - sharing charges ; ( 3 ) the consequences for applicants or recipients who do not pay a premium or cost - sharing charge ; ( 4 ) a list of hospitals charging cost - sharing for nonemergency use of the emergency department ; and ( 5 ) a list of preferred drugs or a mechanism to access such a list , including the state medicaid agency website .

finally , state medicaid agencies must make the public schedule available to a number of subgroups in a manner that ensures that affected applicants , beneficiaries and providers are likely to have access to such a notice .

for beneficiaries , this information must be made available at the time of enrollment or reenrollment subsequent to the redetermination of medicaid eligibility .

it must also be made available when premiums , service - related cost - sharing charges , or aggregate limits are revised .

for applicants , this information must be available at the time of application .

the general public must also have access to this information .

when a state wishes to establish or substantially modify existing premiums or cost - sharing , or to change the consequences for nonpayment , the agency must provide the public with advance notice of the state plan amendment ( spa ) , specifying the amount of premiums or cost - sharing and who will be subject to these charges .

the agency must also provide a reasonable opportunity to comment on such spas , and it must submit documentation with the spa to demonstrate that these requirements are met .

if premiums or cost - sharing are substantially modified during the spa approval process , the agency must provide additional public notice .

