federal executive branch agencies hold an extensive real property portfolio that includes more than 871,000 buildings and structures , and 40 million acres of land worldwide .

these assets have been acquired over a period of decades to help agencies fulfill their diverse missions .

agencies hold properties with a range of uses , including barracks , health clinics , warehouses , laboratories , national parks , boat docks , and offices .

as agencies' missions change over time , so , too , do their real property needs , thereby rendering some assets less useful or unneeded altogether .

healthcare provided by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , for example , has shifted in recent decades from predominately hospital - based inpatient care to a greater reliance on clinics and outpatient care , with a resulting change in space needs .

similarly , the department of defense ( dod ) reduced its force structure by 36% after the cold war ended , and has engaged in several rounds of base realignments and installation closures .

real property disposition is the process by which federal agencies identify and then transfer , donate , or sell facilities and land they no longer need .

disposition is an important asset - management function because the costs of maintaining unneeded properties can be substantial .

in fy2013 , for example , the government disposed of 21,464 unneeded properties with annual operating costs of $411 million .

savings generated by the disposal of unneeded properties might be applied to pressing real property needs , such as improving building security or repairing existing facilities , or towards other pressing policy issues , such as reducing the national debt .

disposition is also important because it is a mechanism by which state and local governments , nonprofit organizations , and businesses may acquire federal property .

in the hands of nonfederal entities , the previously underutilized properties may be used to provide services to the public , such as temporary housing , or contribute to economic development .

this report begins with an explanation of the central role played by the general services administration ( gsa ) in the disposal of federal real property at most agencies .

it then provides a discussion of the unique disposal processes at dod and the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) , which each have independent statutory authority to dispose of their own properties .

it concludes with an overview of the environmental and historic preservation requirements that apply to the disposal of properties at all federal agencies .

the federal real property and administrative services act of 1949 ( property act ) applies to real property held by most federal agencies .

the property act gives gsa the authority to dispose of real property that federal agencies no longer need , although some agencies have been granted the authority to dispose of some or all of their own property .

under the provisions of the property act , gsa disposes of federal real property for federal agencies that lack independent statutory authority to do so themselves .

agencies without independent disposal authority generally follow the process described in this section .

the disposal processes at two landholding agencies with broad independent disposal authority , dod and usps , are also discussed in this report .

dod and usps are two of the three largest federal landholding agencies , as measured by owned square feet .

dod is the largest , with more than 1.7 billion square feet of owned space in its inventory , while usps is the third largest with 197 million square feet of owned space .

both dod and usps have independent statutory authority to dispose of unneeded real property , although the scope of that authority differs .

while usps has been given autonomy in disposing of all of its properties , dod's disposal authorities are more limited and more complicated .

the remainder of this section discusses the disposal process at each agency .

the transfer of surplus federal property may be subject to an array of environmental requirements intended to protect human health and safety , natural resources , and cultural resources .

which requirements may apply to the transfer of a property would depend upon the site - specific conditions , such as the presence of wastes , contamination , and other potential hazards .

for example , federal facilities that manage hazardous wastes or underground storage tanks are subject to closure requirements similar to private industrial facilities .

if contamination is present , remediation may be required to prevent potentially harmful exposures subsequent to transfer .

some federal facilities also may contain more unique hazards , such as unexploded ordnance on dod installations or radiological wastes from the past production of nuclear weapons at department of energy ( doe ) facilities .

federal facilities not involved in industrial operations still may contain hazardous substances from other sources that could present challenges for transfer and reuse , such as asbestos or lead - based paint in buildings .

in addition to human health and safety hazards , the potential impacts of a transfer on certain natural or cultural resources ( such as historic buildings ) also must be assessed .

how such resources would be protected by the recipient of a federal property subsequent to transfer may be a potential issue .

the time and resources necessary for compliance with environmental and historical requirements may vary considerably among individual properties depending on applicability .

the process of determining which federal requirements may apply and how compliance must be demonstrated is sometimes referred to as the environmental review process ( or environmental and historical review ) .

actions necessary to complete the review process are generally integrated into the broader due diligence process established in federal regulation , during which the landholding agency would be required to assess and determine various details about the property , such as any past activities or present conditions at the site that could pose a human health or safety hazard — the existence of mold hazards , radon hazards , asbestos - containing materials , or lead - based paint in any building ; whether pesticides have been applied in the management of the property ; or whether past activities at the site resulted in the release of hazardous substances that must be remediated ; the property's location — in a federally designated floodplain , wetland , or coastal zone ; or in an area that contains federally threatened or endangered species ; and the property's historical significance — a site , buildings or fixtures on the site that are historically , architecturally , or culturally significant .

for each criterion , at a minimum , the landholding agency would be required to evaluate the property to determine whether or not such conditions or issues exist .

depending on that evaluation , the agency may be required to comply with certain environmental laws , regulations , or executive orders before they can make a final decision regarding the disposition of the property .

certain federal requirements may apply specifically because the property disposition would involve a transfer from federal ownership .

that is , the disposition may be subject to certain requirements that generally would not apply ( or could apply differently ) to property transfers between nonfederal agencies or private entities .

the principal federal statutes that govern the environmental review process , identification and remediation of hazardous substances , and historic preservation are outlined below , followed by a summary of the requirements of each statute .

other federal and state laws also may apply to a property transfer depending on the site - specific conditions .

the national environmental protection act ( nepa ; 42 u.s.c .

§§4321 et seq. ) .

under nepa , federal agencies must consider the environmental impacts of an action before making a final decision about that action .

with regard to surplus property disposal , the responsible federal agency would be required to identify impacts associated with both reporting the property as excess and disposal of the property , but not necessarily its future development that would not constitute a federal action itself .

the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 ( cercla ; 42 u.s.c .

§§9601 et seq. ) .

section 120 ( h ) of cercla generally requires federal agencies to clean up contaminated federal property prior to transferring the property out of federal ownership , unless assurances are provided that the cleanup will be carried out subsequent to transfer and certain conditions are satisfied .

to ensure compliance with cercla , a federal agency would be required to certify whether or not hazardous substance activity took place during the period of federal ownership and whether , as a result , hazardous substances were released that may warrant remediation .

the national historic preservation act ( nhpa ; 16 u.s.c .

§§470 et seq. ) .

section 106 of nhpa requires any federal agency with jurisdiction over a proposed federal undertaking to take into account the effect that the undertaking will have on any district , site , building , structure , or object that is included in or eligible for inclusion in the national register of historic places ( i.e. , a property significant in american history , architecture , archaeology , engineering , or culture ) .

some level of compliance with nepa and cercla generally would be required for all federal agency actions related to the closure and disposal of federal surplus property , at least to document whether there would be any significant environmental impacts with respect to nepa and whether hazardous substances may be present with respect to cercla .

compliance with nhpa would be required if the property being disposed is included or eligible for inclusion in the national register or if its disposal would affect such a property .

within the framework of documenting any environmental impacts associated with the property disposal , under nepa , the responsible agency would incorporate information on how compliance with cercla would be demonstrated and whether compliance with any other laws , such as nhpa , would be required .

signed into law in 1970 , nepa has been interpreted as having two primary goals — to ensure that federal agencies consider the environmental impacts of their actions before a final decision is made about the action , and to require those agencies to inform the public of those impacts .

as a procedural statute , nepa is intended to inform a federal agency's decision - making process , but does not require that agency to elevate environmental concerns above others .

regulations implementing nepa were promulgated by the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) .

those regulations identify actions subject to nepa to include those over which a federal agency has some control or responsibility .

for example , nepa may apply to federal agency decisions on the adoption of agency plans and the approval of specific projects .

that is , any planning decision or approval that must be made by the landholding agency regarding surplus property disposal may be subject to some level of review under nepa .

for non - brac properties , agency actions subject to nepa generally include those related to decisions regarding the ( 1 ) closure of the facility and reporting it as excess ; and ( 2 ) disposition of the property .

after it accepts a property for disposal from another federal agency , gsa takes responsibility for completing the nepa process for any subsequent disposal - related activities .

however , the landholding agency would be required to complete any necessary nepa review for actions that pertain to its decision to report the property as excess .

while multiple actions related to surplus property disposal may be subject to nepa , the analysis required to document compliance is usually limited .

the most extensive level of analysis , the preparation of an environmental impact statement ( eis ) , is rarely required for surplus property disposal .

an eis is required for actions that will significantly affect the quality of the human environment .

among other requirements , it must identify and analyze any impacts of the proposal and identify all reasonable alternatives to the proposal , as well as the impacts of those alternatives .

with the exception of federal actions undertaken as part of the brac process , federal real property disposal rarely involves significant environmental impacts .

for federal real estate transactions , significant impacts generally occur ( i.e. , the preparation of an eis may be required ) when the action is likely to involve major new construction .

that may be the case when a federal agency is buying property for development , but not generally when disposing of a property .

while a property transferred from federal ownership may be further developed , the landholding agency is not required to determine how a potential buyer may use the property before making a decision to dispose of it .

often property disposal involves the disposition of a property that has already been developed .

implementing the brac process , however , involves the closure of one military property and the potential expansion of another .

as a result , decisions implementing the brac process have been those most likely to require the preparation of an eis .

regardless of whether an eis would be required , agencies are obligated to identify the potential impacts of the disposition to ensure that it would not have significant impacts .

if the impact of the proposed disposition is uncertain , an agency may ensure compliance with nepa by preparing an environmental assessment ( ea ) .

the result would be either a decision to prepare an eis or to issue a finding of no significant impacts ( fonsi ) .

nepa compliance may also be documented as part of a categorical exclusion ( catex ) determination .

a catex is applied to actions that individual agencies have determined , based on their experiences with similar actions in the past , have no individually or cumulatively significant effect on the environment .

ceq allows an action to be processed as a catex as long as it involves no extraordinary circumstances that could result in significant impacts .

each federal agency's procedures to implement nepa explicitly list actions likely to be approved as a ce or , under certain conditions , an ea .

for example gsa's nepa procedures identify specific actions that can demonstrate compliance with nepa by completing a "catex checklist. .

that checklist is used to ensure that a given action would involve no extraordinary circumstances that would result in significant environmental impacts .

included among such action , gsa explicitly identifies property disposal actions undertaken for another federal agency , where that agency has already documented compliance with applicable legal requirements such as nepa , nhpa , and cercla ; and disposal of real property required by public law wherein congress has not specifically exempted the action from the requirements of nepa .

a determination that the disposal of surplus federal property would result in no significant impacts , under nepa , is not equivalent to determining that the disposition would result in no regulated impacts .

for example , if a federal property is listed on the national register of historic places , the impact of its disposition may be deemed insignificant , but only if there are certain restrictions placed on the future use or development of the property .

within the context of ensuring compliance with nepa , the landholding agency may be required to identify measures necessary to ensure future protection of the resource .

in this instance , the requirement to protect that resource could originate with the nhpa ( or any other applicable law intended to protect cultural , archaeological , or historical resources ) , not nepa .

still , the nepa compliance process may not be complete until decisions have been made regarding how the landholding agency will ensure compliance with those other applicable laws .

as noted above , one of nepa's primary goals is to inform the public of the environmental impacts of a proposed action .

ceq regulations implementing nepa specify public involvement requirements that apply primarily to actions that require an eis .

however , individual agencies have determined that public participation may also be appropriate in the preparation of an ea / fonsi or when determining whether the action may involve some exceptional circumstances that would prevent the application of a catex .

each agency has discretion in determining the level and kind of public participation required for such actions .

for surplus property disposal , the level of public participation will likely depend on the nature of property itself and the potential public interest in that property's potential closure and disposition .

there may be public opposition to the closure and disposition of surplus federal property .

the reasons for such opposition will be unique to that property .

however , opposition could arise if there is public concern that future development of the land would no longer be subject to certain federal requirements .

for example , after the property transfers from federal ownership ( eg , to a local or state agency or to a private developer ) , the impacts of future development would generally not be subject to federal agency review or public comment under nepa or nhpa .

another example of such a law is the archeological and historical preservation act ( ahpa ) .

it requires federal agencies to identify and recover data from archeological sites threatened by their actions .

since a nonfederal land owner would not be required to take such action , members of the public may want the landholding agency to ensure that the property has been adequately surveyed to identify archeological sites or to make the sale conditional on a buyer agreeing to implement certain actions if archeological sites are later discovered .

the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) is the principal federal statute that addresses releases of hazardous substances into the environment on both federal and nonfederal lands .

section 120 ( h ) of cercla generally requires the united states to clean up contaminated federal property prior to transferring the property out of federal ownership .

the policy premise of this provision is that the united states should assume full responsibility for the cleanup of contamination caused by federal activities , and not shift the burden of that responsibility to the recipient merely as a consequence of acquiring the property .

section 120 ( h ) applies to all contaminated federal property declared surplus to the needs of the federal government .

the agency with administrative jurisdiction over a surplus federal property generally is responsible for performing and paying for the cleanup of contamination to fulfill the financial liability of the united states .

in some cases , the recipient may voluntarily agree to pay for the cleanup of a contaminated surplus federal property in exchange for a discounted purchase price to acquire the property , or other conditions of ownership that the recipient may desire .

as is the case with federal facilities that remain in federal ownership , funds available for the cleanup of surplus federal properties are subject to the availability of appropriations to the federal agencies that administer those properties .

for example , the department of defense ( dod ) performs and pays for the cleanup of surplus federal property on military installations closed under a consolidated base realignment and closure ( brac ) round out of funds appropriated to the dod base closure account .

federal facilities generally are not eligible for cleanup funds appropriated to the environmental protection agency ( epa ) under the superfund program , which addresses nonfederal sites elevated for priority federal attention .

however , epa oversees the cleanup of federal facilities through the superfund program in conjunction with the states , in a manner similar to the enforcement of cleanup liability at nonfederal sites .

at federal facilities , the administering federal agency serves as the responsible party on behalf of the united states .

section 120 ( h ) of cercla does not bind the united states to cleaning up a surplus federal property for any one particular land use .

as a result , the reuse of a property is negotiated between the administering federal agency and the recipient of the property .

disagreements over reuse can arise if the recipient intends to use the property for a purpose that would necessitate a level of cleanup that the federal agency may consider too costly , relative to available appropriations to fund the cleanup .

the capabilities of cleanup technologies also could constrain the reuse of a surplus federal property , if it would be impractical to achieve a level of cleanup that would be needed to make the property suitable for a use that the recipient may desire .

consistent with the policy premise of section 120 ( h ) of cercla and retroactive liability under section 107 of the statute , the united states remains responsible for contamination found not to have been sufficiently remediated after the property is transferred out of federal ownership .

section 120 ( h ) ( 3 ) requires the continuing liability of the united states to be specified through a "covenant" incorporated into the deed transferring the property out of federal ownership .

the covenant must warrant that all remedial actions necessary to protect human health and the environment have been taken before the date of transfer , and that the united states shall conduct any additional remedial actions found to be necessary after the date of transfer .

a clause also must be included in the deed granting the united states access to the property to perform cleanup actions for which it may be responsible .

in practice , the contents of a deed can place certain limitations on the continuing responsibility of the united states .

a deed to a transferred federal property typically warrants cleanup only to a level suitable for the land use negotiated prior to transfer .

in some cases , a deed may include a restriction prohibiting certain uses that would be considered unsuitable relative to the level of cleanup performed by the united states .

under such deed restrictions , the united states typically assumes responsibility for additional cleanup only to the extent that more work is found to be needed to make the originally agreed - upon use suitable .

if the new owner later decides to use the property for a different purpose , the new owner typically must assume responsibility for the additional cleanup costs to make the property suitable for the desired purpose .

in some instances , a deed may prohibit certain land uses even if the new owner is willing to pay the cleanup costs .

for example , a deed to a decommissioned military training range may prohibit residential or other land uses because of limitations on cleanup technologies to detect and remove unexploded ordnance .

cleanup capabilities may be constrained especially when ordnance is located beneath the surface , or concealed on the surface by dense vegetation .

some surplus federal properties may contain a mix of contaminated and uncontaminated parcels of land .

although the clean parcels may be ready for reuse , the requirement to clean up the contaminated parcels under section 120 ( h ) of cercla prior to transfer could delay the conveyance of the property as a whole .

to address such situations , the 102 nd congress enacted the community environmental response facilitation act ( cerfa ; p.l .

102-426 ) in 1992 .

this law amended section 120 ( h ) by adding a new subsection ( 4 ) that authorizes the transfer of uncontaminated parcels on a surplus federal property while cleanup continues on the contaminated parcels .

this parcel - by - parcel approach is intended to avoid potential delays in the transfer of "clean" surplus federal lands for reuse , especially such lands on closed military installations where economic redevelopment is desired to replace lost jobs .

in the event that previously unknown contamination is later discovered after transfer out of federal ownership , section 120 ( h ) ( 4 ) ( d ) requires that a deed to an uncontaminated parcel still include a covenant warranting that the united states shall conduct cleanup actions that may become necessary to address contamination attributed to past federal activities .

the cleanup of a contaminated parcel may take several years or more , depending on the type and level of contamination , technical feasibility of cleanup actions , and availability of appropriations to pay for the cleanup .

in such situations , the requirement to complete cleanup prior to transfer out of federal ownership could result in delaying the transfer .

enacted in the 104 th congress , section 334 of the national defense authorization act for fy1997 ( p.l .

104-201 ) amended section 120 ( h ) ( 3 ) of cercla to add a new subsection ( c ) that allows the transfer of a contaminated parcel on a surplus federal property before cleanup is complete , if certain conditions are satisfied .

although congress enacted this amendment in annual defense authorization legislation , this authority applies to any surplus federal property administered by any federal agency , not just surplus u.s. military property .

section 120 ( h ) ( 3 ) ( c ) specifically authorizes a deferral of the cleanup covenant to allow the transfer of title to a contaminated parcel on a surplus federal property before cleanup is complete .

federal agencies often refer to this deferral of the covenant as an "early" transfer , although the statute does not use this term .

the deed to a contaminated property transferred out of federal ownership must contain assurances that the cleanup still will be carried out after the property leaves federal ownership .

the federal agency responsible for the performance of the cleanup also must identify the funding needed to carry out the cleanup in its annual budget requests .

the deed also must restrict the use of the property to purposes that would be protective of human health and environment , while the cleanup proceeds .

for example , at the time of transfer , a property may be suitable for industrial use because the risks of exposure to contamination may be within an acceptable range , whereas other land uses that would result in potentially harmful exposure would be restricted until the property is cleaned up sufficiently for that purpose .

once cleanup is complete , the united states remains obligated to provide a covenant at that time , warranting that all necessary actions to protect human health and the environment have been taken to make the property suitable for its intended , eventual use .

the early transfer of a contaminated surplus federal property that epa has designated on the national priorities list ( npl ) for cleanup purposes is subject to the concurrence of the administrator of epa and the governor of the state in which the facility is located .

the early transfer of a contaminated surplus federal property that is not listed on the npl still requires the concurrence of the governor of the state in which the facility is located , but not epa .

federal agencies proposing an early transfer also must provide the public at least 30 days advance notice and an opportunity to comment on the proposed transfer before it is executed .

when federal property is sold , a review under the national historic preservation act ( nhpa ) may be required to determine whether the action will adversely affect historic properties and how to mitigate those effects .

courts describe nhpa as a "stop , look , and listen" statute that directs an agency to consider the effects of its action on historic sites , but does not require an agency to stop a project that would harm that property .

instead , nhpa requires an agency to make an informed determination following a decision making process that is known as a section 106 review .

federal agencies conduct a section 106 review when their actions , known as undertakings , may affect a historic property .

an undertaking is defined as "a project , activity , or program funded in whole or in part under the direct or indirect jurisdiction of a federal agency. .

the section 106 process begins before federal funding is provided or a federal license issued .

starting a section 106 review early in the project development process ensures that agencies consider "a broad range of alternatives" during the planning process .

when a federal agency finds an action is an undertaking , its first step is to identify the parties required to be involved in the decision making process , who are known as consulting parties .

nhpa regulations define who must be invited as a consulting party , including the state historic preservation officer ( shpo ) , the tribal historic preservation officer ( thpo ) , local and tribal officials , and , if the federal undertaking involves issuing a permit , the applicant .

other interested parties may participate , such as historic associations and general members of the public , but do not have the same standing in the decision making process as the consulting parties .

next , the agency identifies the area of potential effects ( ape ) , defined as "the geographic area or areas within which an undertaking may directly or indirectly cause alterations in the character or use of historic properties. .

at this stage , the action agency , with the consulting parties , identifies historic properties that may be affected .

historic properties are defined as those listed or eligible for listing in the national register of historic places .

if no historic properties are within the ape , the section106 process concludes .

when historic properties are found within the ape , the agency will coordinate with the consulting parties to determine whether the undertaking will adversely affect the property .

if no adverse effects are found , the section 106 process ends .

the undertaking does not have to touch a historic property physically for an agency to find an adverse effect , as the nhpa regulations state that the agency must consider both direct and indirect effects of the project , as well as reasonably foreseeable effects that may occur later in time or at some distance , or are cumulative .

accordingly , nhpa would apply not only to selling federally owned historic buildings but may also apply when the sale of a non - historic building would adversely affect historic properties .

for example , if the sale of a non - historic federal building could change the character of a historic area , that might be considered an adverse effect and would require further analysis .

if adverse effects on historic properties are found , nhpa does not require the agency to reject the undertaking .

instead , the agency is required to compile adequate documentation of its adverse effects findings , make the documentation available to the public , and provide an opportunity for comment .

an additional consulting party may be invited at this stage — the advisory council on historic places ( achp or the council ) .

the agency , with the cooperation of the consulting parties , shall "develop and evaluate alternatives or modifications to the undertaking that could avoid , minimize , or mitigate adverse effects on historic properties. .

when the parties agree on avoidance and / or mitigation of the adverse effects , the agency and the shpo / thpo will enter into a binding agreement known as a memorandum of agreement ( moa ) , and consulting parties are invited to concur .

completion of a moa concludes the section 106 process .

if the parties cannot reach an agreement on the adverse effects , the agency , the shpo / thpo , or the council may terminate the section 106 process .

the terminating party must notify the others in writing of the basis for ending consultation , and the achp will provide the opportunity for the parties ( including itself ) and the public to comment .

however , termination of the section 106 process does not mean that the project must also be terminated .

if the agency decides to continue the undertaking , the agency must document its rationale and demonstrate that it considered the comments of the council .

the agency must give a copy of this document to the consulting parties and make it available to the public .

then , the agency may advance its project despite any harm to historic properties , taking any mitigation measures it chooses .

