enacted in response to concerns that the united states could lose its historical advantages in scientific and technological innovation , the 2007 america competes act ( p.l .

110-69 ) sought "to invest in innovation through research and development , and to improve the competitiveness of the united states. .

containing eight titles and dozens of provisions affecting at least a half - dozen federal agencies , the principal policy contributions of the america competes act were the establishment of the doubling path policy for certain federal physical sciences and engineering ( ps&e ) research accounts and the authorization ( or reauthorization ) of various federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education programs .

major provisions of the america competes act , and its successor , the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-358 ) , have expired .

most of the funding authorizations in the america competes act spanned the three - year period between fy2008 and fy2010 .

congress extended these authorizations for a second three - year period — through fy2013 — as part of the 2010 reauthorization .

congress has not enacted legislation to authorize funding for competes acts programs and agencies since then .

bills were introduced , but not enacted , in the 113 th congress .

legislators in the 114 th congress have also moved to reauthorize the competes acts .

the america competes reauthorization act of 2015 ( h.r .

1806 ) and the america competes reauthorization act of 2015 ( h.r .

1898 ) , as well as several stand - alone bills containing selected provisions from these reauthorization measures , have been introduced and , in some cases , passed by the house .

in the senate , members have introduced a bill called the energy title of america competes reauthorization act of 2015 ( s. 1398 ) .

this report provides an overview of the competes acts for readers seeking background and legislative context .

it was written to serve as both a primer and a reference document .

it includes a description and legislative history of the acts , a summary of the broad policy debate , and an examination of the implementation status of selected competes - related programs and policies .

this report also provides analysis of major bills to reauthorize the competes acts from the 113 th and 114 th congresses .

for authorized and appropriated funding for competes - related accounts through fy2013 , see crs report r42779 , america competes acts: fy2008 to fy2013 funding tables , by [author name scrubbed] .

the contemporary federal conversation about scientific and technological advancement generally centers on concerns about prosperity and security .

the possibility that the united states has or could lose its historic strengths in scientific and technological advancement — and therefore has or could lose the prosperity and security attributed to that advancement — has become the central rationale for a portfolio of otherwise disparate federal programs , policies , and activities .

sometimes identified as "innovation" or "competitiveness" policy , these programs , policies , and activities address education , tax , patent , immigration , economic development , research and development , telecommunications , and other policy issues — either alone or in combination — that policymakers perceive as critical to the u.s. scientific and technological enterprise .

the 2007 america competes act ( p.l .

110-69 ) was an example of this type of policymaking .

designed to "invest in innovation through research and development , and to improve the competitiveness of the united states," the law authorized $32.7 billion in appropriations for certain federal ps&e research accounts , stem education activities , and innovation - related programs and policies between fy2008 and fy2010 .

in particular , the law established what is commonly referred to as the "doubling path policy" for ps&e research .

this policy provided annual increases in authorized funding for the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the scientific and technical research and services ( strs ) and construction of research facilities ( crf ) accounts at the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , and the office of science account at the department of energy ( doe ) — with the implicit goal of doubling combined funding for these accounts over a seven - year period ( from an fy2006 baseline ) .

some of the stem education and innovation - related programs and policies authorized by the act include the math now program at the department of education ( ed ) , the manufacturing extension partnership program at nist , and the advanced research project agency - energy ( arpa - e ) at doe .

the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-358 ) reaffirmed the central policy thrusts of the america competes act .

it , too , sought to "invest in innovation through research and development , and to improve the competitiveness of the united states. .

however , under the reauthorization , funding for the ps&e doubling path accounts grew more slowly — they would have doubled over an 11-year period instead of a 7-year period — and stem education provisions focused more on college and university - level programs rather than on programs targeting earlier grades .

other provisions in the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 allow federal agencies to offer innovation prizes and direct the department of commerce ( doc ) to establish a new loan guarantee program for manufacturers , as well as a regional innovation program .

the reauthorization also repealed certain stem education program authorizations , particularly those that did not receive appropriations between fy2008 and fy2010 ( eg , math now ) .

overall , the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 authorized $45.5 billion in appropriations between fy2011 and fy2013 .

congressional debate about the america competes act and the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 was substantively similar .

advocates for the competes acts argued that additional support for r&d in the physical sciences and engineering , and in stem education , would lead to innovation and improve u.s. competitiveness .

they noted that many experts consider innovation , particularly technological innovation , to be a driving force behind u.s. global economic competitiveness and national prosperity .

as such , many observers consider innovation a crucial national asset .

proponents of the acts further asserted that the united states is at risk of losing its innovation advantage .

they argued that a combination of external pressures and internal weaknesses threatens the u.s. global position .

for example , they noted that changes in the industrial bases and educational attainment rates of rapidly developing countries like china and india have led many analysts to conclude that these countries are able to compete for a growing percentage of the world's high - value jobs and industries .

these global changes , advocates asserted , appeared to be accompanied by perceived weaknesses in areas that have long been u.s. strengths .

in particular , the acts' proponents raised concerns about federal funding for research in the physical sciences and engineering and about the education and training of u.s. scientists , engineers , and technicians .

this case was more fully laid out in the national academies publication rising above the gathering storm , which is widely believed to have contributed to the shape and scope of the america competes act .

the argument for , as well as major provisions in , the america competes act can also be traced to a 2006 proposal by president george w. bush , known as the american competitiveness initiative ( aci ) .

opposition to the acts tended to fall into three broad categories: ( 1 ) questions about fundamental assumptions , ( 2 ) preferences for alternative policies or approaches , and ( 3 ) cost .

for example , some analysts disputed fundamental assumptions driving provisions designed to increase the number of stem graduates , arguing that there is a lack of evidence of extensive stem workforce shortages and that the bigger challenge is a dearth of attractive employment opportunities in stem fields .

other analysts preferred to use regulatory and tax policy tools to achieve the acts' objectives , arguing that direct federal investment in r&d in the physical sciences and engineering and in stem education could distort markets .

finally , opponents raised concerns about costs , arguing that proposed funding increases were too expensive in light of the federal deficit and debt .

the following sections describe enactment of , and selected legislative action related to , the competes acts .

overall , neither the america competes act nor the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 were fully funded or implemented .

in 2013 , the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report on implementation of the acts .

in that report , gao found that existing programs with defined ( or specific ) appropriations authorizations generally continued to operate , though not typically at authorized funding levels .

the implementation of new programs was less consistent .

according to gao , the competes acts established 28 new programs with defined appropriations authorizations .

of these , one new program was fully implemented ( arpa - e ) and five new programs were partially implemented as of may 2013 .

less is known about the disposition of policy provisions that did not receive a specific funding authorization in the acts .

the outcomes of such provisions are typically harder to assess because agencies may not explicitly report all implementation actions .

however , insight into agency activities is possible in some cases .

the following sections describe the disposition and implementation of selected competes acts provisions , including those with and without defined funding authorizations .

they provide information on ( 1 ) the status of the doubling path for physical sciences and engineering research funding , ( 2 ) implementation of certain stem education provisions , and ( 3 ) the implementation status of certain other provisions of ongoing interest to congress , including the arpa - e , data access , and innovation inducement prize provisions .

at least three bills have been introduced to reauthorize selected provisions of the competes acts in the 114 th congress: h.r .

1806 , h.r .

1898 , and s. 1398 .

both h.r .

1806 and h.r .

1898 include provisions authorizing activities and appropriations for physical sciences and engineering research , stem education , and related programs at multiple competes acts agencies .

s. 1398 focuses on the office of science and arpa - e within the department of energy .

the following sections summarize these bills and highlight some of their provisions .

information about efforts to reauthorize in the 113 th congress is included in the appendix .

in addition to their stated purposes — investing in innovation and improving u.s. competitiveness — the competes acts have effectively functioned as the primary authorization acts for nist , the office of science , and nsf since fy2008 .

the acts have also contained a variety of provisions for policy and programs at arpa - e , ostp , ed , nasa , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , the doc's economic development administration , and gao .

as such , the range of policy issues that may arise during congressional debate about reauthorization of the competes acts could include a wide variety of issues perceived as relating to innovation or competitiveness , or reauthorization , at any or all of these agencies .

however , key questions for congress may center on the future of the doubling path policy for ps&e research and authorized funding levels for nsf , nist , and the office of science as well as on the disposition and direction of the federal stem education effort .

at least four bills were introduced to reauthorize selected provisions from the competes acts in the 113 th congress: h.r .

4159 , h.r .

4186 , h.r .

4869 , and s. 2757 .

all of these bills included various policy and fiscal provisions authorizing activities and appropriations for physical sciences and engineering research , stem education , and related programs at competes act agencies .

the following sections summarize these bills and highlight some of their provisions .

h.r .

4159 the america competes reauthorization act of 2014 ( h.r .

4159 ) was introduced to "provide for investment in innovation through research and development and stem education , to improve the competitiveness of the united states , and for other purposes. .

it would have authorized funding for nsf , nist , and the office of science and would have authorized or amended various federal stem education and innovation - related programs , policies , and activities .

funding for the targeted accounts .

h.r .

4159 would have authorized appropriations to nsf , nist , and the office of science from fy2015 through fy2019 .

explanatory materials associated with h.r .

4159 do not mention the doubling path policy or the targeted accounts ; rather , they highlight provisions authorizing year - over - year increases for nsf , nist , and the office of science .

accordingly , table a - 1 shows the compound annual growth rate for these agencies under h.r .

4159 , treating fy2014 enacted appropriations as the baseline and fy2019 authorized levels ( as per h.r .

4159 ) as the final year .

for the sake of comparison with the competes acts , under h.r .

4159 , the compound annual growth rate in authorized funding for just the targeted accounts would have been 4.1% ( between the fy2006 baseline and fy2019 ) or about a 17-year doubling period .

stem education .

h.r .

4159 contained a number of stem education provisions .

examples include provisions that would have ( 1 ) established a government - wide stem education coordinator within the ostp and ( 2 ) directed ostp to develop guidance for federal agencies on increasing opportunities for federal scientists and engineers to participate in stem education activities .

at nsf , the bill would have , among other things , authorized grants to institutions of higher education for undergraduate stem education reform ; authorized grants to community colleges for advanced manufacturing education ; and authorized grants for r&d on the alignment , implementation , impact , and improvement of state - based stem education standards .

additionally , h.r .

4159 would have authorized informal education activities and made changes to the robert noyce teacher scholarship program ( noyce ) program at nsf .

other provisions .

other provisions in h.r .

4159 sought to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in stem education and employment .

for example , section 217 would have directed nsf to develop written guidance for institutions of higher education on best practices for identifying cultural or institutional barriers to the recruitment , retention , and promotion of underrepresented populations in stem degree programs and academic stem careers .

h.r .

4159 also included provisions to reauthorize the regional innovation program and federal loan guarantees for innovative technologies in manufacturing , which were established by the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 .

the bill's doe title would have authorized certain office of science research programs ( eg , high energy physics , fusion energy ) and would have reauthorized and amended arpa - e .

section 204 would have created a new advanced research projects agency - education ( arpa - ed ) at the department of education .

legislative disposition .

h.r .

4159 was referred to both the house committee on education and the workforce , as well as the house committee on science , space , and technology .

it was not marked up or enacted .

the bill was sponsored by the ranking minority member of the house committee on science , space , and technology and co - sponsored by all of the minority members of that committee .

it had no house majority members as co - sponsors .

h.r .

4186 the frontiers in innovation , research , science , and technology act of 2014 ( h.r .

4186 , first act ) was introduced "to provide for investment in innovation through scientific research and development , to improve the competitiveness of the united states , and for other purposes. .

the act included provisions that would have authorized funding for nsf and nist , as well as those that would have authorized or amended various federal stem education and innovation - related programs , policies , and activities .

funding for the targeted accounts .

the first act would have authorized appropriations to nsf and nist for fy2014 and fy2015 .

in his statement during full committee markup of h.r .

4186 , the chairman of the house committee on science , space , and technology did not mention the doubling path policy or targeted accounts , but rather said in a time of tight budgets , this bill authorizes small overall funding increases for the national science foundation ( nsf ) and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) in fiscal year 2015 .

accordingly , table a - 2 shows the compound annual growth rate in authorized appropriations for nsf and nist under the first act , treating fy2013 actual appropriations as the baseline and fy2015 authorized levels ( as per h.r .

4186 ) as the final year .

h.r .

4186 would not have authorized funding for the office of science .

as such , it is not possible to calculate a growth rate for the targeted accounts under h.r .

4186 that would be comparable to the growth rate in funding for the targeted accounts as authorized under the competes acts' doubling path policy .

stem education .

the first act included many stem education provisions , several of which sought to address governance concerns about the federal effort .

in particular , the bill would have established a stem education advisory panel to advise the president and other policymakers on stem education - related topics .

in addition , the bill would have created a federal government - wide stem education coordinating office at the nsf .

other stem education provisions in h.r .

4186 would have authorized informal stem education activities — and made changes to the noyce program — at nsf .

section 2 of h.r .

4186 would have clarified that the definition of the term "stem education" included computer science ( for the purposes of the act ) .

other provisions .

other provisions in the first act would have authorized and amended certain networking and information technology r&d ( nitrd ) program provisions , provided for coordination of international science and technology partnerships , and provided for public access to federally funded research and data .

the bill also included provisions from the transfer act of 2013 ( h.r .

2981 ) , which would have amended the small business act to revise and expand ( to certain other agencies ) an existing proof - of - concept pilot program at the national institutes of health .

some of the more intensely debated provisions of the first act would have provided defined appropriations to nsf by directorate ( eg , $742.9 million for biological sciences in fy2014 , $150.0 million for social , behavioral , and economic sciences in fy2015 ) and would have required nsf to determine ( and describe in writing ) how each grant it issues serves certain enumerated national interests .

legislative disposition .

h.r .

4186 was not enacted .

it was marked up and ordered reported by voice vote from the house committee on science , space , and technology on may 28 , 2014 .

the bill was sponsored by the chairman of the subcommittee on research and technology , house committee on science , space , and technology .

it was co - sponsored by members of the majority ( including the chairman of the full committee ) and opposed by the ranking minority member of the full committee .

it had no house minority co - sponsors .

h.r .

4869 the department of energy research and development act of 2014 ( h.r .

4869 , doe - rda ) , would have authorized funding for the office of science and other department of energy programs in fy2014 and fy2015 .

funding for targeted accounts .

doe - rda would have authorized appropriations for the office of science in fy2014 and fy2015 .

in a statement about the bill , the sponsor said funding levels for the office of science were "true to the intent of the competes act legacy. .

under doe - rda , the compound annual growth rate in authorized appropriations for the office of science would have been 7.3% , treating fy2013 actual appropriations as the baseline and fy2015 authorized levels ( as per h.r .

4869 ) as the final year .

because doe - rda would not have authorized appropriations for the other targeted accounts ( eg , nsf , as well as nist's strs and crf ) , it is not possible to calculate a growth rate for the targeted accounts under h.r .

4869 that would be comparable to the growth rate in funding for the targeted accounts as authorized under the competes acts' doubling path policy .

other provisions .

in addition to authorizing overall appropriations for doe's office of science , h.r .

4869 would have authorized certain office of science research programs ( eg , high energy physics , fusion energy ) ; addressed various issues at the national laboratories ( eg , technology transfer , early - stage technology demonstration , etc .

 ) ; and amended the arpa - e statute .

additionally , the bill would have authorized certain doe activities in crosscutting r&d , nuclear energy r&d , energy efficiency and renewable r&d , and fossil energy r&d .

legislation disposition .

h.r .

4869 was not enacted .

the subcommittee on energy , house science , space , and technology committee sought to mark up a committee print of doe - rda on june 11 , 2014 ; however , the markup was adjourned before full consideration after some of the minority members expressed concern about process .

h.r .

4869 was formally introduced two days later , on june 13 , 2014 .

h.r .

4869 was sponsored by the chairman of the subcommittee on energy , house committee on science , space , and technology and co - sponsored by members of the majority , including the chairman of the full committee .

it had no house minority co - sponsors .

s. 2757 the america competes reauthorization act of 2014 ( s. 2757 ) was introduced "to invest in innovation through research and development , to improve the competitiveness of the united states , and for other purposes. .

s. 2757 differs from the house bill of the same name ( h.r .

4159 ) .

for example , unlike h.r .

4159 , s. 2757 does not include office of science or other department of energy provisions .

however , both bills would have authorized funding for nsf and nist and would have authorized or amended various ( in some cases , differing ) federal stem education and innovation - related programs , policies , and activities .

funding for the targeted accounts .

s. 2757 would have authorized appropriations to the nsf and nist from fy2015 through fy2019 .

in a press release , the bill's sponsor stated that s. 2757 "builds on the goals and successes" of the competes acts and that it would authorize "stable and sustained increases" in funding for the nsf and nist .

the press release does not mention the doubling path policy .

accordingly , table a - 3 shows the compound annual growth rate in authorized appropriations for nsf and nist under s. 2757 , treating fy2014 enacted appropriations as the baseline and fy2019 authorized levels as the final year .

s. 2757 would not have authorized funding for the office of science .

as such , it is not possible to calculate a growth rate for the targeted accounts under s. 2757 that would be comparable to the growth rate in funding for the targeted accounts as authorized under the competes acts' doubling path policy .

stem education .

examples of stem education provisions in the senate version of the america competes reauthorization act of 2014 include section 102 , which would have directed the nstc subcommittee on stem education to encourage comments from certain stakeholders ( eg , state education agencies , nonprofits ) when updating the five - year federal strategic stem education plan ; to consider cross - agency efforts to improve stem career awareness when implementing and updating the five - year plan ; and to develop guidance and best practices for federal agencies on encouraging informal stem education , among other things .

other stem education provisions in s. 2757 would have authorized a program for stem secondary schools at nsf and would have amended and reauthorized the informal stem education and noyce programs at nsf .

section 202 directs the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) to continue providing stem education and outreach activities and to consider the long - term research and workforce needs of the mission directorates before finalizing any reorganization of nasa education programs .

other provisions .

other provisions in s. 2757 would have directed ostp to evaluate "family - responsive" federal science agency programs and policies and to provide guidance to federal science agencies on such policies .

section 511 would have allowed nsf to establish a prize program for educational practices that broaden participation in stem fields .

other provisions would have directed nsf to maintain its intellectual merit and broader impacts criteria as the basis for evaluating grant proposals and would have authorized the expansion of nsf's innovation corps ( i - corps ) program to other federal agencies .

section 611 would have reauthorized the regional innovation program at the department of commerce ; title iv , subtitle b would have reauthorized the national nanotechnology initiative .

legislative disposition .

s. 2757 was not enacted .

it was referred to the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation but was not marked up .

s. 2757 was sponsored by the ( then retiring ) chairman of the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

it had six senate majority ( and no senate minority ) co - sponsors .

