digital radio broadcasting was introduced in the 1980s as a european research project , leading to the adoption of a european standard called digital audio broadcasting ( dab ) , updated in 2006 to dab+ .

dab / dab+ standards are compatible with many digital cellphone standards , notably digital gsm , massively deployed as the european standard beginning in the early 1990's .

digital radio broadcasts over cell phones became available in europe in the late 1990's .

by 2000 , the dab radio standard and gsm had converged and dab radio chips were incorporated into some handsets to provide radio listening as a feature .

for example , a digital phone from nokia , with a tuner installed could , be converted into a radio by downloading software onto the phone , and adding an antenna ( connected to the charger connection ) and headphones ( connected to the audio jack ) .

with the introduction of smartphones , the conversion from phone to radio became more straightforward for the consumer , as discussed in the following paragraphs .

in the united states , digital broadcast radio was authorized by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) in 2002 as hd radio , a trademark of ibiquity digital corporation .

hd radio is ibiquity's core business .

radio stations that broadcast hd radio pay fees to ibiquity .

in 2011 , an analysis by pew research identified 2,103 hd radio stations , approximately 13% of all radio stations , noting that the number appeared to have plateaued .

for 2012 , pew reported that the number of radio stations dropping hd radio was greater than the number of stations adopting it .

ibiquity reported "close to 2,100" hd radio stations as of september 2014 .

the fcc reported 15,433 licensed radio stations ( am , fm , or hd channels ) as of september 2014. ibiquity also markets digital radios and radio chips ; the primary consumer market is for car radios .

as the chips it developed for digital car radios became smaller , ibiquity began to explore the possibility of including them in ipods or smartphones , promoting the radio chips to the wireless industry at a 2010 conference of the ctia , a major wireless industry association .

a dongle for ipod or iphone ( ios operating system ) had been introduced in 2009 by at least one manufacturer to provide an external hd radio connection .

hd radio dongles for wireless mobile devices using ios or android operating systems are available from several manufacturers through sources such as amazon.com or bestbuy and similar retailers .

they are activated by downloading and accepting an hd radio app .

in 2014 , the bbc launched a campaign , the "universal smartphone radio project," to expand the market for digital radio listeners by adding an fm / dab / internet chip to smartphones .

the bbc reportedly is leading an industry coalition that includes the national association of broadcasters ( nab ) and commercial radio australia .

in the united states the fm / dab / internet chip for smartphones is marketed as nextradio .

it was introduced in the united states by emmis communications in 2013 .

nextradio is enhanced through cloud services provided by tagstation .

nextradio requires a smartphone with the customized chip and radio tuner and uses an app that makes it possible to listen to over - the - air radio while connected to the internet , providing a number of interactive features .

there are approximately 32 devices currently available in the united states with nextradio pre - installed .

as emmis noted in the above - quoted filing with the securities and exchange commission , the broadcasting industry is lobbying regulators and legislators in support of including nextradio chips in smartphones .

the basis of the industry campaign , as expressed by nab , is the value of radio information in times of disaster .

the topic of using radio - enabled cellphones for emergency alerts in the united states has periodically been considered by policy makers in the field of emergency communications , but no specific actions have been taken to include this technology in emergency planning .

instead , emergency planning at the federal level has focused on improving the communications capabilities for wireless messages based on the internet protocol ( ip ) .

as discussed in the 2014 national emergency communications plan ( necp ) , ip - enabled networks permit the interconnection and management of emergency alerts and information across a wide choice of devices , including smartphones , electronic signs , next generation 9-1-1 services , and the emergency alert system ( eas ) .

a goal of the necp and emergency planners at all levels is to provide important information to as many people as possible , in a timely manner .

to that purpose , federal , state , local , and tribal agencies are using communications technologies to connect to many types of devices .

the reasoning , discussed in the 2014 necp , is that if people are most readily reached by , for example , social media , then alerts must be delivered by social media .

the number of active smartphone social network users in the united states was estimated at 97.9 million users in 2013 and is projected to grow to 160.5 million by 2017 .

the backbone of the united states' emergency alert system ( eas ) is a network of high - power am radio broadcast stations that broadcast alerts across wide areas .

these stations are referred to as primary entry point stations because they are the point of entry for emergency alerts and warnings .

these alerts are in turn picked up and distributed across the country by additional radio stations , television , most cable systems , and other media , as required by the fcc .

since 2009 , the federal emergency management administration ( fema ) has been enhancing the pep backbone to reach 90% of the country's population .

the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) jointly administers eas with the fcc , in cooperation with the national weather service ( nws ) , an organization within the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .

the noaa / nws weather radio system — referred to as national weather radio — is the primary source for alerts and warnings over eas .

measures to improve nwr and related networks are ongoing .

for example , fema is developing the integrated public alert and warning system ( ipaws ) to meet requirements for an alert system as specified by an executive order issued by president george w. bush .

when completed , ipaws should be able to accept any legitimate alert or action announcement , verify it , and relay it to wide variety of communications devices .

legislation passed in 2006 set in motion requirements for delivering alerts to cellphones , now known as wireless emergency alerts ( wea ) .

wea uses the ipaws network to deliver geographically targeted messages to cellphones over commercial wireless networks .

radio - enabled cellphones are able to receive wea messages as well as radio broadcast alerts .

similarly , over - the - air tv broadcasts might be delivered to mobile devices ( typically tablets ) that have been enabled through the addition of a dongle .

with an increasing number of people relying on mobile devices connected to the internet as their primary source of information , the reliability of these networks has become a concern for policy makers .

at the federal level , for example , the fcc has undertaken a number of actions intended to improve wireless network reliability .

rapid advancements in wireless technologies are resolving many of the network vulnerabilities identified by the fcc and other federal agencies .

for example , the industry is stepping up the installation of small - scale networks that reduce reliance on vulnerable high - site towers , and is investing in new standards that allow networks to use each other's capacity .

a new chip that may be introduced in 2015 has numerous applications that will not rely on cell towers .

for example , one application being developed for this chip is planned to handle wireless connections for 1 million people congregated at times square on new year's eve .

continued improvements in emergency communications infrastructure and management are key goals of the necp .

for example , policies need to be developed that will accelerate the transition from analog to digital technologies for 9-1-1 calls .

how responses are managed is also under study .

immediately after the boston marathon bomb attack in april 2013 , for example , fearful that a cellphone signal might trigger another bomb , authorities ordered that wireless phone networks be turned off .

this practice is being reconsidered given the ubiquity of cellphones for communications and their use for wea .

