since its founding in 2006 , the national popular vote ( npv ) initiative has promoted an agreement among the states , an interstate compact that would effectively establish direct popular election of the president and vice president without a constitutional amendment , while retaining the structure of the electoral college system .

the united states is unique among "presidential" republics by providing an indirect election to choose its chief executive .

the president and vice president of the united states are selected not by registered voters , but by the electoral college , electors appointed in the states "in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct.... " alexander hamilton , who was "present at the creation" of the constitution in 1787 , commented favorably on the electoral college system in the federalist : the mode of appointment of the chief magistrate of the united states is almost the only part of the system , of any consequence , which has escaped without severe censure , or which has received the slightest mark of approbation from its opponents... .

i venture somewhat further , and hesitate not to affirm that if the manner of it be not perfect , it is at least excellent .

it unites in an eminent degree all the advantages the union of which was to be wished for .

notwithstanding hamilton's endorsement , the first proposal to change the electoral college system by constitutional amendment was introduced as early as 1800 , and since that time more than 700 proposals to reform or eliminate the college have been introduced in congress .

reform advocates have long focused on the fact that it does not provide for direct democratic election , that less - populous states are afforded an arithmetical advantage due to the assignment of two electors to each state , regardless of population , and that the winner - take - all system makes it possible for candidates to win an electoral college majority and the presidency , while gaining fewer votes than their principal opponents in the popular election .

between 1949 and 1979 , congress considered amendments to reform the electoral college , or replace it with direct popular election , in committee and on the floor of both chambers .

proposed amendments must , however , meet the requirements of the constitution's article v , which calls for two - thirds approval by both houses of congress , and ratification by three - fourths of the states ; to date , no electoral college reform proposal has met these requirements .

proponents of the national popular vote initiative contend that their plan will achieve direct popular election while circumventing the requirements of article v , and will guarantee that the popular vote winners will always be elected president and vice president .

the fundamentals of the electoral college system were established by article ii , section 1 of the u.s. constitution , and subsequently revised by the twelfth amendment .

the constitution's minimal provisions have been complemented over the past two centuries by a range of federal and state laws , political party procedures , and enduring political traditions , leading to the system as it exists today .

the salient features of the contemporary system are detailed below .

the electors are collectively known as the electoral college ; although this phrase does not appear in the constitution , it gained currency in the early days of the republic , and was recognized in federal law in 1845 .

the electoral college has no continuing existence ; its sole purpose is to elect the president and vice president .

each state is allocated a number of electors equal to the combined total of its u.s. senate and house of representatives delegations .

the district of columbia is also allocated three electors .

at present , the total is 538 , reflecting the combined size of the senate ( 100 members ) , the house ( 435 members ) , and the district of columbia electors .

any person may serve as an elector , except senators and representatives , or any other person holding an office of "trust or profit" under the united states .

article ii , section 1 of the constitution empowers the states to "appoint [electors] , in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct.... " this grant of authority provides the constitutional basis claimed for the npv initiative .

in practice , all states currently provide for popular election of their electoral college delegations .

candidates for the office of elector are nominated by political parties and other groups on the presidential ballot in each state .

in most cases , the candidates for the office of elector are nominated by the state party committee or the party's statewide convention .

the winning presidential nominees must gain a national majority of 270 or more electoral votes , out of the 538 total , in order to be elected .

if no ticket of candidates attains a majority , then the house of representatives elects the president , and the senate the vice president , in a procedure known as contingent election .

candidates for the office of elector are selected by their respective political parties .

they are expected to vote for the presidential and vice presidential candidates to whom they are pledged .

some states seek to require them to so vote by law or other means , but most constitutional scholars hold that the electors remain free agents under the constitution , and that they may vote for any person they choose .

on rare occasions , an elector will vote for a different candidate , or abstain from casting a vote for any candidate ; he or she is known as a "faithless elector. .

the goal of presidential campaigns under the existing system is to win by carrying states that collectively cast a majority of electoral votes .

political parties and presidential campaigns tend to focus on states that are closely contested ( widely referred to as "battleground" states ) , or that have large delegations of electoral votes , or both .

winning a majority of the more populous and / or battleground states is considered crucial to obtaining the necessary electoral vote majority .

in 48 states and the district of columbia , the presidential / vice presidential ticket winning the most popular votes ( a plurality or more ) in that state is awarded all its electoral votes .

that is to say , the winning party's entire ticket of electors is elected .

this is referred to as the "winner - take - all" or "general ticket" system .

presidential election day is set by law for tuesday after the first monday in november every fourth year succeeding the election of president and vice president .

on presidential election day , voters cast one vote for the candidates they support .

they are , however , actually voting for the state political party "ticket" of electors supporting those presidential and vice presidential candidates .

presidential electors assemble on the first monday after the second wednesday in december following the general election .

they meet in their respective states , not collectively , and cast separate votes by ballot for the president and vice president .

after the electors vote , the results are sent by the states to congress and various other federal authorities .

on january 6 of the year following a presidential election , congress meets in a joint session to count the electoral votes and make a formal declaration of which candidates have been elected president and vice president .

a range of factors contributed to the emergence of the national popular vote initiative in the first decade of the 21 st century .

a major source was frustration by reform advocates after three decades of failed attempts to secure congressional approval for a direct popular election amendment .

a more immediate spur was the contentious and disputed presidential election of 2000 , which is regarded as having been a major factor contributing to the development of the npv proposal .

as noted previously , the npv initiative was the ultimate result of the various studies and proposals offered following the presidential election of 2000 .

arguments in support of and opposed to the national popular vote proposal resemble those advanced in favor of and against direct popular election of the president .

the central issue turns on the question of the asserted simplicity and democratic attractiveness of the direct election idea as compared to a more complex array of factors cited by supporters of the electoral college system .

in addition to policy issues discussed previously , some observers have also raised questions related to the npv initiative based on the fact that it is an interstate compact as defined in the constitution .

others have questioned whether npv might conflict with some provisions of the voting rights act .

critics of the electoral college system have sought direct election of the president and vice president without success for more than two centuries .

the npv initiative represents a novel effort to achieve this goal by use of an interstate compact that would circumvent the stringent requirements necessary for the proposal and ratification of constitutional amendments .

since its inception in 2006 , npv has achieved a degree of success: 14 states and the district of columbia , controlling a total of 189 electoral votes , have joined the compact since 2008 .

progress has arguably been sporadic , however , notwithstanding active campaigning by national popular vote inc. over the course of more than a decade , npv has heretofore failed to develop a sustained momentum toward its stated goal of states controlling 270 electoral votes .

the action of three states in joining npv to date in 2019 marks the most activity in a single year since 2008 ; it remains to be seen whether this trend will continue .

to date , certain democratic - leaning states have joined the compact .

the arguable lack of support in republican - controlled state legislatures raises questions about further accessions to the compact in the immediate future , particularly given the fact that the gop controlled both legislative chambers in 30 states following the 2018 elections .

to date , while the npv initiative has generated interest among supporters of direct popular election of the president , it does not appear to have gained widespread awareness among the public at large .

the findings of the march 27 , 2019 , politico / morning consult survey cited earlier in this report arguably suggest that greater public knowledge of npv might spur popular support for the compact .

this might then contribute to further momentum if additional states were to join , particularly populous ones like florida ( 29 electoral votes ) , georgia ( 16 electoral votes ) , and ohio ( 18 electoral votes ) where the compact was under active consideration in 2019 .

under these circumstances , proponents might be energized and encouraged by a sense of progress for the initiative .

at the same time , npv opponents could be expected to coalesce around the issues identified earlier in this report , and renew and increase their efforts in defense of the electoral college system .

the activities of both might ultimately bring the npv initiative to the more immediate attention of congress .

