t he information technology ( it ) industry has evolved greatly over the last half century .

continued , exponential progress in processing power and memory capacity has made it hardware not only faster but also smaller , lighter , cheaper , and easier to use .

the original it industry has also increasingly converged with the communications industry into a combined sector commonly called information and communications technology ( ict ) .

this technology is ubiquitous and increasingly integral to almost every facet of modern society .

ict devices and components are generally interdependent , and disruption of one may affect many others .

over the past several years , experts and policymakers have expressed increasing concerns about protecting ict systems from cyberattacks — deliberate attempts by unauthorized persons to access ict systems , usually with the goal of theft , disruption , damage , or other unlawful actions .

many experts expect the number and severity of cyberattacks to increase over the next several years .

the act of protecting ict systems and their contents has come to be known as cybersecurity .

a broad and arguably somewhat fuzzy concept , cybersecurity can be a useful term but tends to defy precise definition .

it usually refers to one or more of three things: a set of activities and other measures intended to protect — from attack , disruption , or other threats — computers , computer networks , related hardware and devices , software , and the information they contain and communicate , including software and data , as well as other elements of cyberspace .

the state or quality of being protected from such threats .

the broad field of endeavor aimed at implementing and improving those activities and quality .

it is related to but not generally regarded as identical to the concept of information security , which is defined in federal law ( 44 u.s.c .

§3552 ( b ) ( 3 ) ) as protecting information and information systems from unauthorized access , use , disclosure , disruption , modification , or destruction in order to provide - ( a ) integrity , which means guarding against improper information modification or destruction , and includes ensuring information nonrepudiation and authenticity ; ( b ) confidentiality , which means preserving authorized restrictions on access and disclosure , including means for protecting personal privacy and proprietary information ; and ( c ) availability , which means ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information .

cybersecurity is also sometimes conflated inappropriately in public discussion with other concepts such as privacy , information sharing , intelligence gathering , and surveillance .

privacy is associated with the ability of an individual person to control access by others to information about that person .

thus , good cybersecurity can help protect privacy in an electronic environment , but information that is shared to assist in cybersecurity efforts might sometimes contain personal information that at least some observers would regard as private .

cybersecurity can be a means of protecting against undesired surveillance of and gathering of intelligence from an information system .

however , when aimed at potential sources of cyberattacks , such activities can also be useful to help effect cybersecurity .

in addition , surveillance in the form of monitoring of information flow within a system can be an important component of cybersecurity .

the risks associated with any attack depend on three factors: threats ( who is attacking ) , vulnerabilities ( the weaknesses they are attacking ) , and impacts ( what the attack does ) .

the management of risk to information systems is considered fundamental to effective cybersecurity .

the federal role in cybersecurity involves both securing federal systems and assisting in protecting nonfederal systems .

under current law , all federal agencies have cybersecurity responsibilities relating to their own systems , and many have sector - specific responsibilities for ci .

more than 50 statutes address various aspects of cybersecurity .

figure 1 is a simplified schematic diagram of major agency responsibilities in cybersecurity .

in general , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) develops standards that apply to federal civilian ict under the federal information security modernization act ( fisma ) , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) is responsible for overseeing their implementation .

the department of defense ( dod ) is responsible for military ict , defense of the nation in cyberspace , and , through the national security agency ( nsa ) , security of national security systems ( nss ) , which handle classified information .

nsa is also part of the intelligence community ( ic ) .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has operational responsibility for protection of federal civilian systems and is the lead agency coordinating federal efforts assisting the private sector in protecting ci assets .

it is also the main federal focus of information sharing for civilian systems through its national cybersecurity and communications integration center ( nccic ) .

the department of justice ( doj ) is the lead agency for enforcement of relevant laws .

in february 2015 , the obama administration also established , via presidential memorandum , the cyber threat intelligence integration center ( ctiic ) under the director of national intelligence ( dni ) .

its purposes are to provide integrated analysis on cybersecurity threats and incidents affecting national interests across the federal government and to support relevant government entities , including the nccic and others at dod and doj .

the legislative and executive - branch actions discussed above are largely designed to address several well - established near - term needs in cybersecurity: preventing cyber - based disasters and espionage , reducing impacts of successful attacks , improving inter - and intrasector collaboration , clarifying federal agency roles and responsibilities , and fighting cybercrime .

however , those needs exist in the context of more difficult long - term challenges relating to design , incentives , consensus , and environment ( dice ) : design: experts often say that effective security needs to be an integral part of ict design .

yet , developers have traditionally focused more on features than security , for economic reasons .

also , many future security needs cannot be predicted , posing a difficult challenge for designers .

incentives: the structure of economic incentives for cybersecurity has been called distorted or even perverse .

cybercrime is regarded as cheap , profitable , and comparatively safe for the criminals .

in contrast , cybersecurity can be expensive , is by its nature imperfect , and the economic returns on investments are often unsure .

consensus: cybersecurity means different things to different stakeholders , often with little common agreement on meaning , implementation , and risks .

substantial cultural impediments to consensus also exist , not only between sectors but within sectors and even within organizations .

traditional approaches to security may be insufficient in the hyperconnected environment of cyberspace , but consensus on alternatives has proven elusive .

environment: cyberspace has been called the fastest evolving technology space in human history , both in scale and properties .

new and emerging properties and applications — especially social media , mobile computing , big data , cloud computing , and the internet of things — further complicate the evolving threat environment , but they can also pose potential opportunities for improving cybersecurity , for example through the economies of scale provided by cloud computing and big data analytics .

legislation and executive actions in the 114 th and future congresses could have significant impacts on those challenges .

for example , cybersecurity r&d may affect the design of ict , cybercrime penalties may influence the structure of incentives , the nist framework may facilitate achievement of a consensus on cybersecurity , and federal initiatives in cloud computing and other new components of cyberspace may help shape the evolution of cybersecurity .

