congressional involvement in the siting of museums in the district of columbia began in the early 19 th century , when congress began to receive petitions from constituents to build museums in the nation's capital .

for example , in 1816 , painter d. w. boudet asked congress for establishing in the city of washington , a museum of natural and artificial curiosities , and praying that he may , under such regulations and restrictions as congress may think proper to prescribe , have permission to collect such of the national trophies , presents , and other articles of curiosity , as are the property of the public , for the purpose of arranging and displaying them in his museum when established .

since at least the 1840s , the federal government has supported the creation and funding of museums in washington , dc .

after the patent office building — the home of the u.s. patent office from 1842 until 1932 — was completed , one of its first uses was to display the european art collection of john varden , a prominent washingtonian .

while not , perhaps , the first display of art in a federal building in the district of columbia , the display of varden's collection was significant as he was named the first "'curator' of the newly created 'national institute' for government - owned artistic and historic items," and his collection formed the basis of the new institute's collections .

upon his death in 1829 , james smithson — a british scientist — bequeathed his fortune to the united states "to found at washington , under the name of the smithsonian institution , an establishment for the increase & diffusion of knowledge among men. .

in 1846 , congress formally accepted smithson's gift and founded the smithsonian institution .

since then , it has grown to 20 museums in washington , dc , and new york city .

further , in creating the smithsonian , congress consolidated existing "objects of art , natural history , etc. , belonging to the united states in washington" into a single organization .

since the creation of the smithsonian institution , congress has used its authorizing statute as a template for establishing other museums .

these include museums that have become part of the smithsonian institution ( eg , the national museum of the american indian and the national museum of african american history and culture ) and museums that operate independently ( eg , the national gallery of art and the u.s .

holocaust memorial museum ) .

for most museums operated in whole or in part by the federal government , congressional authorization is required .

in the 113 th congress ( 2013-2014 ) , legislation was introduced to authorize the national museum of the american latino , and to authorize a commission to study the potential creation of a national women's history museum .

for the national museum of the american latino , a commission reported to congress in 2011 that the museum should be established and made part of the smithsonian institution .

since then , proposals to authorize the museum have been introduced , but no further action has been taken either by the committees of jurisdiction or the house or the senate .

in december 2014 , the commission to study the potential creation of a national women's history museum was established in the carl levin and howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 ( p.l .

113-291 ) .

it will report "not later than 18 months after the date of the first meeting of the commission" on whether the museum should be authorized , how it should be funded , and whether it should be a smithsonian museum .

this report focuses on contemporary museum creation in the district of columbia .

using examples from past museum authorizations , the three most common methods of establishing a museum — creation of a museum study commission , donation acceptance , and direct authorization through law — are examined .

the report also provides issues for congressional consideration in considering new museum creation .

these include the museum's subject matter , funding , location , management , and the potential role of current laws , such as the commemorative works act ( 40 u.s.c .

§§8901-8909 ) — which guides the placement of memorials in the district of columbia and prohibits construction in certain areas of the nation's capital — for the future of museums on and around the national mall .

museums in the district of columbia can be broadly divided into two groups: private and federal .

private museums are not within the purview of congress and are not addressed in this report .

federal museums are generally created by statute and may receive appropriations for museum operations .

statutorily created federal museums can be categorized into smithsonian and non - smithsonian museums .

historically , congress has authorized federal museums in the district of columbia under one of three circumstances: following the recommendation of an advisory commission , accepting a gift or donation , or directly authorizing a museum .

should congress choose to authorize a commission to study the potential creation of a new museum or accept a donation , it would need to enact a statute to authorize a museum .

since 1980 , congress has authorized four new museums in the district of columbia — the united states holocaust memorial museum , the national law enforcement museum , the national museum of the american indian , and the national museum of african american history and culture .

additionally , legislation has been introduced to authorize the national museum of the american latino .

regardless of the process employed , if congress considers authorizing a new museum in the district of columbia , several issues might warrant consideration .

these include the subject matter , management and operations , location , funding , and the role of the commemorative works act ( cwa ) .

since before james smithson's gift to the united states , congress authorized most new federal museums in the district of columbia .

that involvement continues today with current legislative proposals for a new national museum of the american latino and a national women's history museum .

the process used to create new museums has varied historically .

in some cases , congress has accepted donations of collections and buildings from prominent citizens ( eg , the national gallery of art and the national museum of the american indian ) .

in other instances , congress has taken the recommendation of presidential and congressional advisory commissions to create new museums ( eg , the holocaust museum and the national museum of african american history and culture ) .

in authorizing a new museum , congress could decide whether it should be part of the smithsonian institution , part of another agency , or a stand - alone entity .

these decisions could be made with or without a private sector donation or a commission's recommendations .

recent practices suggest that the use of commissions to make recommendations on the potential creation of a new museum has been prevalent over the last 30 years .

using an advisory commission to make recommendation on future museums can provide congress with valuable information , as the commission's members are subject matter experts in the proposed museum's subject and museum management .

following the issuance of a commission's report , which could address virtually any topic congress believes is relevant , congress can make a decision about the museum's subject matter , funding , location , management and operations , and whether the cwa should apply .

the desire to continue to build new museums does not seem likely to abate in the coming years .

how new proposals might be considered and if any standard process should be applied to the museum evaluation and authorization process could be a useful tool for congress .

since the number of museum proposals , however , is generally not large in any given congress , prescribing specific processes for the evaluation of new museum ideas might not be necessary or warranted .

