s tates and localities can have significant interest in the manner and extent to which federal officials enforce provisions of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) regarding the exclusion and removal of unauthorized aliens .

some states and localities , concerned that federal enforcement disrupts families and communities , or infringes upon human rights , have adopted "sanctuary" policies limiting their cooperation in federal efforts .

other states and localities , in contrast , concerned about the costs of providing benefits or services to unauthorized aliens , or such aliens settling in their communities , have adopted measures to deter unauthorized aliens from entering or remaining within their jurisdiction .

in some cases , such states or localities have also sued to compel federal officials to enforce the immigration laws , or to compensate them for costs associated with unauthorized migration .

this report provides an overview of challenges by states to federal officials' alleged failure to enforce the ina or other provisions of immigration law .

it begins by discussing ( 1 ) the lawsuits filed by six states in the mid - 1990s ; ( 2 ) arizona's counterclaims to the federal government's suit to enjoin enforcement of s.b .

1070 ; and ( 3 ) mississippi's challenge to the deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) initiative .

it then describes the challenge brought by over 25 states or state officials in december 2014 to the obama administration's proposal to expand daca and create a similar program for unauthorized aliens whose children are u.s. citizens or lawful permanent resident aliens ( lprs ) ( commonly known as dapa ) .

the report does not address challenges to the federal government's alleged failure to enforce the immigration laws that have been made by other parties , including private individuals , municipal officials , or , in one case , the people of a state ( although not the state itself ) .

but see crs legal sidebar wslg1145 , "sheriff joe" found to lack standing to challenge the obama administration's immigration enforcement priorities and deferred action initiatives , by [author name scrubbed] .

in the mid - 1990s , six states which were then home to over half the unauthorized aliens in the united states — arizona , california , florida , new jersey , new york , and texas — each challenged the federal government's "fail[ure] to control illegal immigration. .

each case raised somewhat different issues .

however , all resulted in losses for the states both before the reviewing federal district court and on appeal .

limitations on standing — or who is a proper party to seek judicial relief from a federal court — were noted in some cases .

however , even when standing was assumed , the states' constitutional and statutory claims failed , as discussed below .

the following sections discuss how the courts viewed the most notable arguments made in the 1990s litigation , including those based on the naturalization , guarantee , and invasion clauses of the u.s. constitution ; the tenth amendment ; and provisions of the ina .

in 2011 , over a decade after the mid - 1990s litigation , arizona asserted counterclaims challenging the federal government's alleged failure to enforce the immigration laws in the litigation over arizona's support our law enforcement and safe neighborhoods act ( commonly known as "s.b .

1070" ) .

arizona had adopted s.b .

1070 in 2010 in an attempt to deter unauthorized aliens from settling in the state by requiring that state and local police check the immigration status of all persons whom they stop , arrest , or detain .

s.b .

1070 also made it a state crime to engage in certain conduct thought to facilitate the presence of unauthorized aliens within the state .

the federal government sought to enjoin enforcement of s.b .

1070 on the grounds that it was preempted by federal law .

arizona responded , in part , by alleging that federal policies and practices as to immigration enforcement ran afoul of various provisions of the constitution and federal statute .

in particular , arizona alleged that federal officials had violated the invasion and domestic violence clauses , as well as the tenth amendment , by , respectively , failing to protect arizona from "invasion" by aliens unlawfully entering the united states and "refusing" to reimburse the state for the "costs and damages associated with illegal immigration in arizona. .

arizona also alleged that federal officials had failed to comply with statutory mandates to achieve and maintain "operational control" of the arizona - mexico border , pursue and effectuate the removal of unauthorized aliens who are found within the interior of the united states , and reimburse states for the costs of detaining "criminal aliens" pursuant to the state criminal alien assistance program ( scaap ) .

the federal government challenged arizona's standing to raise all of these claims other than that as to reimbursement pursuant to scaap .

however , the reviewing federal district court "presum[ed]" that arizona had standing because ( 1 ) the federal government did not question whether "illegal immigration" constituted an injury in fact ; ( 2 ) arizona had alleged facts indicating that unauthorized aliens' conduct and choices in crossing into arizona were directly influenced by federal policies and practices ; and ( 3 ) ordering the federal government to "deploy ... temporary measures" to secure the border would provide arizona "some relief. .

arizona did not fare as well on the merits of its arguments .

the reviewing federal district court first found that arizona's claims as to the invasion clause and the tenth amendment were precluded by the litigation in the mid - 1990s , or , alternatively , settled in the federal government's favor by ninth circuit precedent .

the court similarly found that arizona's remaining constitutional claim — alleging a violation of the domestic violence clause that had not been raised in the mid - 1990s litigation — was also settled by ninth circuit precedent finding that the clause applies only to "insurrections , riots , and other forms of civil disorder," and not "ordinary crimes. .

the court also viewed the domestic violence clause as implicating nonjusticiable political questions .

the reviewing federal district court then found that arizona's various statutory claims involved actions that were committed to agency discretion by law and , thus , were not subject to review by the courts .

in so finding , the court specifically looked at provisions of immigration law that direct the secretary of homeland security to "take all actions the secretary determines necessary and appropriate to achieve and maintain operational control" over the u.s. border within 18 months after the enactment of the secure fence act of 2006 ; prioritize the incarceration of unauthorized "criminal aliens" and reimburse states through scaap for the costs of incarcerating such aliens ; establish procedures for removing unauthorized aliens apprehended in the interior of the united states ; and bar federal , state , and local officials from restricting the sharing of information regarding persons' citizenship or immigration status .

however , the court concluded that each provision involved actions that are committed to agency discretion by law .

in some cases , the court reached this conclusion because the statute provided no standard by which the court could judge the propriety of federal officials' actions , as with the construction of the border fence , where "no deadline mandates completion of the fencing and infrastructure developments or any required discrete action by a specified time. .

in other cases , the court noted that the statutes themselves grant federal officials "substantial discretion," as was the case with "determining where to build fencing , where to use alternative infrastructure improvements rather than fencing , and how best to develop a comprehensive program to prevent illegal immigration. .

in no case did the court , in its published opinion , note the use of "shall" in any of these statutes , or discuss whether this word could be construed to indicate mandatory action .

the court further found the specific actions challenged by arizona — which included prioritizing certain enforcement efforts and "considering changes in the interpretation and enforcement of immigration laws that would 'result in meaningful immigration reform absent legislative action'" — did not constitute an abdication of the executive's statutory responsibilities .

the court did so , in part , because arizona conceded that federal officials "continue to enforce federal immigration laws in accordance with priorities established by the federal government. .

thus , according to the court , while arizona "disagrees" with federal enforcement priorities , its "allegations do not give rise to a claim that [federal officials] have abdicated their statutory responsibilities. .

one year later , in 2012 , mississippi raised similar claims about federal officials' alleged failure to enforce the immigration laws when it joined a challenge brought by some u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) agents to the obama administration's deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) initiative .

this challenge arose from the administration's decision to grant some "unauthorized aliens" who had been brought to the united states as children and raised here deferred action — one type of relief from removal — and , in many cases , work authorization .

the ice agents and mississippi asserted that this initiative violates the take care clause , impinges upon congress's legislative powers , and contradicts certain provisions in section 235 of the ina , which some assert require that unauthorized aliens be placed in removal proceedings .

they also alleged that it runs afoul of the administrative procedure act ( apa ) because the obama administration did not promulgate regulations before making deferred action — which the plaintiffs viewed as a "benefit," not an exercise of prosecutorial discretion — available to unauthorized aliens who had been brought to the united states as children .

the ice agents were found to have standing to raise these challenges and , at least initially , prevailed before the reviewing federal district court on their claim that daca runs afoul of three purportedly "interlocking" provisions in section 235 of the ina which state that 1. any alien present in the united states who has not been admitted shall be deemed an applicant for admission ; 2. applicants for admission shall be inspected by immigration officers ; and 3. in the case of an alien who is an applicant for admission , if the examining immigration officer determines that an alien seeking admission is not clearly and beyond a doubt entitled to be admitted , the alien shall be detained for removal proceedings .

in particular , the court noted that each of the three provisions includes the word "shall," and took the view that "shall" indicates mandatory agency action .

however , this same court later found that it lacked jurisdiction over the ice agents' claims .

this finding was affirmed on appeal by the fifth circuit in a decision which suggests — but does not directly hold — that the fifth circuit may not view section 235 of the ina as barring the executive from granting deferred action to unauthorized aliens .

mississippi , in contrast , was found not to have standing because the reviewing court viewed its alleged injury as "conjectural and based on speculation" and , thus , insufficiently concrete to satisfy the constitutional requirements of standing .

this injury consisted of the fiscal costs associated with unauthorized aliens residing in the state who were allegedly enabled to remain there as a result of daca and obama administration guidance regarding the exercise of prosecutorial discretion in civil immigration enforcement .

the federal government did not contest that the expenditure of state funds could qualify as an invasion of a legally protected interest sufficient to establish standing under the "proper circumstances. .

rather , the federal government argued that such circumstances were not present in the instant case because mississippi relied upon a 2006 report — which pre - dated daca — to show the costs it incurred as the result of the obama administration's actions .

the district court agreed , and also noted that mississippi had offered only "conclusory allegations" that the unauthorized aliens granted deferred action would have been removed but for the daca initiative , or that daca had resulted in a decrease in the total number of aliens removed by the federal government .

the district court's decision as to mississippi's standing was affirmed by the fifth circuit on appeal .

in so doing , the fifth circuit noted that it viewed mississippi's alleged injury as "purely speculative" because it "is not supported by any facts" showing that mississippi's costs increased , or will increase , as a result of daca .

one judge did , however , issue a concurring opinion which emphasized that concrete evidence that an injury has occurred or will occur is not necessary for standing for certain types of claims , but did not view mississippi as making such claims .

most recently , in december 2014 , over 25 states or state officials filed suit challenging the obama administration's announcement that it is expanding the daca program to cover additional aliens who had been brought to the united states as children , and creating a daca - like program for unauthorized aliens who are the parents of u.s. citizens or lprs ( commonly known as dapa ) .

in particular , the states assert that these new programs violate the take care clause and separation of powers principles of the constitution , federal immigration law , and substantive and procedural requirements of the apa .

the federal government disputes these assertions .

it also maintains that the plaintiffs lack standing , and that the challenged programs represent an exercise of enforcement discretion and , as such , are immune from judicial review .

in a decision issued on february 16 , 2015 , the u.s. district court for the southern district of texas found that the states have standing to challenge dapa and the daca expansion , and that the challenged programs are judicially reviewable .

it also imposed a preliminary nationwide ban on the implementation of these programs after finding that the states are likely to prevail on the merits of their argument that the memorandum establishing the programs constitutes a substantive rule , but was issued without compliance with the notice - and - comment procedures required for such rules under the apa .

the federal government filed an emergency expedited motion to stay the injunction with the district court , which was denied because the district court viewed its "original findings and rulings" as "correct. .

the federal government also appealed the district court's decision regarding standing , reviewability , and the procedural requirements of the apa to the fifth circuit .

the government requested that the fifth circuit stay the injunction pending resolution of this appeal .

on may 26 , 2015 , the fifth circuit issued a decision rejecting , by a vote of 2 to 1 , the federal government's request for the stay because it viewed the federal government as failing to make the requisite showing that it was likely to succeed on the merits of its arguments that ( 1 ) the states lack standing ; ( 2 ) dapa and the daca expansion are not subject to judicial review ; and ( 3 ) the memorandum establishing the challenged programs constitutes an interpretative rule , not a substantive one .

subsequently , on november 9 , 2015 , the fifth circuit denied , again by a vote of 2 to 1 , the government's appeal , in part , because it agreed with the district court's reasoning in finding that the states have standing to challenge dapa and the daca expansion , the programs are judicially reviewable , and their establishment represents a substantive rule that should have been subject to notice - and - comment rulemaking .

however , the fifth circuit also went beyond the district court's analysis in finding that dapa and the daca expansion are impermissible because they conflict with provisions of the ina or , alternatively , represent unreasonable interpretations of the ina .

the supreme court granted the federal government's petition for review of the fifth circuit's decision .

however , an evenly divided supreme court ultimately issued a decision that , consistent with recent practice , affirmed the fifth circuit's decision without any opinion or indication of the justices' voting alignment .

this means that the preliminary nationwide ban on the implementation of dapa and the daca expansion that the district court imposed in february 2015 , when it granted the states' motion for a preliminary injunction , remains in place , at least for now .

the district court continues to hear arguments on whether to permanently enjoin implementation of these programs .

the supreme court's 4-4 split in united states v. texas leaves in place a fifth circuit decision that upheld a preliminary nationwide ban on the implementation of dapa and the daca expansion , and that could complicate certain executive actions as to immigration in the future ( eg , relatively large - scale grants of deferred action , parole in place , extended voluntary departure , or other relief from removal that would result in aliens being deemed "lawfully present" and obtaining work authorization ) .

in other contexts , though , states' ability to challenge alleged federal "failures" to enforce the immigration laws in the future may be more limited than it might first appear .

the 2015 litigation in texas does mark the first time that a state has obtained a court order directing the federal government to take certain actions ( i.e. , delaying implementation of dapa and the daca expansion ) in response to state allegations that the federal government is failing to enforce the ina .

on the other hand , the facts and circumstances involved in the 2015 texas litigation are arguably distinguishable from those in earlier cases and , thus , potentially limit this decision's relevance to any future state challenges to federal enforcement of the immigration laws .

first , there are the specific facts and circumstances which prompted the reviewing courts to find that texas , in particular , has article iii standing to challenge dapa and the daca expansion .

this finding was based , in part , on texas's documentation of the costs it would incur in issuing driver's licenses to dapa beneficiaries .

moreover , because the federal government had advocated a position in prior litigation over the issuance of driver's licenses to daca beneficiaries that texas asserted would result in the federal government requiring it to issue driver's licenses to dapa beneficiaries , texas could counter the argument that these costs arose due to state law or the constitution , and not the federal government's actions .

both factors were arguably significant , particularly to the district court .

mississippi's alleged injury in the crane litigation , for example , was seen as inadequate for standing because mississippi did not show that the implementation of daca had increased , or would increase , its costs .

certain claims in the mid - 1990s litigation similarly failed because the states were seen as incurring specific costs associated with unauthorized aliens because of grant conditions ( to which the state had agreed ) , state laws , or constitutional requirements , and not the dictates of the federal government .

second , and relatedly , there is the specific form that the federal government's alleged failure to enforce the immigration laws took in the 2015 texas decision .

namely , the obama administration proposed to grant deferred action ( one type of relief from removal ) to certain unauthorized aliens , a proposal which could result in those aliens becoming eligible for certain "benefits" under existing law ( eg , work authorization , social security numbers ) .

in finding that this particular form of nonenforcement of the immigration laws is subject to judicial review , both the district court and the majority of the fifth circuit emphasized that they view the granting of deferred action as involving an "affirmative action" on the executive's part , and not simply a matter of an agency's enforcement priorities , or nonenforcement of the laws as to individual aliens and groups of aliens .

both of these ( i.e. , enforcement priorities , nonenforcement as to individuals ) would appear to be within the executive's discretion , in the courts' view , and thus not subject to judicial review .

indeed , the district court even suggested , in denying the federal government's emergency expedited motion to stay the injunction , that immigration officials could achieve their purpose of designating potential dapa beneficiaries as "low priorities" for removal by giving them written documentation to this effect , so long as this documentation does not involve a grant of deferred action .

