nigeria begins 2015 facing highly polarizing — and potentially destabilizing — elections amid a dangerous territorial advance in the northeast by the violent islamist insurgent group boko haram .

by some estimates , more than 5,500 people were killed in boko haram attacks in 2014 , and boko haram attacks have already claimed hundreds of lives in early 2015 .

in total , the group may have killed more than 10,000 people since its emergence in the early 2000s .

more than 1 million nigerians have been displaced internally by the violence , and nigerian refugee figures in neighboring countries continue to rise .

state department officials have suggested that the planned elections may be a factor in the increased tempo of boko haram attacks , as the group seeks to manipulate political sensitivities and undermine the credibility of the state as the polls approach .

on february 7 , nigerian election officials announced that the elections , scheduled for february 14 and 28 , would be delayed by six weeks .

the decision is controversial .

the election commission declared that it was "substantially ready" and that preparations were "sufficient to conduct free , fair and credible elections as scheduled. .

the decision to delay the vote was made after security officials contended that they could not guarantee security for the polls because the military "needed at least six weeks within which to conclude a major military operation" against boko haram and could not provide "traditional support" to police and other security agencies during elections .

some observers view the delay as an opportunity to improve conditions for prospective voters in the northeast , amid fears that many could be disenfranchised by the violence and displacement .

the delay also provides more time to address concerns about poll preparations .

it is unclear , however , whether the nigerian public will view the delay as enhancing or detracting from the credibility of the electoral process .

the potential for substantial improvement in the security situation in the northeast within this timeframe is also unlikely .

the opposition , while urging calm , called the delay "provocative" and "a major setback for democracy," and press reports and social media suggest that many nigerians perceive the postponement as undue interference by security officials .

former nigerian president olusegun obasanjo expressed public alarm with the decision , saying , "i hope we will not have a coup. .

secretary of state john kerry voiced deep disappointment , stating that "political interference" with the election commission was "unacceptable," warning against further delays , and declaring it "critical that the government not use security concerns as a pretext for impeding the democratic process. .

the united kingdom articulated a similar view , calling the decision "cause for concern. .

with public confidence in the electoral process reportedly already low , such concerns may amplify political tensions and raise the potential for violent protests if the election results are disputed .

a contested election outcome could undermine the nigerian government's ability to bring potential post - election violence under control and further impede its ability to counter the boko haram threat .

the upcoming presidential elections may be nigeria's closest contest to date , with the field of serious candidates narrowed for the first time to the standard - bearers of two major political parties .

the incumbent , president goodluck jonathan , a christian from the southern niger delta region , and his people's democratic party ( pdp ) , which has been in power since the return to civilian rule in 1999 , face a strong challenge from a new opposition alliance .

that party , the all progressives congress ( apc ) , draws support in part from popular disaffection with government performance in the predominately muslim north and its response to boko haram , and with reports of rising corruption .

in december , the apc selected former military ruler muhammadu buhari , a northerner who challenged jonathan in the last election , as its candidate .

experts suggest that inter - faith relations in nigeria , where the population is roughly divided between christians and muslims , have deteriorated in recent years .

religious identity overlaps with ethnic and regional identities in nigeria , and the invocation of religious identity by some politicians in increasingly inflammatory political messages has stoked tensions in parts of the country .

the u.s. commission for international religious freedom explains , in an electoral context , the religious and ethnic affiliations of persons running for public office are important to most nigerian voters and are always known to them ; indeed many observers note that these are two of the most important bases on which people vote .

if given a choice , muslims tend to vote for muslims and christians for christians .

both political parties understand the importance of the confluence of religious identity and politics , and both are highlighting religion in the campaign .

in 2014 , the pdp labeled the apc as "nigeria's muslim brotherhood," although the party has not advocated an islamist platform , and many key apc leaders were once top pdp officials ( including several southern , christian politicians who left the pdp over disagreements with jonathan ) .

buhari's running mate is a yoruba ( nigeria's second - largest ethnic group ) pentacostal pastor and former state attorney general from the opposition - leaning , populous southwest .

some in the pdp have tried to link the apc to the boko haram insurgency , despite buhari having reportedly been the target of a boko haram attack in july 2014 and labeled more recently as an "infidel" by boko haram's leader .

conversely , while the pdp historically has been arguably the most diverse of nigeria's political parties , internal divisions and defections to the opposition in the past year , notably among its northern members , have led some in the north to characterize the pdp under president jonathan as representing primarily christian and southern — and more specifically niger delta — interests .

the potential for violence around the elections is high ( see figure 1 for potential hot spots ) .

previous elections have been marred by violence , and many analysts suggest that the prospects for electoral unrest have never been greater .

an estimated 800 people were killed in violence following the last elections , in 2011 , and some 65,000 were displaced .

the post - election protests in the north against jonathan's victory highlighted grievances and mistrust of the government in that region .

such frustration is widely believed to have grown in the past four years as the impact of the boko haram insurgency has spread .

further , some northern opponents of president jonathan view his candidacy as illegitimate , given legal questions surrounding his eligibility and a popular view in the region that it is the north's "turn" to hold the presidency .

these tensions , overlaid atop simmering communal violence in parts of central and northern nigeria , and alongside the potential for boko haram efforts to further destabilize the situation , have led some former u.s. officials to express alarm about the country's trajectory .

nigeria also faces mounting economic pressures ; uncertainty around the elections and the prospect for security conditions to deteriorate further have deterred investors and undermined consumer confidence .

the value of the nigerian naira has plummeted against the dollar recently , and the government is struggling to balance competing budget demands , including the considerable cost of the elections and a rising security budget , amid a sharp drop in the global price of oil , a primary source of foreign exchange and government revenue .

nigeria is considered a key country in africa because of its size and political and economic weight in the region .

it is africa's largest economy , largest oil producer , and most populous country , with almost 180 million people .

nigeria's muslim population is among the largest in the world , vying with , and likely overtaking , egypt's as the largest on the continent .

lagos , its commercial center , is among the world's largest cities .

until recently , nigeria routinely ranked among the united states' largest sources of imported oil .

the united states imported over 40% of nigeria's total crude oil exports until 2011 , but u.s. purchases have since plummeted as domestic u.s. energy supply has increased .

the obama administration still considers its relationship with the country to be among the most important on the continent , although reports suggest relations have deteriorated in the past year .

diplomatic engagement has been tempered at times over the years by nigerian perceptions of u.s. intrusion in domestic or regional affairs , and by u.s. concern with human rights , governance , and corruption issues .

disagreements over nigeria's approach to countering boko haram have been an increasing source of friction in the relationship .

nigerian political life has long been scarred by ethnic , geographic , and religious conflict , and decades of corruption and misrule have undermined the state's authority and legitimacy .

divisions among ethnic groups , between north and south , and between christians and muslims , often stem from contention over access to land , jobs , and socioeconomic development .

by some estimates , as many as 16,000 nigerians have died in localized clashes driven by such tensions in the last decade ( separate from the casualties caused by the boko haram conflict ) .

in 2014 , nigeria was estimated to have the largest displaced population in africa — more than 3.3 million people — and the third largest in the world .

additionally , years of social unrest , criminality , and corruption in the oil - rich southern niger delta region have hindered oil production , undermined the delta's economic development , and contributed to piracy in the gulf of guinea .

while nigeria's economy is africa's largest , its human development indicators are among the world's lowest , and a majority of the population lives in extreme poverty .

nigeria has high income inequality by global standards and lags far behind south africa , africa's second - largest economy , on the u.n. human development index .

over 40% of the current population is under the age of 15 , and almost a third of primary - school - aged children are not enrolled in school .

nigeria's long - term economic growth is threatened not only by political instability and security challenges , but also by poor infrastructure and electricity shortages .

decades of economic mismanagement , instability , and corruption have hindered investment in nigeria's education and social services systems and stymied industrial growth .

debt relief from the paris club of donors in 2005 has provided new opportunities for investment in nigeria's social development , but experts stress a need to take action to forestall a relapse into unsustainable levels of debt that could prevent the country from meeting its development goals .

the announcement in october 2014 by the world health organization ( who ) that nigeria was free of ebola virus transmission brought positive attention to the country's coordinated effort to stop the spread of the virus , which has ravaged guinea , liberia , and sierra leone .

nigeria's response also highlighted lessons learned in a country that until recently was considered a global epicenter of polio transmission .

nigeria's response to its ebola outbreak was swift , with the government immediately declaring a national public health emergency and creating an operations center from which experts directed contact tracing , case management , health care worker protocols , and public education .

the response benefited from applied epidemiology experience from nigeria's polio eradication efforts ; experts from the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention and the who supported the effort .

nigeria has had other recent public health successes , nearly eradicating polio , decreasing malaria and tuberculosis prevalence , and reducing hiv prevalence among pregnant women .

nigeria still grapples with significant health sector challenges , though , and is home to nearly one - tenth of the world's hiv / aids infected persons — more than 3 million people — the largest hiv - positive population in the world after south africa .

nigeria's upcoming elections are a critical test for its political leaders , its security forces , and its people .

the country was ruled by the military for much of the four decades after independence before transitioning to civilian rule in 1999 .

elections held in the following decade were widely viewed as flawed , with each poll progressively worse than the last .

the 2011 elections , in contrast , were seen by international observers as more credible than previous efforts , but not without problems , and the protests and violence that followed the polls suggested that many nigerians lacked faith in the electoral process .

since then , donors and advocacy groups have pressed the government to improve electoral procedures and prosecute cases of electoral fraud and political violence to promote accountability and build public confidence .

while nigeria's election commission has received praise for some of its efforts to improve the credibility of the process , including through an update of the voter register , other efforts have been hampered by inaction on electoral law reforms .

recent assessments of election preparations have raised potentially significant concerns , such as delays in the distribution of tens of millions of voter cards and the recruitment and training of poll workers .

the question of whether the country's sizeable internally displaced population can legally vote outside their home areas is a potential flashpoint , as is the possibility that parts of the northeast may be deemed too insecure to hold elections .

given the close nature of the race , allegations of disenfranchisement could call into question the credibility of the poll results .

jonathan will again face buhari in the 2015 polls , in a race widely expected to be much closer than in 2011 , when jonathan won with more than 59% of votes .

buhari received only 32% amid a crowded field of candidates .

to win , a candidate must gain an absolute majority of the votes and at least 25% in two - thirds of the states .

with some predictions of a race that could be decided by less than 1 million votes ( with 68.8 million registered voters ) , concerns about disenfranchisement and rigging are significant .

high stakes around the historically contentious state gubernatorial races offer further risks of rigging and violence around the polls .

the presidential candidates' commitment to the abuja accord , a january 2015 agreement in which they pledged to avoid statements that could incite violence , will be tested in the coming weeks .

the opposition has urged calm in response to the february poll delay , with buhari stating that "any act of violence can only complicate the security challenges in the country and provide further justification to those who would want to exploit every situation to frustrate the democratic process. .

in 2014 , the u.s. consul general in lagos wrote in an op - ed that nigeria faced a "crisis of credibility" fueled by decades of impunity for large - scale corruption and electoral fraud .

according to a 2014 gallup poll , only 13% of nigerians expressed confidence in the electoral process .

independent efforts to assess the process and verify the election results , such as the "quick count" planned by the transition monitoring group ( a coalition of local civil society groups ) may improve voter confidence .

in the event of a close outcome , the perceived legitimacy of the process and the results will be critical factors in averting potentially widespread protests and minimizing violence .

nigeria's security forces , already stretched by deployments to counter boko haram ( which targeted election facilities in 2011 ) , will face an additional challenge in trying to secure 120,000 polling stations without fueling the perception of interference .

northern views of the security forces were already reportedly low in the context of alleged abuses during operations to counter boko haram , and there have been allegations in the past year that the pdp has used security agencies for political purposes .

accusations that military officials have used insecurity as a pretext to delay the polls and keep jonathan in office may further hinder security forces' ability to ensure security and stability when the elections occur .

boko haram has grown increasingly active and deadly in its attacks against state and civilian targets in nigeria since 2010 , calling for an uprising against secular authority and a war against christianity .

the group draws on a narrative of vengeance for state abuses to elicit recruits and sympathizers , and appears to have increased its ranks through forced recruitment and jailbreaks .

u.s. officials have estimated in press reports that boko haram may have between 4,000 and 6,000 "hardcore" fighters , while other sources contend its force could be larger .

after years of calling for the creation of an islamic caliphate in nigeria , the group now appears intent on establishing one by force .

in july 2014 , boko haram shifted from a tactical focus on asymmetric attacks against government and civilian targets , toward a more strategic approach in which it has also targeted key infrastructure like bridges and fuel depots , and mounted a conventional offensive to seize and hold territory .

estimates on the amount of territory held by boko haram vary , but press reports suggest that by early 2015 the nigerian government may have lost between 40% - 70% of borno state and some territory in neighboring yobe and adamawa states , including border areas near cameroon .

nigerian forces have countered large - scale assaults on the state capitals of maiduguri and damaturu , but such efforts have reportedly left rural areas largely undefended .

reuters calculated in mid - january 2015 that boko haram held 30,000 square km of territory , roughly the size of maryland , while the london - based telegraph put the figure at 20,000 square km a week prior .

u.s. officials have not publically corroborated either estimate .

recent military offensives by nigeria and chad have reclaimed some territory , but their ability to hold those gains will rely on continued cooperation between the two countries .

boko haram attracted increased international attention in 2014 .

its april abduction of some 270 school girls from chibok , a town in borno , sparked both a domestic and international outcry and the twitter campaign #bringbackourgirls .

while some of the girls escaped , the majority have yet to be returned to their families .

in early june , boko haram deployed its first known female suicide bomber , in the northeast state of gombe .

weeks later , the group conducted its first known attack in southern nigeria , using another female suicide bomber to target a fuel depot in lagos .

it has continued to target markets , bus stations , schools , banks , detention facilities and other government facilities , among other locations .

in november , the group hit the central mosque in kano , northern nigeria's largest city , killing more than 120 and wounding almost 400 .

the group's tactics and strategy evolved in 2014 , with an upsurge of violence that included the increasing deployment of women and children as weapons as well as large - scale incursions to take territory .

some of its attacks , including the january 2015 raid on baga and surrounding settlements in far northeast borno , which may be its deadliest attack yet , appear to be retribution against communities seen to cooperate with nigerian forces , including through vigilante groups .

while boko haram attacks have remained largely concentrated in northeast nigeria , the group periodically strikes beyond that area and appears increasingly active in neighboring countries , notably cameroon .

its leadership has appeared at times to be inspired by the islamic state ; it has modified its logo to incorporate the islamic state flag , used its anthem in a video , and voiced support for both the islamic state and al qaeda ( aq ) in public messages .

as of january 2015 , u.s. officials did not consider the group to be an aq affiliate .

on march 7 , 2015 , boko haram released an audio message on twitter from its leader , ababukar shekau , in which he pledges allegiance to the leader of the islamic state , abu bakr al baghdadi .

the practical implications of that pledge , and the extent to which , if at all , the two groups have direct links , are unclear .

multiple factors have undermined the nigerian security forces' response to boko haram , notably security sector mismanagement and corruption .

by many accounts , troops are not adequately resourced or equipped to counter the insurgency despite a rising defense budget of more than $5 billion in 2014 ( roughly 20% of the government's total budget ) .

many soldiers , particularly in the northeast , reportedly suffer from low morale , struggling to keep pace with a foe that appears increasingly well - armed and trained .

in the assessment of dod officials , nigerian funding for the military is "skimmed off the top," and former nigerian president obasanjo , himself once a military leader , suggests that corruption in the army is "deeply ingrained. .

nigerian government statements about its response to the boko haram threat have appeared , at times , out of touch with events .

a government announcement in october 2014 of a purported cease - fire and hostage negotiations with boko haram , for example , was met with skepticism by many nigerians as dozens were killed in attacks within days of the agreement allegedly taking effect .

likewise , security officials at times have downplayed the threat posed by boko haram's territorial advance and overplayed the success of their own response .

in january , nigerian government officials were criticized for making limited statements in the days after a major boko haram attack in which hundreds were killed while publicly expressing sympathy with france for the deaths of 16 terrorist attack victims in that country .

the official rationale for the february 2015 election delay has prompted further skepticism as observers question whether the military can make substantial progress against boko haram and create a secure environment for the polls within six weeks .

nigerian security officials insist that there will be enough troops available by march 28 to secure the elections , citing improved military cooperation with nigeria's neighbors , and indicate that the poll date will not be moved again .

nigeria's national security advisor has also vowed that all known boko haram camps will be dismantled during this period .

boko haram currently appears to pose a threat primarily to stability in northern nigeria , and to surrounding areas in neighboring cameroon , chad , and niger .

u.s. intelligence officials warn , however , that if its territorial offensive continues , it "could grow into a significant regional crisis with implications outside of northwest africa. .

the group also poses a threat to international targets in the region , including western citizens .

boko haram's leader has issued direct threats against the united states , but to date no u.s. citizens are known to have been kidnapped or killed by the group .

the state department designated boko haram and a splinter faction , ansaru , as foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) in november 2013 .

the united nations security council added boko haram to its al qaeda sanctions list in may 2014 .

in its first formal public reaction to boko haram's activities , the u.n. security council issued a presidential statement on january 19 , 2015 , condemning the recent escalation of attacks and resulting humanitarian crisis .

the council also expressed concern that the situation was undermining peace and security in west and central africa and welcomed the efforts of countries in the region , as well as foreign donors , to support the creation of a multinational joint task force .

the security council is expected to consider authorization of a regional force endorsed by the african union at its annual summit in late january .

previous efforts to make a regional force operational have been hindered by a lack of cooperation , capacity , and in some cases political will , among the affected countries .

after a period of strained relations in the 1990s during nigeria's last military dictatorship , u.s. - nigeria relations steadily improved in the 2000s , and until recently appeared comparatively strong .

positive relations have been significant in the context of nigeria's role on the u.n. security council ( as one of its nonpermanent members since january 2014 ) , and in the context of global dialogues on such issues as nuclear nonproliferation .

in addition to the strategic role their country often plays as a u.s. partner in the region and in global forums , nigerians are the single largest african diaspora group in the united states .

nigeria is an important u.s. trading partner and the second - largest beneficiary of u.s. private investment on the continent .

in 2010 , the obama and jonathan administrations established the u.s. - nigeria binational commission ( bnc ) , a strategic dialogue to address issues of mutual concern .

its working groups cover a range of topics , including terrorism .

human rights issues have at times been an area of contention , not only in relation to the behavior of nigeria's security forces but also on such topics as gay rights .

the coming months may be a critical period in nigeria , not only for its democratic trajectory , but for the security and stability of the country , and possibly the wider sub - region .

developments during this period may also have implications for congressional oversight of u.s. policy toward nigeria .

"no matter which candidate is declared victorious," one former u.s. ambassador to nigeria argues , "there are plenty of reasons for the loser to reject the results. .

concerns raised around the poll delay likely exacerbate the opposition's skepticism of the jonathan government's commitment to a fair process .

another former senior u.s. diplomat contends that the problems with voting in the northeast , the potential for fraud , and the reported influx of arms to volatile areas are an explosive mix that could render parts of the country "ungovernable" and allow the threat posed by boko haram to increase .

he suggests that "there is no national consensus in nigeria on how to deal with this [boko haram] insurgency , and no one seems prepared to confront it as the national crisis it is .

instead the matter has become deeply politicized , as competing regional factions accuse each other of active complicity with the terrorists. .

by many accounts , u.s. government leverage with the nigerian government is limited .

anxiety will remain high as the elections approach .

some experts caution that nigerians and the international community must prepare for a "less than perfect outcome. .

the prospect of another election delay would likely be unacceptable not only to the opposition , but to nigeria's international donors .

a possible outcome in which jonathan , with the advantage of incumbency , wins a narrow victory based in part on high turnout in his southern niger delta stronghold , and in which significant numbers of voters in the northeast are unable to vote , may be difficult for some opposition supporters to accept .

some opposition politicians have threatened to form a parallel government if they view the polls as rigged .

if suggestions that the election campaign has been a distraction from counterinsurgency efforts are valid , a post - election scenario of unrest could draw further attention and resources away from nigeria's counterterrorism response .

without genuine nigerian cooperation , efforts by neighboring countries and the broader international community to intensify their response to boko haram may have limited effect inside nigeria , where the group's impact is the greatest .

