in december 2014 , congress passed the revitalize american manufacturing and innovation act of 2014 ( ramia ) , as title vii of division b of the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) .

president obama signed the bill into law on december 16 , 2014 .

ramia directs the secretary of commerce to establish a network for manufacturing innovation ( nmi ) program within the commerce department's national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) .

the act comes about two years after president obama first proposed the establishment of a national network for manufacturing innovation in his fy2013 budget .

president obama first proposed the establishment of a national network for manufacturing innovation ( nnmi ) in his fy2013 budget , requesting $1 billion to support the establishment of up to 15 institutes .

shortly thereafter , he formally introduced the concept in a speech at a manufacturing facility in virginia on march 9 , 2012 .

no legislation to enact the president's proposal was introduced in the 112 th congress .

in 2013 , the president renewed his call for an nnmi in his fy2014 budget request , again seeking $1 billion in mandatory funding .

the president's fy2015 budget proposal also sought authority and funding to establish the nnmi .

the request was not part of the president's fy2015 base budget request , but rather a part of an adjunct $56 billion opportunity , growth , and security initiative ( ogsi ) proposal .

the ogsi request included $2.4 billion to establish up to 45 nnmi institutes .

in august 2013 , bills entitled the revitalize american manufacturing and innovation act of 2013 were introduced in the house ( h.r .

2996 ) and the senate ( s. 1468 ) to establish a network for manufacturing innovation .

h.r .

2996 passed the house in september 2014 .

s. 1468 was reported by the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation in august 2014 .

in december 2014 , provisions of h.r .

2996 were incorporated in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) as title vii of division b , the revitalize american manufacturing and innovation act of 2014 ( ramia ) .

p.l .

113-235 was signed into law by president obama on december 16 , 2014 .

ramia includes provisions establishing and providing for the operation of a network for manufacturing innovation .

ramia , in part , amends the national institute of standards and technology act ( codified at 15 usc 271 et seq. ) .

establishing the nmi program , setting forth its purposes , and authorizing its structure , funding , and operation .

the act also establishes a national program office to support the nmi program .

while ramia establishes the nmi program ; sets forth its purposes ; and authorizes its structure , funding , and operation ; a number of broad policy issues and ones related to the program's implementation remain .

the appropriate role of the federal government in fostering technological innovation or supporting a particular company , industry , or industrial sector ( eg , manufacturing ) has been the focus of a long - running national policy debate .

views range from those who believe that the federal government should take a hands - off or minimalist approach to those who support targeted federal investments in promising technologies , companies , and industries .

and while there has been broad agreement on federal support for fundamental research , the consensus in favor of federal support frays as technology matures toward commercialization .

advocates for a strong federal role in advancing technologies and industries often assert that such interventions are justified by the economic , national security , and societal benefits that generally accompany technological advancement and u.s. technological and industrial leadership .

for such reasons , the manufacturing sector has received the attention of the federal government since the nation's founding .

critics of a strong federal role provide a variety of arguments .

for example , some contend that such interventions skew technology development and competition by replacing market - based decisions of companies , capital providers , and researchers with the judgment of government bureaucrats or politicians ( sometimes referred to as the government "picking winners and losers" ) .

those who hold this view generally assert that this may result in inefficient allocation of capital , development and deployment of inferior technologies , and political favoritism ( sometimes referred to as "crony capitalism" ) .

others assert that such interventions often represent a transfer of wealth from taxpayers to already - prosperous companies and their shareholders ( sometimes referred to as "corporate welfare" ) .

others may prefer an approach that is more technology - or industry - neutral , such as reducing costs and other burdens on manufacturers by reducing taxes , regulations , and frivolous lawsuits .

the nmi — with its focus on advanced manufacturing research , innovation , and technology — is likely at the intersection of these viewpoints .

while ramia included a number of findings that highlight the role manufacturing plays in the u.s. economy , it did not identify specific shortcomings of the u.s. manufacturing sector that the nmi program is to address .

analysts hold divergent views of the health of u.s. manufacturing .

while some may be supportive of the effort , others may question whether there is a compelling national need for the network for manufacturing innovation program .

some analysts believe that the u.s. manufacturing sector is at risk .

expressed concerns of those holding this view include a "hollowing - out" of u.s. manufacturing resulting from the decision of many u.s. manufacturers to move production activities and other corporate functions ( eg , research and development , accounting , information technology , tax planning , legal research ) offshore ; focused efforts by other nations to grow the size , diversity , and technological prowess of their manufacturing capabilities and to attract manufacturing operations of u.s. - headquartered multinational companies using a variety of policy tools ( eg , tax holidays , worker training incentives , market access , and access to rare earth minerals ) ; and a decades - long declining trend in u.s. manufacturing employment , punctuated by a steeper drop from 2001 to 2010 .

in january 2010 , u.s. manufacturing employment fell to its lowest level ( 11.5 million ) since march 1941 , down more than 41% from its peak of 19.6 million in june 1979 .

in support of the president's proposal for a national network for manufacturing innovation , the information technology and innovation foundation , a washington , dc - based think tank , articulated a variety of reasons why there is a need for an nmi - like federal program in a report titled why america needs a national network for manufacturing innovation .

among the itif's assertions: an nmi - like program would address two issues important to u.s. manufacturing competitiveness: technology and talent .

spillovers from successful innovations resulting from a firm's investments can yield substantial benefits captured by competitors producing a market failure that results in underinvestment in manufacturing r&d and innovation .

other types of market failures — for example , the need for large - scale capital investments and training outlays that may require many years to pay off — may "limit the scale - up of innovative manufacturing processes , the installation of new capital equipment , and the full integration of manufacturing systems across supply chains. .

foreign governments engage in a variety of policy and programmatic activities designed to attract u.s. and other manufacturing firms to their countries ; subsidize and protect domestic producers ; or "repress labor , condone intellectual property theft , and manipulate their currency values in order to expand their manufacturing footprint. .

the federal government provides little support for manufacturing - focused u.s. based research activities: such funding is scattered among multiple agencies and "has rarely been a priority for any of them. .

this position contends that u.s. academia , in general , does not incentivize engineering advances and practical problem - solving , but rather "originality and breakthroughs. .

the emphasis on "engineering as a science" in u.s. academic engineering programs contributes further to this bias .

other analysts see the u.s. manufacturing sector as vibrant and healthy .

those holding this view tend to point to , among other things , the sector's strong growth in output and productivity , as well as the united states' substantial share ( 17.4% ) of global manufacturing value - added ( second only to china , 22.4% ) .

in addition , between january 2010 and september 2014 , manufacturing employment added approximately 707,000 jobs , growing to 12.2 million .

in addition , many analysts attribute u.s. manufacturing employment losses to broader global technology and business trends , such as technology - driven productivity improvements , increases in capital - labor substitution , movement of labor - intensive production activities to lower wage regions of the world , foreign competition in manufactured goods in both u.s. and foreign markets , and disaggregation of work processes resulting in the contracting of service work previously performed by employees of manufacturing firms as well as the offshoring of manufacturing activities .

independent of their perspective on the health of the u.s. manufacturing sector , some analysts may believe that there should not be an nmi program .

some may assert that the role envisioned for the nmi should be performed by the private sector ; that the federal government should not favor or subsidize particular companies , industries , or technologies ; that the nmi would be ineffective or counterproductive ; that the funds that would go to the nmi should be used to support manufacturing in other ways ; that the funds should be used for different federal functions altogether ; or that the funds should be directed toward deficit reduction .

some may also believe that the nmi is , in part or in whole , duplicative of other federal programs , such as the nist advanced manufacturing technology ( amtech ) consortia program or the manufacturing extension partnership ; or , as a new and separate program , represents an increasing fragmentation of federal efforts to help manufacturers .

some may question whether additional federal funding will produce more innovation and whether and how the u.s. manufacturing base will effectively absorb such innovations .

others may prefer an expanded direct role for the federal government .

this could include increasing federal funding for manufacturing r&d , providing grants and loan guarantees for domestic manufacturing , and , in some cases , subsidizing production of products for which there are deemed positive benefits for the nation that cannot be captured by the manufacturer .

still others argue that long - term employment losses in manufacturing are inevitable and that federal policy should focus elsewhere .

in a july 2014 wall street journal article , former treasury secretary lawrence summers argued that , "the economic challenge of the future will not be producing enough .

it will be providing enough good jobs. .

summers described the loss of manufacturing jobs over the long - term as "inexorable and nearly universal," a result of technology and market forces mirroring the earlier loss of agricultural jobs , only , he added , this "change will come faster and affect a much larger share of the economy. .

summers did not offer a prescriptive alternative , but rather stated the need for government policies and approaches that "meet the needs of the information age. .

when considered in the context of the overall u.s. economy , manufacturing output , or federal spending , the nmi appropriations authorizations provided in p.l .

113-235 are relatively small .

nevertheless , both proponents and opponents of the nmi may see such appropriations authorizations as opening the door to future increases in funding for the nmi as well as establishing a precedent for the creation of additional programs of a similar nature for manufacturing or other sectors of the u.s. economy .

the act provides for the secretary of commerce to use up to $5 million in funds appropriated to the nist industrial technology services account to carry out the nmi program .

the availability of funds from this authorization , however , will depend on the level of annual appropriations made to the nist its account .

in addition , whatever appropriations are made to the its account may be subject to congressional prioritization and restrictions included in report language accompanying the appropriations bill .

in fy2015 , congress appropriated $138.1 million for the its account , directing nist to spend $130.0 million on the hollings manufacturing extension partnership and $8.1 million on nist's advanced manufacturing technology consortia program .

it did not provide explicit funding for the nmi in fy2015 .

for fy2016 , if congress desires to provide funding to nist to carry out the nmi program under the act's authorization , it may choose to increase funding for the its account in an amount equal to the level of funding it wishes to provide for the administration of the nmi program , reduce funding for one or both of the existing programs being funded by this account , or leave the determination of the allocation of the its appropriation to the secretary of commerce or nist .

a second source of funding provided for by the act is authority given to the department of energy to transfer to nist up to $250 million for the period fy2015-fy2024 .

however , the availability of funds provided by the doe to nist depends , in part , on the level of annual appropriations made to the doe's energy efficiency and renewable energy account specifically for advanced manufacturing r&d .

this source of funding for the nmi may also be subject to prioritization and potential restrictions included in report language accompanying the appropriations bill .

in addition , the availability of these funds to nist will depend on doe's willingness to transfer funds to nist for the nmi program .

a third possibility for funding the program is the authority given to the secretary to accept funds , services , equipment , personnel , and facilities from any covered entity to carry out the program .

the act does not specify how the funds provided by nist , doe , or other agencies are to be allocated between program management activities and funding for the centers .

in the absence of such specifications , it appears that the funds from these sources may be used for either or both of these purposes .

in addition to authorizing the establishment of centers for manufacturing innovation , the act authorizes the establishment of a network of these centers .

in this regard , the act specifies which centers are eligible to be a part of the network and designates the national program office as "a convener of the network. .

however , the act does not further specify the purpose , federal role , or activities of the network .

congress may opt to consider amending the act to clarify these points or to authorize nist and participating agencies to do so .

the act authorizes the nmi through fy2024 and requires the comptroller general of the united states to make a final assessment by december 31 , 2024 .

no specifications are made for a federal role after the end of fy2024 .

as the program progresses , congress may opt to consider whether to continue the nmi beyond fy2024 or to allow it to expire .

congress may opt to conduct oversight hearings on the implementation of the nmi program to ensure that it is operating as congress intends , with respect to funding , interagency cooperation , the establishment of new centers , the incorporation of existing manufacturing centers as part of the network , the integration of the nmi with existing federal manufacturing activities , and other related issues .

