space heating is the largest energy - using activity in the residential sector , accounting for nearly 40% of total residential energy use .

natural gas furnaces account for about half of that total .

about 40% of households use natural gas furnaces — the most common type of equipment and fuel — used for space heating .

based on this new authority granted by eisa , doe initiated a regional standards rulemaking for residential furnaces , heat pumps , and central air conditioners .

the discussion in this section , and in those that follow , focuses mainly on efficiency standards policy design and issues for natural gas furnaces , but much of the discussion would also apply to issues for the other equipment .

as part of the authorization for doe to adopt a direct final rule , eisa directed doe to seek public comment on the proposed rule .

according to doe , the law stipulated that if one or more adverse comments or an alternative joint recommendation are received relating to the direct final rule , the secretary must determine whether the comments or alternative recommendation may provide a reasonable basis for withdrawal under 42 u.s.c .

6295 ( o ) or other applicable law .

if the secretary makes such a determination , doe must withdraw the direct final rule and proceed with the simultaneously published [notice of proposed rulemaking] .

three main industry issues were raised through this public comment process .

a description of those issues — both industry concerns and doe responses — follow .

in december 2011 , apga petitioned the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit for review of the dfr .

the apga contended that: ( 1 ) the 90% efficiency standard for the northern region constituted an effective ban on non - condensing residential furnaces in violation of section 325 ( o ) ( 4 ) of epca ; ( 2 ) the use of a dfr to prescribe a standard that was contested on the merits by a number of parties violated section 325 ( p ) ( 4 ) of epca ; and ( 3 ) doe's actions in publishing the dfr were arbitrary and capricious and otherwise in violation of the requirements of the administrative procedure act .

over the ensuing months , a number of parties intervened in the dispute .

several trade organizations intervened in support of the apga's challenge , while a number of environmental organizations and other groups intervened in support of doe and the efficiency standards adopted in the dfr .

in january 2013 , doe and the apga reached agreement on a settlement and filed a joint motion asking the court to vacate the portion of the dfr that established regional efficiency standards for residential natural gas furnaces and remand the dispute to doe for a traditional notice and comment period prior to issuance of a final rule .

although the initial parties had both agreed to this settlement , the intervenors on both sides of the dispute opposed the request .

hardi opposed the settlement on the grounds that it would leave the portions of the dfr that apply to central air conditioners and heat pumps in place .

hardi argued that many of the issues raised in the apga challenge applied to those standards as well as to the residential furnace standards .

hardi also moved to be substituted for the apga as the petitioner in the case so that the legal challenge to the dfr could continue for other equipment even if the court approved the proposed settlement .

doe opposed this request for substitution for a number of legal and policy - related reasons .

the proposed settlement was met with objections from the other side of the debate as well .

several environmental and consumer organizations also filed a motion opposing the doe - apga settlement .

these parties opposed remand of the dfr because they believed the efficiency standards of the dfr to be beneficial to consumers and the environment .

the motion also noted the long history of delays in the issuance of these efficiency standards .

citing these delays , the parties argued that if the court granted the settlement and resulting remand to doe for revision of the rule , it should impose a strict timeline for issuing the new rules .

in response to these challenges , the court granted motions to stay implementation of the dfr , which had been scheduled to take effect on may 1 , 2013 , until six months after it issued a decision on the proposed settlement .

the court also directed the parties to submit a joint proposed format for re - briefing the case .

this request was complied with on september 28 , 2013 , when apga , doe , and intervenors on both sides filed a proposed briefing schedule with the court .

on march 11 , 2014 , doe and apga , as well as the various intervenors in the case , filed a joint unopposed motion for approval of a new settlement in which doe agreed to seek a remand of the non - weatherized gas furnaces portion of the june 27 , 2011 , direct final rule .

under this new settlement , the portion of the rule relating to energy conservation standards for non - weatherized gas furnaces were vacated and remanded to doe for a new notice and comment rulemaking proceeding .

further , doe agreed to ( 1 ) conduct an administrative proceeding to clarify its process related to direct final rules ; ( 2 ) clarify its position regarding its enforcement authority vis - à - vis distributors ; ( 3 ) exercise its enforcement discretion by not seeking civil penalties for violations of the regional air conditioner standards for 18 months , so as to alleviate problems related to product sell - through and stranded inventory ; and ( 4 ) consider a negotiated rulemaking to address enforcement of regional standards for central air conditioners .

on april 24 , 2014 , the court approved the settlement agreement and issued an order that the standards established for non - weatherized gas furnaces and mobile home gas furnaces be vacated and remanded to doe for further rulemaking .

as a result , the standards established by the dfr for the non - weatherized gas furnaces and mobile home gas furnaces will not go into effect .

instead , the standards previously established — but not implemented — for these product classes of furnaces in doe's 2007 final rule will come into effect , with compliance required beginning on november 19 , 2015 .

however , the remaining portions of the challenged dfr , including the efficiency standards for other furnaces , central air conditioners , and heat pumps , remained in place .

the court order adopted all elements of proposed settlement , noting that "[t]he parties and intervenors have agreed that vacatur should accordingly be limited to the portions of the direct final rule and the notice of effective date that relate to energy conservation standards for non - weatherized gas furnaces. .

thus the energy conservation standards established in the dfr for other types of furnaces , central air conditioners , and heat pumps would be unaffected by the order partially vacating the dfr for further proceedings and would go into effect in accordance with the dfr .

however , with respect to non - weatherized residential gas furnaces , the settlement requires doe to ( 1 ) make data available to the public prior to publishing a proposed rule ; ( 2 ) "use best efforts to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking regarding energy efficiency standards for non - weatherized gas furnaces within one year of the issuance of the remand in this case" ; and ( 3 ) to issue a final rule within the later of two years of the issuance of the remand or one year of the issuance of proposed rule .

as a result of the adopted settlement , the current national standard of 78% will remain in effect until november 19 , 2015 , when a new national standard of 80% will be established pursuant to the november 2007 final rule referenced above .

the adopted settlement also clarifies the applicable requirements for residential central air conditioners .

as noted above , the settlement leaves in place the requirements for other products adopted in the dfr .

under the terms of the settlement , doe is required to issue an "enforcement policy statement addressing the upcoming deadline for compliance with regional standards for central air conditioners. .

starting january 1 , 2015 , a national energy conservation standard will apply to all central air conditioners manufactured on or after that date , but regional standards will impose additional requirements in a number of states as well .

however , doe also pledges that it will not seek civil penalties for violations of regional standards until july 1 , 2016 , due to "uncertainty created by the litigation and in an exercise of its enforcement discretion. .

finally , under the terms of the settlement , doe agreed to initiate a notice and comment rulemaking proceeding to clarify its process related to the promulgation of direct final rules as a general matter .

to this end , doe attached an addendum titled plan for clarification of doe direct final rule process .

on july 21 , 2014 , doe issued a final rule technical amendment that amended the relevant portions of its regulations to reflect the court's order vacating the amended energy conservation standards for non - weatherized gas furnaces ( including mobile home furnaces ) .

the final rule technical amendment was published on july 29 , 2014 .

pursuant to the settlement agreement , doe has undertaken a new rulemaking process for residential gas furnaces .

per the agreement , doe will issue a notice of proposed rulemaking within one year of issuance of the remand , including at least a ninety - day public comment period .

doe has also agreed to issue a final rule either within two years of the issuance of the remand or within one year of the issuance of the proposed rule .

also , the settlement agreement compels doe to complete its enforcement guidance .

doe is preparing a nopr for this rulemaking .

as one early step in that process , in june 2014 , doe issued a notice of intent to establish a negotiated rulemaking working group under the appliance standards and rulemaking federal advisory committee to negotiate proposed requirements for enforcement of regional standards .

the purpose of the working group is to discuss and reach consensus on a proposed rule .

in october 2014 , the american gas association ( aga ) and apga issued a white paper which recommends that doe's new rulemaking for non - weatherized residential gas furnaces establish separate product classes for condensing and non - condensing furnaces .

this recommendation was prompted mainly by an issue apga raised previously: some residential buildings may not accommodate side - venting required by 90% - efficient condensing - type furnaces .

aga and apga asserted that: condensing and non - condensing non - weatherized gas furnaces are significantly different in terms of the venting mechanisms they use , how they produce and dispose of condensate and the building environments in which they can be installed .

these differences create important differences in consumer utility , and must be appropriately considered in doe's standards development process .

the two groups argue that , under the settlement agreement approved by court order , doe agreed to reconsider the question of whether condensing and noncondensing non - weatherized gas furnaces should be treated as separate product classes in any future rulemaking that covers those products .

further , they cite epca's "special rule for certain types or classes of products" as requiring doe to establish separate standards for any group of covered products if the products "have a capacity or other performance - related feature which other products within such type ( or class ) do not have and such feature justifies a higher or lower standard from that which applies ( or will apply ) to other products within such type ( or class ) . .

aga and apga conclude that , given the special performance - related characteristics and utility that non - condensing non - weatherized residential gas furnaces provide to consumers , " epca requires that doe establish separate product classes for condensing and non - condensing gas furnaces . .

 ( emphasis added ) .

spurred by eisa , doe attempted to employ two energy efficiency policy innovations in its formulation of the dfr for regional furnace efficiency standards .

as the first policy to incorporate regional standards , it sought to expand the application of more efficient technology to the energy efficiency potential in northern states .

such an increased "extraction" of the energy efficiency "resource" there would parallel the way that new drilling technology can increase access to underground oil and natural gas reserves .

through doe's upcoming rulemaking following from the court - approved settlement , the regional furnace standards policy initiative may yet be realized — though perhaps in a somewhat more limited application than may have been envisioned by the parties to the 2009 collaborative agreement that ultimately led to the dfr .

the dfr policy mechanism was designed to accelerate the energy efficiency rulemaking process .

in one aspect , it aimed to address the many years of delay in updating the furnace standards to reflect advances in technology .

in another aspect , it also aimed to reduce the amount of time required to formulate the standards .

clearly , industry concerns about the need for additional preparation and sell - through time to meet a new regional installation standard increased the complexity of the process relative to previous standards processes that had only targeted equipment manufacturing changeovers .

the new unaddressed complexity ultimately led to court challenges and additional time delays .

in sum , the advent of regional standards may yet raise the efficiency levels in the northern states for gas furnace equipment retrofits and for outfitting newly constructed housing .

such action on standards would have the effect of increasing national energy savings .

meanwhile , implementation of the new standards — previously scheduled for 2013 — may not occur before the year 2020 .

the delay in standards will clearly defer some energy savings .

it is not clear whether the delay would affect the achievement of savings targets for state energy efficiency resource standards .

appendix a .

gas furnace: non - condensing type appendix b .

chronology of the regional standards policymaking process appendix c. doe rulemaking analysis plan overview and general approach in march 2010 , doe published a notice of the consensus agreement and issued a rulemaking analysis p lan ( rap ) for residential furnaces .

the rap is based on the energy - saving criteria specified in epca , as amended .

as noted previously , in the background section , epca specified that any amended appliance ( "covered product" ) efficiency standard must be designed to achieve the maximum improvement in energy efficiency that is "technologically feasible and economically justified. .

further , doe may not adopt a standard that would not result in "significant conservation of energy. .

in assessing an efficiency standard as "economically justified," doe must determine that the benefits of using equipment that satisfies the standard would exceed its burdens .

this assessment must address public comments on the proposed standard and consider , "to the greatest extent practicable," several additional factors .

to address the criterion of "technological feasibility" doe assesses the full range of commercially available equipment and its associated energy efficiency levels .

doe then chooses several trial standard levels ( tsls ) across the spectrum of available energy efficiency levels .

to assess the economic justification criterion , doe runs an elimination process for the tsls .

the process starts with the maximum technologically feasible level — the highest of doe's selected tsl levels of energy efficiency — and then runs scenarios with successively lower efficiency levels until reaching a point where the level is economically justified .

doe must then assess whether that level would achieve a "significant amount of energy savings. .

market participants and distribution channels the rap identified non - weatherized ( indoor ) natural gas furnaces as accounting for the dominant market share among the family of residential furnace equipment types: because the large majority of residential furnace shipments fall into the non - weatherized gas product class , doe will focus heavily on non - weatherized gas - fired furnaces .

as a result , doe plans to select units for teardown that will include approximately 25 non - weatherized gas - fired furnaces , 4 weatherized gas - fired furnaces , 6 mobile home gas - fired furnaces , and 8 non - weatherized oil - fired furnaces .

in order to estimate the price "markup" that a manufacturer adds to furnace production cost , doe had to define furnace market participants and identify associated distribution channels ( supply chains ) .

the rap describes the furnace distribution channel in simple terms: most residential furnaces pass through the following distribution channel: the original equipment manufacturer ( oem ) assembles the system and sells it to a distributor ; the distributor sells the unit to a contractor ; the contractor sells the unit to the final end - user and performs the installation .

after installation , the contractor performs all service on the system , including inspection , maintenance , and repair .

the rap provides rich detail about the contractor portion of the channel , where the direct interaction with consumers takes place: most contractors compete at the local level and the majority of them are small businesses .

many contractors carry products made by more than one manufacturer .

contractors interface with the end - user: installing new furnace systems to their specifications as well as inspecting , servicing , or repairing the existing system .

in the residential furnace market , contractors sell products as part of an installation package and do not list retail product prices separately from installation cost .

furthermore , differences in local markets , weather conditions , and many other factors can affect the price [that] contractors charge for furnaces .

 ( emphasis added ) potential industry impacts of regional standards in the rap , doe stated that it expected similar issues for the new dfr rule as it had experienced in its previous rulemaking for this equipment .

in describing doe's methods for assessing potential impacts of regional standards , the rap notes the similarities of the market participants and distribution channels for each of each of the three types of equipment covered by doe's 2007 rule that called for an 80% afue standard: market participants in the residential furnace distribution chain are often represented by the same trade associations as those in the central air conditioning and heat pump distribution chain .

for the current [2007] central air conditioner and heat pump standards rulemaking , doe conducted limited interviews with distributors and contractors , and sought comment regarding the potential impacts of regional standards as they relate to these products .

commenters noted that distributors and contractors of central air conditioners and heat pumps also service furnaces and face very similar issues with respect to regional standards .

 ( emphasis added ) doe's rap laid out three potential ways that the new standards could affect industry .

first , doe anticipated that new regional standards could disrupt existing supply chains .

based on the comments of the distributors , the rap recounted doe's interpretation of their views and concerns: the distributors were concerned that possible disparities between the regional boundaries for standards and existing distribution boundaries may prove problematic .

distributors stated that regional standards may be defined based on geographic boundaries composed of state lines , which are usually different than the boundaries of markets for heating and cooling products .

additionally , distributors were concerned about the possible impact of regional standards on the efficiency of the distribution chain , and ultimately , their ability to control costs .

national and regional distributors stated that they would face decreases in their economies of scale , which currently affect products that can be stocked and sold nationwide .

they stated that if certain products could not be sold throughout the entire country , then the cost of those products in the regions where they could be sold would be driven up .

they added that distributors [in] service areas that overlap borders between regions would be particularly affected , as their costs would increase due to the more complex and diverse inventories .

second , doe foresaw that supply chain disruption could raise management and compliance costs .

for furnace distributors and contractors , doe anticipated that the regional standards would present two new challenges: based on the ... interviews and its own preliminary market assessment , doe believes there are two main ways in which regional standards could impact furnace distributors and contractors .

first , because some distributors close to borders of regions may sell products in more than one region , complying with standards that differ across regions may cause these distributors to carry a different mix of inventory to fill orders in each region .

the inventory management costs could increase or the overall investment in inventory could increase .

second , eisa 2007 allows for regional standards to be enforced at the installation level , in addition to the existing enforcement of national efficiency standards at the manufacturer level .

as a consequence , there likely would be new compliance costs for distributors and contractors , involving at a minimum additional record - keeping and reporting .

 ( emphasis added ) third , the doe plan also anticipated that distributors and contractors would respond to the above - noted cost increases by increasing prices: based on its current assessment of the market , doe believes that any additional costs that regional standards may impose on furnace distributors and contractors would be reflected by a change in the markups used by these entities .

in its analysis of regional standards , doe plans to estimate changes in markups based on an assessment of ( 1 ) the inventory that would likely be carried in various geographic areas ( south , north , and border areas ) , and ( 2 ) the potential costs of enforcement requirements .

 ( emphasis added ) some key economic assumptions energy price assumptions doe's appliance standards program planned to use the energy information administration's ( eia's ) projections of national average natural gas , propane , electricity , and fuel oil prices to residential consumers to estimate future energy prices .

the most recent edition of eia's annual energy outlook ( aeo ) was chosen to serve as the source of projections for future energy prices .

equipment first cost vs. life cycle cost in order to analyze future monetary "first costs" of furnace equipment and the costs associated with the equipment's energy use through a long - term future , doe had to select a value for the consumer discount rate: the calculation of [life cycle cost] requires the use of an appropriate discount rate to determine the present value of operating expenses during the product lifetime .

the discount rate used in the lcc analysis represents the rate from an individual consumer's perspective.... for consumers of residential furnaces , doe plans to use the same approach that it relied on to develop discount rates for the november 2007 residential furnaces and boilers standards rulemaking ( i.e. , deriving the discount rates from estimates of the "finance cost" to purchase residential products ) .

potential risk of fuel switching the potential problem of fuel - switching ( product - switching ) was addressed in the rap : doe also plans to account for fuel and product switching that may result from standards requiring higher - efficiency furnaces .

because home builders are sensitive to first costs , a standard level that significantly increases the purchase price may induce some builders to switch to a different heating system .

such a standard level may also induce some home owners to replace their existing furnace with a different heating product , although in this case switching may incur additional costs to accommodate the different product .

the decision to switch is also affected by the prices of the energy sources for competing products ( i.e. , the prices of natural gas and electricity ) .

doe's analysis will account for the key factors expected to influence fuel and product switching that may result from standards requiring higher - efficiency furnaces .

doe will take into consideration factors from the rulemaking on heat pumps that may influence fuel switching from furnaces , in particular the potential installed costs of heat pumps , which compete with furnaces in some markets .

estimating the future value of energy savings to estimate the values for cumulative energy savings , doe adopted omb - specified guidelines for values of discount rates: according to u.s. office of management and budget ( omb ) guidelines for federal agencies , doe will conduct two npv [net present value] calculations , one using a real discount rate of 3 percent and another using a real discount rate of 7 percent .

the discount rates for the determination of npv are in contrast to the discount rates used in the lcc analysis , which are designed to reflect a consumer's perspective .

the 7-percent real value is an estimate of the average before - tax rate of return to private capital in the u.s. economy .

the 3-percent real value represents the "societal rate of time preference," which is the rate at which society discounts future consumption flows to their present value .

key issues for public comment the rap noted that doe wanted to receive public comment on a variety of key issues , including: the consensus agreement ; the combining of multiple equipment standards into a single rulemaking that covered residential central air conditioners , heat pumps , residential furnaces , and furnace fans ; doe's proposed definitions of regions , for the analysis of regional standards ; and the viability of the regional standard enforcement mechanisms presented in the rap , other mechanisms doe should consider , and the extent to which these mechanisms would result in additional financial burdens to consumers , manufacturers , contractors , distributors , dealers , and installers .

in particular , doe stated an interest in data on how , if at all , the enforcement options would increase compliance costs and / or other costs .

appendix d. map of the northern region for indoor ( non - weatherized ) furnace .

