the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) is a refundable tax credit available to eligible workers earning relatively low wages .

because the credit is refundable , an eitc recipient need not owe taxes to receive the benefit .

hence , many working poor ( especially those with children ) who have little or no tax liability receive financial assistance from this tax provision .

the amount of the eitc is based on a variety of factors , including number of qualifying children , earned income , and tax filing status .

one concern with the eitc is the credit's complex rules and formulas make it difficult for taxpayers to comply with and difficult for the internal revenue service ( irs ) to administer .

studies indicate that eitc errors ( both unintentional and intentional ) result in a relatively high proportion of eitc payments being issued incorrectly .

the department of the treasury's agency financial report ( afr ) for fiscal year ( fy ) 2017 estimates that in fy2017 between 21.9% and 25.8% of eitc payments — between $14.9 billion and $17.6 billion — were issued improperly .

in 2014 , the irs issued a study examining the major factors that lead taxpayers to erroneously claim the eitc .

this study found that the majority of taxpayers who overclaim the eitc are ultimately ineligible for the credit , rather than eligible for a smaller credit .

 ( while the study was released in 2014 , it is also referred to as the 2006-2008 eitc compliance study in this report , because it examined tax returns between 2006 through 2008. ) .

in addition , the irs may have difficulty ensuring that tax filers are in compliance with all the parameters of the credit , a problem that may be exacerbated in light of budgetary constraints faced by the agency .

this report examines findings from the 2014 irs study .

the report first briefly defines and compares two common measures of eitc noncompliance: improper payments and overclaims .

next , the report provides an overview of the major factors leading to eitc noncompliance identified in the 2014 study on this issue , as well as challenges the irs may face in their efforts to reduce each type of error .

these factors include claiming ineligible children as qualifying children for the credit , income reporting errors , and filing status errors .

finally , the report describes the role of paid preparers in eitc noncompliance .

this report does not provide a detailed overview of the credit .

for more information on eligibility for and calculation of the eitc , see crs report r43805 , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) : an overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed .

this report discusses two measures of eitc noncompliance: improper payments and overclaims .

although these two measures of eitc noncompliance are related , they do differ .

eitc improper payments are an annual fiscal year measure of the amount of the credit that is erroneously claimed ( generally overclaimed ) and not recovered by the irs .

in other words , recovered amounts of the credit are subtracted from erroneous claims of the credit to calculate improper payments .

eitc overclaims are the amount of the credit claimed incorrectly and do not include the impact of enforcement activities .

hence , the major difference between improper payments and overclaims is that improper payments net out amounts recovered or protected by the irs , while overclaims do not .

hence , improper payments are generally smaller than overclaims .

in addition , in contrast to improper payments which are published annually , overclaims have historically been reported less frequently ( the last two comprehensive irs studies that examined overclaims were released in 1999 and 2014 ) .

for a more detailed explanation of the relationship between improper payments and overclaims , see the appendix .

the irs estimates that in fy2017 , between $14.9 and $17.6 billion in eitc payments ( i.e. , between 21.9% and 25.8% of payments ) were issued improperly .

eitc improper payments and rates are often compared to the improper payments and rates of traditional spending programs .

for example , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has designated the eitc as a "high - error program" in comparison to other spending programs , with eitc improper payments the second highest in terms of the total dollar amount ( behind medicare fee - for - service ) and the highest in terms of improper payment rate ( improper payments as a percentage of total payments ) .

 , however , in order to make accurate comparisons of improper payments between tax benefits and traditional spending programs , it may be necessary to also consider the comparative costs of administering tax benefits and spending programs .

the federal government must spend money to administer its tax laws — as well as other government programs ( eg , food stamps , veteran's benefits ) .

the irs's administrative expenses include processing tax returns , auditing tax returns , and collecting unpaid tax liabilities .

to the extent that additional administrative expenses are associated with fewer errors ( unintentional mistakes and fraud ) and ultimately a reduction in improper payments , these administrative costs should be considered when comparing the improper payments of tax benefits to traditional spending programs .

for example , some experts stress that spending programs may have lower improper payment rates than the eitc because they screen every participant before the benefit can be claimed .

such screenings generally involve high administrative costs .

in contrast , the administrative cost of the eitc is relatively minimal .

in congressional testimony , the irs taxpayer advocate noted that using tax returns as the "application" for eitc benefits rather than a traditional screening process results in low cost with high participation as well as the risk of improper payment .

the irs has pointed out that for the eitc current administration costs are less than 1% of benefits delivered .

this is quite different from other non - tax benefits programs in which administrative costs related to determining eligibility can range as high as 20% of program expenditures .

in addition to comparing the eitc's improper payments to the improper payments of other spending programs , they can also be compared to revenue losses that arise from taxpayer noncompliance with other provisions of the tax code .

eitc errors are not the major source of revenue losses arising from taxpayer noncompliance .

the most recent irs report on the tax gap — tax liabilities not paid — estimated that the annual average gross tax gap for the tax years 2008 to 2010 period was $458 billion .

the net tax gap , which nets out amounts subsequently collected , was estimated to be $406 billion over the same time period .

the majority of the net tax gap — $291 billion — is associated with the individual income tax .

the largest source of noncompliance with individual income tax laws was the underreporting of business income on individual income tax returns , resulting in $125 billion of the tax gap the next largest source of the tax gap ( in dollar terms ) was the underreporting of self - employment tax , estimated to be $65 billion annually during the 2008 to 2010 period .

as the taxpayer advocate stated in the fiscal year 2015 objectives , when comparing the tax gap from the eitc noncompliance versus underreporting business income , "eitc overclaims account for 6% of the gross individual income tax noncompliance while business income underreported by individuals accounts for 51.9%. .

 .

in august 2014 , the irs released a new eitc compliance study examining the causes of eitc overclaims on 2006 , 2007 , and 2008 tax returns ( henceforth referred to as the "2006-2008 eitc compliance study" ) .

this study found that the majority of tax filers who overclaim the eitc are ineligible for the credit , instead of eligible for a smaller credit .

specifically , between 79% and 85% of eitc dollars claimed incorrectly were claimed by tax filers ineligible for the credit .

this study concluded that there were three major reasons for errors among claimants: eitc claimants claimed children who were not their qualifying children for the credit ; eitc claimants misreported their income ; and eitc claimants used an incorrect filing status when claiming the credit .

the 2006-2008 eitc compliance study found that the most frequent eitc error was incorrectly reporting income , and the largest error ( in terms of overclaim dollars ) was incorrectly claiming a child for the credit , as illustrated in table 1 .

the study also found that filing status errors are a source of eitc overclaims , although they are a relatively smaller cause of errors in comparison to income reporting and qualifying child errors .

unlike previous studies ( which did not examine error among paid preparers ) , this study also found that among paid tax preparers , unenrolled preparers were the most common type of preparers of tax returns which include the eitc .

in addition , unenrolled preparers were found to be most prone to error when claiming the credit .

total overclaims from the 2006-2008 eitc compliance study were estimated to be between $14.0 billion ( low estimate ) and $19.3 billion ( high estimate ) .

for policymakers , it may be important to understand not only the types of taxpayer errors that lead to eitc overclaims , but also how the irs may or may not be able to detect these errors and administer this tax benefit .

the irs examines a small sample of all tax returns every year , including those with the eitc , to verify that taxpayers are complying with tax laws .

in fy2017 , the irs examined over one million tax returns , of which more than a third ( 36.0% ) included an eitc claim .

 ( by way of comparison , the irs processed over 245 million returns in the same time period. ) .

the irs estimated that of $29.0 billion of additional tax owed as a result of all examinations , 6.9% ( $2.0 billion ) came from tax returns which included an eitc claim .

generally , the irs does not reveal how it detects errors or flags questionable tax returns to prevent persons from using this information to circumvent irs detection .

however , public documents that evaluate the efficacy of the irs error detection procedures do provide a general overview of some of the ways the irs can attempt to detect errors , especially before a refund is issued .

an overview and analysis of challenges the irs may face in detecting and reducing specific errors is provided for each type of error .

while not a complete evaluation , they are intended to highlight how the irs may prevent overclaims from different types of error as well as the agency's limitations in effectively administering the eitc .

in addition to detecting and preventing errors , the irs can , once they have determined a tax filer improperly claimed the eitc , subject that taxpayer to both financial penalties and disallow them from claiming the credit in future years .

if upon examination by the irs , all or part of a taxpayer's eitc is denied , the taxpayer ( 1 ) must pay back the amount in error with interest ; ( 2 ) may need to file the form 8862 , information to claim earned income credit after disallowance ; ( 3 ) may be banned from claiming eitc for the next two years if we [the irs] find the error is because of reckless or intentional disregard of the rules ; or ( 4 ) may be banned from claiming eitc for the next ten years if we [the irs] find the error is because of fraud .

tax return preparers who erroneously claim the credit on behalf of clients may also be subject to financial penalties , suspension or expulsion from e - file , injunction preventing them from preparing returns or subjecting them to certain limitations , and other disciplinary action .

in summary , the recent eitc compliance study found that the most common error tax filers make when claiming the eitc is incorrectly reporting income .

the largest eitc error in dollar terms is incorrectly claiming a child for the credit .

the 2006-2008 eitc compliance study however , did not provide estimates of what proportion of eitc errors were due to taxpayer confusion versus intentional error ( i.e. , fraud ) .

this may be of particular interest to policymakers seeking to reduce eitc errors because the strategies to reduce "honest mistakes" versus "fraud" differ .

insofar as these errors are due to taxpayer ( or paid tax preparer ) confusion with the eitc eligibility rules , the most effective policy response may be to simplify these rules and create greater uniformity for all child - related tax benefits in conjunction with increasing taxpayer education on eitc eligibility .

this may be particularly relevant for eitc claimants given that about one - third of the eitc claimants in a given year did not participate in the program the previous year and may be unfamiliar with the complex eligibility requirements of the credit .

increasing enforcement activities and auditing could be the best policy response for errors resulting from fraudulent claims of the credit .

the irs would need data on taxpayers' compliance with eitc parameters ( eg , whether the child claimed was a qualifying child ) to enforce the rules of the credit .

however , the irs currently may not have sufficient information to verify qualifying child eligibility and self - employment income .

the issues surrounding the irs ability to detect and correct eitc errors highlight a more general problem with administering complex provisions like the eitc — the lack of accurate and timely third - party data to verify complex eligibility rules .

the irs's budgetary constraints may also hinder enforcement activities .

problems with administration of the eitc also highlight more general problems of administering a variety of child - related tax benefits ( like the dependent exemption , the child tax credit , and the child and dependent care credit ) , each with slightly different eligibility rules .

a taxpayer , for example , may incorrectly believe that eligibility for one child - related tax benefit , like the child tax credit , makes them eligible for the eitc , and vice versa , when that may not be the case .

there are a variety of legislative options to improve the administration of the eitc , alone and in the context of other child - related tax benefits .

congress could simplify tax provisions such that they are enforceable with current third - party data ( eg , by making the eitc purely a work - based credit , based on earnings , not qualifying children ) .

or congress could simplify eligibility for all child - related tax benefits , such that a qualifying child for one benefit would be a qualifying child for all other child - related tax benefits .

the irs's administration of the eitc has highlighted the agency's shifting role from tax collector to tax collector and benefit administrator .

unlike other agencies that administer social and economic benefit programs , the irs does not expend significant resources to determine a taxpayer's eligibility for the eitc before a tax return is filed .

instead , taxpayers file for the eitc , and then the irs may verify if the taxpayer is eligible for the credit .

some tax returns are checked during tax filing season and others are checked post filing season , after the credit has been paid .

minimal pre - filing eligibility verification may reduce administrative costs but also lead to substantial amounts of the credit being claimed in error .

more broadly , improper payments of refundable tax credits may increase as the number of refundable credits the irs administers increases or participation in existing credits increases .

given the high percentage of eitc improper payments and data limitations in detecting certain eitc errors , congress may choose to reconsider providing social benefits through the tax code in the form of refundable credits .

alternatively , if congress remained interested in providing social benefits in the form of refundable tax credits , the irs's mission statement could be broadened to include both tax collection and the administration of social benefits .

without any changes in the way the irs administers social benefits like the eitc , improper payments of refundable credits and the suitability of the irs in administering social benefits could continue to be a prominent issue in tax administration .

as previously mentioned , this report discusses two measures of eitc noncompliance: improper payments and overclaims .

although these two measures of eitc noncompliance are related , they do differ .

improper payments are an annual fiscal year measure of the amount of the credit that is erroneously claimed and not recovered by the irs .

overclaims and the overclaim rate are the amount of the credit claimed incorrectly on successfully processed tax returns and do not include the impact of enforcement activities .

in addition , overclaims and the overclaim rate are generally reported less frequently than improper payments and the improper payment rate .

the irs released studies in 1999 and 2014 which examined eitc overclaims .

improper payments , the improper payment rate , and overclaims eitc improper payments are defined as erroneous amounts of the credit ( including both the nonrefundable and refundable portion of the credit ) that are "paid out to taxpayers and are not later recovered or corrected by the irs. .

to determine an estimate of the dollar amount of improper payments in a given fiscal year , an estimated improper payment rate is multiplied by an estimate of total eitc claims for that fiscal year .

the estimated improper payment rate is based on a sample of the most recent individual income tax reporting compliance data , which can be several years older than the estimate of total eitc claims .

for example , the estimated improper payment rate used to estimate the dollar amount of improper payments in fy2012 used tax data from 2008 tax returns .

this estimated improper payment rate ( based on a sample of 2008 tax returns ) was then multiplied by an estimate of total eitc claims for fy2012 to determine the dollar amount of improper payments for fy2012 .

an eitc overclaim is "the difference between the eitc amount claimed by the taxpayer on his or her return and the amount the taxpayer should have claimed. .

to determine why some tax filers erroneously claim the eitc , the irs examines tax returns with an eitc overclaim instead of examining returns with an improper payment .

this allows the irs to determine the factors that lead tax filers to claim the credit incorrectly .

if instead , the irs examined tax returns with eitc improper payments , their sample would exclude those tax returns whose eitc overclaims were either never paid ( due to prerefund compliance checks ) or were recovered ( as a result of postrefund audits ) .

excluding these tax returns could result in inaccurate estimates of the major factors that lead to incorrect eitc claims .

before fy2013 , the eitc improper payment rate was calculated as total overclaims dollars net of eitc overclaim dollars recovered , divided by the total amount of eitc dollars claimed on all returns .

beginning in fy2013 , the irs's calculation of improper payments includes underpayments .

eitc underpayments are "the amount of the eitc disallowed by the irs in processing that should have been allowed. .

under this new calculation of the improper payment rate , the dollar amounts of underpayments and overclaims are added together and the total amount of recovered eitc overclaims is then subtracted from this sum ( see figure a - 1 ) .

this modification has a small effect on the improper payment rate , with treasury noting that "underpayments increase the overall improper payment rate by less than 0.05 percent. .

do improper payments measure the cost of eitc noncompliance to the government ? .

the cost of eitc errors to the treasury equals credit overpayments ( overclaims net any overclaims blocked or which were recovered by compliance measures ) net of any underclaims or offsetting errors .

an underclaim is the amount of the credit a taxpayer is entitled to claim but neglects to claim , and includes eligible taxpayers who fail to claim the credit entirely as well as those who claim less than they should .

an offsetting error is an underclaim that may partially or fully offset an overclaim .

for example an offsetting error occurs when a child claimed in error by taxpayer a could have been correctly claimed by taxpayer b , but taxpayer b did not claim that child .

depending on the size of underclaims and offsetting errors , estimated improper payments "may or may not represent a loss to the government. .

for example , if tax filers overclaimed $10 billion of the eitc ( net of amounts never paid or recovered ) , but $2 billion of the credit was never claimed by eligible claimants , the net amount of the credit paid in error would be $8 billion .

when underclaims are large in relation to overclaims , improper payment amount may overstate the cost of eitc errors to the treasury .

when underclaims are relatively small compared to overclaims , improper payment amounts may be accurate approximations of the cost of eitc errors to the treasury .

currently , there are no publicly available estimates of underclaims and offsetting errors .

the irs does estimate that 21% of eligible eitc claimants do not claim the credit .

however , an estimate of the amount of eitc dollars underclaimed by these 21% of eligible recipients is not currently available .

