during the last few decades , consumers in the united states have shown a significant interest in purchasing consumer products and packaging that appear to be beneficial — or at least not harmful — to the natural environment .

in response to consumers' willingness to pay a premium for these products , manufacturers and others have increasingly touted the positive environmental attributes of their products in marketing materials , such as in advertising or on product labels .

these environmental marketing claims may be self - declared by manufacturers or made by a government or third party through a certified "seal of approval" or "environmental label" awarded to products that meet certain environmental criteria .

some members of congress and commentators have argued that consumers may have difficulty verifying claims made about the environmental attributes of a particular product , and thus that environmental marketing messages have the potential to deceive consumers .

according to these arguments , misleading claims may lead consumers to purchase products that lack the advertised environmental benefits or cause consumers to become indifferent to the claims .

in addition , some commentators have argued that the prevalence of misleading claims in the marketplace could potentially discourage companies from competing to produce more environmentally beneficial products .

this report examines the federal trade commission's ( ftc's ) role in regulating environmental marketing claims under the federal trade commission act ( ftc act ) and other federal laws .

it begins with an overview of the ftc's enforcement powers under the ftc act , including their potential extraterritorial application to unfair or deceptive claims made by foreign entities outside of the united states' territorial jurisdiction ( eg , labels on products that are imported into the united states ) .

it then examines how the ftc has exercised its powers under the act and other laws in the environmental marketing context .

the report concludes by considering legal issues potentially implicated by regulating environmental marketing claims , including questions involving the first amendment , international trade law , and federal preemption of state law .

this report does not examine the role that other federal agencies may play in regulating or monitoring the use of environmental marketing claims .

it also does not consider the possible use of the lanham act to bring a private cause of action against an entity that makes a false or deceptive environmental marketing claim .

finally , it does not address "private industry self - regulation" of claims by the national advertising division ( nad ) administered by the council of better business bureaus , which issues nonbinding decisions in alternative dispute resolution proceedings regarding advertising claims .

the ftc derives its general consumer protection powers from section 5 of the ftc act .

that section declares it unlawful for certain "persons , partnerships , or corporations" to engage in "unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce. .

the ftc act's definition of "commerce" encompasses both domestic commerce among the states , u.s. territories , and the district of columbia , as well as commerce with foreign nations .

under the ftc act , the commission has authority to promulgate or issue trade regulation rules , interpretive rules , and policy statements , and to investigate certain trade practices .

the ftc may enforce the act using administrative or judicial processes .

there is no private right of action in the ftc act .

the commission's powers under the ftc act are summarized below .

the ftc frequently receives complaints from consumers about cross - border fraud , including allegations that a foreign business located outside of u.s. territory has engaged in unfair or deceptive acts or practices causing injury to consumers in the united states .

it is possible that a foreign entity in a foreign country could make false or misleading environmental marketing claims that injure u.s. consumers .

for example , a foreign manufacturer might affix deceptive labels to its products prior to their import into the united states .

partly in order to address cross - border fraud , congress amended the ftc act in 2006 to expand and clarify further the ftc's international enforcement authorities , allowing greater cooperation between the agency and foreign countries and specifically allowing extraterritorial application of the ftc act by u.s. courts to certain conduct by foreign entities located in foreign countries .

however , despite these amendments , the ftc may face several procedural hurdles in litigating cases against a foreign defendant who lacks a legal presence in the united states , including the challenges involved in serving process on foreign defendants in a foreign country ; overcoming defendants' motions to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction or forum non conveniens ; engaging in discovery abroad ; and obtaining recognition and enforcement of u.s. judgments by foreign courts .

the ftc's enforcement of section 5 of the ftc act , which prohibits unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce , is central to the agency's role in regulating environmental marketing claims .

to explain to businesses and the public how the ftc interprets section 5 in determining which environmental marketing claims are unfair or deceptive , the agency has issued nonbinding guides for the use of environmental marketing claims .

because these "green guides" are administrative interpretations of law , the ftc cannot bring an enforcement action alleging a violation of them per se , but must find that the practice at issue is unlawful under section 5 of the ftc act or other applicable law .

in addition to enforcement efforts directly under section 5 of the ftc act , the ftc also enforces various other laws passed by congress aimed at assisting consumers in making meaningful comparisons regarding products' environmental attributes .

most of these laws state that violators are subject to ftc enforcement actions under section 5 of the ftc act .

some commentators have suggested that certain environmental marketing messages have the potential to deceive consumers , and that the prevalence of such messages in the marketplace may discourage companies from competing to create more environmentally beneficial products .

environmental marketing claims may be self - declared by manufacturers in advertising or on product labels , or made by a government or third party through a certified "seal of approval" or "environmental label" awarded to a product that meets certain environmental criteria .

these claims may concern a single environmental attribute or relate to the environmental impacts of a product during all or part of its life cycle , such as the effect on the environment of the product's manufacture , distribution , use , or disposal .

currently , federal regulation of environmental marketing claims consists primarily of the ftc's case - by - case enforcement approach under section 5 of the ftc act , which prohibits unfair or deceptive acts or practices in commerce .

through the green guides , the commission has provided nonbinding guidelines explaining how it might enforce section 5 in the environmental marketing context .

the ftc and other federal agencies also enforce federal laws and regulations that address specific types of environmental claims such as "dolphin - safe" or "organic" claims .

the federal government has also established voluntary labeling programs such as energy star that allow manufacturers to affix a label to a product if a third party certifies that the product has met environmental criteria set by federal agencies .

finally , in some contexts , the federal government has required manufacturers to disclose certain information about their products in marketing materials , including on labels .

while the ftc's green guides and private voluntary standards , such as the international organization for standardization ( iso ) 14020 series of standards for environmental labels and declarations , to protect consumers currently shape many environmental marketing claims , environmental marketing claims may also be regulated by , among other things: ( 1 ) enacting a government standard to set a floor for regulation and allowing private voluntary standards to provide stricter requirements or ( 2 ) codifying a private voluntary labeling and marketing standard into law or using such a standard as a basis for a law .

for instance , congress could compel manufacturers to disclose certain environmental attributes of a product or its packaging , as it has done with the energyguide label .

in addition , an existing voluntary environmental labeling program , such as the energy star program , could be expanded to cover more product categories and attributes .

under the energy star program , the federal government sets specifications that products must meet to qualify for a government - owned label ; licenses third parties that determine whether products conform with these specifications ; and monitors use of the label to ensure it remains meaningful to consumers .

this section examines legal issues potentially implicated by these various approaches to federal regulation of environmental marketing claims , including issues involving the first amendment , international trade law , and preemption of state law .

some commentators have suggested that certain environmental marketing messages have the potential to deceive consumers , and that the prevalence of such messages in the marketplace may discourage companies from competing to create more environmentally beneficial products .

currently , federal regulation of environmental marketing claims consists primarily of the ftc's case - by - case enforcement approach under section 5 of the ftc act , which prohibits unfair or deceptive acts or practices in commerce .

the commission has provided nonbinding guidelines explaining how it might enforce section 5 in the environmental marketing context .

federal regulation of environmental marketing claims potentially raises legal issues involving the first amendment , international trade law , and preemption of state law .

legislation that regulates how manufacturers or sellers make certain claims about their products in advertisements or on labels may raise questions about the constitutional limits of regulating commercial speech .

requiring manufacturers to disclose certain information relating to the environmental characteristics of their products in advertisements and on labels may raise questions about the constitutionality of legislation that compels speech .

in addition , a law regulating environmental marketing claims that appear on product labels could potentially raise issues concerning the united states' obligations under international trade law .

for example , such measures could potentially be subject to the wto tbt agreement , which generally requires wto members preparing , adopting , and applying a measure to adhere to obligations concerning nondiscrimination ; trade - restrictiveness ; transparency ; and reliance on international standards as a basis for regulation .

however , the extent to which the tbt agreement applies to measures that regulate claims made on labels that address so - called "non - product - related processes and production methods" ( eg , the amount of carbon dioxide emitted during manufacture of a product ) is unclear .

another issue is the degree to which federal laws and regulations governing environmental marketing claims should expressly preempt state laws .

on the one hand , commentators argue , federal preemption could bring uniformity to varying state standards , making it less costly for manufacturers to market their products throughout the united states and making it easier for consumers to evaluate environmental marketing claims .

on the other hand , commentators note that courts have traditionally considered consumer protection to fall within the states' police powers .

states could arguably tailor environmental marketing regulations to fit local conditions and concerns , and state laws could potentially supplement federal enforcement efforts .

