china is in a new era of development and is at a crossroads with its economic development plans and its newly announced commitment to consolidate the minerals industry .

china is the world's leading producer and consumer of many minerals and metals that are in high demand in the united states and china and upon which the united states is highly import dependent .

china's current , 12 th five - year plan ( 2011-2015 ) and successive five - year plans anticipate rapid urbanization , a rising middle class , and increased product manufacturing of high - value , high - quality goods and increased consumption .

with china's potential economic growth and heavy u.s. reliance on imported raw materials , will adequate supplies of critical and strategic raw materials and metals be available to the u.s. economy from reliable suppliers ? .

is there a possibility of material shortfalls ? .

if china uses more of its raw materials and metals for its own downstream manufacturing sector instead of exporting them , as well as competing for raw materials and metals from outside china , then there may be a cause for concern .

materials such as the platinum group metals ( pgms ) , niobium , tantalum , manganese , and cobalt are heavily imported by the united states and china .

most of the minerals and metals discussed in this report have been classified by the department of defense ( dod ) as strategic minerals , while others are classified by the department of energy ( doe ) as critical .

many of these materials are used in building defense systems while others are required for new energy technologies .

many chinese leaders have acknowledged that double - digit economic growth is unsustainable .

over the next five years , china is planning a more sustainable growth rate in its gross domestic product ( gdp ) of about 7% - 8% annually .

new economic reforms that will generally lead to more market - based decision making are underway , according to china's third plenum .

the slowing of china's economy and less construction has resulted in less demand , overcapacity , and lower prices for many raw materials , particularly steel and steel - making materials ( eg , iron ore , chromium , and manganese ) .

the economic slowdown in china has implications for the global economy , particularly those countries and companies that export raw materials to china ( eg , brazil , australia , and south africa ) .

because of weak domestic demand for steel and subsequent falling prices , chinese steel producers are exporting more high - valued steel products to other parts of asia .

prices in general could rebound once excess production capacity is eliminated and high - cost producers discontinue operations or are merged with large - scale operations .

the mining industry in china consists of many small and fragmented companies .

china's national government seeks to consolidate its mining industry , eliminating obsolete and inefficient capacity , and has announced specific consolidation goals for certain sectors .

chinese consolidation plans intend to address energy efficiency along with air and water pollution concerns .

the chinese government has closed some obsolete iron ore smelting plants and mines around beijing because of their negative impact on air quality .

it also has begun to implement longer - term plans to improve the quality of the environment .

the mining and metals industry is generally seeking technology upgrades that are more efficient and less polluting .

eliminating excess capacity will be the mining sector's biggest challenge , said gu zangqin , head of the china national petroleum and chemical planning institute .

gu argues that china's move to more urbanization , a growing middle class , and industrialization will likely continue to drive up demand for raw materials and consumer products in the long run .

one vice president , however , argued that overcapacity is not the biggest challenge , but rather innovation and sustainability .

he stated further that china's industrialization and urbanization will bring opportunities , but government and consumers should focus on sustainability of raw materials used in the entire supply chain .

in a recent investorintel article , jack lifton , a metals analyst , concurs with a good part of the analysis by gu stated above .

lifton acknowledges that there is already significant raw material industry restructuring taking place now , and he concludes that more changes , that is , consolidations , are likely for the raw materials sector in the 13 th five year plan .

lifton reports that in 2014 , china consumed 60% of the world's metals supply of all types and that china consumes as much as 80% of the world supply of various high - tech metals ( eg , rare earth elements , yttrium ) .

lifton reiterated that china's push is to manufacture more of the high - value consumer goods ( eg , electronics , appliances , and autos ) as well as the intermediate materials and parts that are required to make them .

under this consumption - driven model , domestic consumption of parts , intermediate goods , and finished goods would accelerate .

having access to raw materials needed to sustain the emerging phase of the chinese economy is still most important and will "underpin the growth of the high - tech manufacturing economy so that chinese domestic consumption can grow," according to lifton .

the quality of goods produced and sold in china is an important factor for the rising middle class and generally important for its more recent consumption - driven economic model .

the chinese government announced plans for a more aggressive approach in its "go global" campaign designed to secure raw materials .

the government policy to "go global" was established in 1999 but was not fully implemented until around 2002-2003 .

it articulated three main objectives: ( 1 ) to support national exports and expand into international markets ; ( 2 ) to push domestic firms to internationalize their activities as a means of acquiring advanced technologies ; and ( 3 ) to invest in the acquisition of strategic resources .

concern by the communist party of china ( cpc ) over "resource security" has increased during the past few years , which led to more outbound direct investment ( odi ) in the mining sector as a policy to secure access to raw materials .

even as china's economy slows , the chinese are positioning themselves more aggressively through their "go global" policy and continue to secure access to raw materials needed for sustained economic development .

in some instances , lower - cost imports may be cheaper than producing high - cost domestic materials .

the official goal of china , and part of its "go global" strategy , according to the ministry of commerce , is to invest another $390 billion in odi over the next five years .

outbound direct investment in mining projects reached $106 billion at the end of 2013 , accounting for 16% of china's overall odi , according to reports discussed in the china daily .

most of china's resource imports are purchased from corporations not owned by the chinese , but there are some equity investments in the raw materials and metals sectors .

a recent study by the council on foreign relations ( cfr ) concluded that china's demand for resources will not slow anytime soon .

according to the authors of the cfr study , "leaders will need to take steps to respond as the world is transformed by china's growing presence and pursuit of natural resources. .

further , they argue , there is the possibility that "chinese companies will control larger amounts of natural resource production overseas and possibly impose a more rigid trading arrangement , possibly slowing the world's response to supply disruptions. .

and because of the emergence of market - based investment decisions in china , and a consumption - driven economy , the next 20 years will very likely not look like the previous 20 .

many on capitol hill express a deep sense of skepticism and are not convinced that china's leaders are taking sufficient measures to address economic reforms or quality of life issues such as environmental pollution .

in recent years , primarily because of china's raw material export policies ( eg , export restrictions and new export licensing requirements on rare earth elements , particularly the hrees ) there has been heightened congressional and executive branch interest in seeking legislative options that would facilitate continued u.s. access to reliable mineral supplies .

this report will examine china's position in the global mineral and metal markets ; its growth in mineral reserves ; the growth of supply , demand , and imports ; and the role of china's state - owned enterprises ( soes ) .

the report takes a look at u.s. mineral import dependence , u.s. import dependence on china , and selected policy options .

there are appendices on mineral end - use applications , and selected critical minerals legislation in the 113 th congress .

this section provides a discussion of selected policy options that are included in legislation introduced in the 113 th congress .

appendix b of this report summarizes much of the critical minerals - related legislation .

similar bills are likely to be introduced in the 114 th congress .

china's economic development will continue to have a major impact on the world supply and availability of raw materials and downstream products .

other countries will likely be faced with making adjustments to secure needed raw materials , metals , and finished goods for national security and economic development .

many firms have moved to china to gain access to its market , raw materials or intermediate products , and generally lower - cost production .

at the same time , china is seeking technology transfer from many of these firms to expand its downstream manufacturing capacity .

despite china's current overcapacity and increased exports of some commodities , in the long run it may be in china's interest to use its minerals ( plus imports ) for domestic manufacturing of higher - valued downstream products ( eg , component parts and consumer electronics ) .

higher - cost , inefficient facilities and mines may close more rapidly , resulting in china seeking more imports as mining industry consolidations are implemented .

one issue being raised by several economists is how china will respond to global market prices .

will chinese firms continue to provide domestic industries with discounted prices , keeping more materials in - house , while selling materials at higher prices to the export market ? .

or will economic reforms and international pressure lead to more closely aligned domestic and export prices and the continuation of mineral and metal exports ? .

china's dominance in the supply and demand of global raw materials could be addressed through consistent development of alternate sources of supply , use of alternative materials ( substitutes ) when possible , efficiency gains , aggressive r&d in development of new technologies , and comprehensive minerals information to support this effort .

there may not be an immediate crisis , but china is likely entering an era of fewer raw material exports over the long run , which seems to call for some type of long - term planning by the private sector and government entities that want to meet u.s. national security , economic , and energy policy interests and challenges .

it would be important to keep an eye on free trade issues and address any concerns through the wto if needed , such as the previous cases of export restrictions of raw materials brought up and won against china .

more analysis would be useful to investigate u.s. firms' capacity to adjust to supply bottlenecks such as restrictions in exports , underinvestment in capacity , china's materials use domestically , single source issues , strikes , power outages , natural disasters , political risk , and lack of substitutes .

having such analysis and understanding may be a matter of public policy .

congress may consider policies to minimize the risk of potential supply interruption of critical and strategic minerals and metals before a crisis emerges .

appendix a .

selected minerals major applications appendix b .

selected critical minerals - related legislation in the 113 th congress h.r .

761 , the national strategic and critical minerals production act of 2013 introduced by representative mark e. amodei on february 15 , 2013 , and referred to house committees on natural resources and the judiciary .

h.r .

761 passed by a vote of 246-178 on september 18 , 2013 .

the bill defines critical and strategic minerals and would seek to streamline the federal permitting process for domestic mineral exploration and development .

it would establish responsibilities of the "lead" federal agency to set clear mine permitting goals , minimize delays , and follow time schedules when evaluating a mine plan of operations .

the review process would be limited to 30 months , and the priority of the lead agency would be to maximize the development of the mineral resource while mitigating environmental impacts .

s. 1600 , critical minerals policy act of 2013 introduced by senator lisa murkowski on october 29 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on energy and natural resources .

the bill would define what critical minerals are , but would request that the secretary of the interior establish a methodology that would identify which minerals qualify as critical .

the secretary of the interior shall maintain a list of critical minerals not to exceed 20 at any given time .

the bill would establish analytical and forecasting capability on mineral / metal market dynamics as part of u.s. mineral policy .

the secretary of the interior would direct a comprehensive resource assessment of critical mineral potential in the united states , assessing the most critical minerals first and including details on the critical mineral potential on federal lands .

s. 1600 would require the national academy of sciences to update its 1999 report hardrock mining on federal lands , examine the regulatory framework for mineral development in the united states , and provide the number and location of abandoned hardrock mines .

agency review and reports would be intended to facilitate a more efficient process for critical minerals exploration on federal lands , and specifically would require performance metrics for permitting mineral development activity and report on the timeline of each phase of the process .

the department of energy would establish an r&d program to examine the alternatives to critical minerals and explore recycling and material efficiencies through the supply chain .

the department of the interior would produce an annual critical minerals outlook report that would provide forecasts of domestic supply , demand , and price for up to 10 years .

title ii of the bill recommends mineral - specific action ( led by the department of energy ) for cobalt , lead , lithium , thorium , and non - traditional sources for rare earth elements .

for example , there would be r&d for the novel use of cobalt , grants for domestic lithium production r&d , and a study on issues associated with establishing a licensing pathway for the complete thorium nuclear fuel cycle .

title iii would repeal the 1980 minerals policy act and the critical minerals act of 1984 and would authorize $60 million for appropriation .

appendix c. 2014 u.s. net import relianc .

