on february 23 , 2015 , senator susan collins introduced s. 534 , the immigration rule of law act of 2015 , which would prohibit funding for almost all of the president's immigration accountability executive action announced on november 20 , 2014 .

the legislation cites 11 of the 12 memoranda issued pursuant to the executive action , including 9 memoranda issued by the secretary of homeland security , and both memoranda issued by the president .

the legislation would prohibit any funds or fees , including deposits into the immigration examinations fee account , from being used to grant any federal benefits pursuant to any policy changes established in the cited memoranda .

in addition , the bill would require the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to treat as within its highest enforcement priority for removal any alien convicted of domestic violence , sexual abuse , child molestation , or child exploitation .

the bill would express the sense of congress on policies that it finds as imposing disadvantages on the hiring of u.s. citizens and lawfully present aliens .

it would also express the sense of congress on policies that disadvantage the immigration processing of lawfully present aliens in favor of that for unauthorized aliens .

president obama's immigration accountability executive action of november 20 , 2014 , would revise some u.s. immigration policies and initiates several programs , including a revised border security policy for the southwest border ; deferred action programs for some unauthorized aliens ; revised interior enforcement priorities ; changes to aid the entry of skilled workers ; promoting immigrant integration and naturalization ; and several other initiatives the president indicated would improve the u.s. immigration system .

the most controversial among these would grant deferred action to as many as 5 million unauthorized aliens .

the president announced the executive action through 10 department of homeland security ( dhs ) memoranda , 2 white house memoranda , and 3 department of labor ( dol ) fact sheets .

according to the president , the action was taken in response to the absence of legislation addressing major problems within the immigration system .

the president has stated that his executive action is temporary , and that his successor can rescind some or all of its provisions .

those opposed to the executive action argue that it was taken largely for political purposes .

they contend that once granted , the temporary measures it encompasses would be difficult to revoke .

separately , a debate has arisen as to whether the president has the legal authority to take such action , with the administration and others arguing the president's action falls within his authority , and many in congress arguing the president has overstepped it .

that debate and its attendant legal questions are beyond the scope of this report .

as the administration proceeds to implement the executive action , some in congress have vowed to halt some or all of its provisions .

security along u.s. borders has been an ongoing subject of congressional interest since the 1970s , when illegal immigration emerged as a serious national problem .

the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , spurred concerns about border security , a core part of dhs's effort to control unauthorized migration .

the united states border patrol ( usbp , border patrol ) spearheads this effort as the lead agency along most of the borders .

the usbp focuses on the regions between ports of entry ( poes ) .

in addition to border patrol agents , other law enforcement personnel work in u.s. border regions .

these include customs and border protection ( cbp ) officers at poes ; immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) agents ; u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) personnel ; additional federal law enforcement officers from agencies such as the drug enforcement administration , u.s .

marshals service , and department of agriculture ; state and local police ; and on occasion , the national guard .

complementing this array of personnel are cbp's land - based surveillance assets , air and marine surveillance assets , and fencing and physical infrastructure .

usbp has experienced large - scale growth since 2004 , and dhs secretary johnson and the obama administration have argued that the southwest border is more secure than ever .

yet , some members of congress and others have called on the administration to do more to secure the border .

border security has been a recurrent theme in congress's debate about comprehensive immigration reform since 2005 , and some members have argued that congress should not consider additional immigration reforms until the border is more secure .

usbp is responsible for enforcing u.s. immigration law and other federal laws along the border and for preventing all unlawful entries into the united states , including entries of terrorists , unauthorized aliens , weapons of mass destruction , illicit narcotics , and other contraband .

in discharging its duties , usbp patrols roughly 7,500 miles of u.s. international borders with mexico and canada and the coastal waters around florida and puerto rico .

along the border , usbp's staffing has grown from 9,511 in fy2004 to 18,611 in fy2013 , with a slight dip to 18,127 in fy2014 ( figure 1 ) .

at the same time , apprehensions at the southwest border have declined with an uptick in recent years partly due to a rise in the number of unaccompanied children crossing illegally .

it is unclear how the expansion in usbp personnel has influenced unlawful migration , but the obama administration and dhs secretary johnson have touted these two numbers as indicative of improved security along the southwest border .

in recent years , cbp and usbp have developed border security plans .

in may 2012 , cbp released the most recent iteration , the "2012-2016 border patrol strategic plan. .

it shifts attention from resource acquisition and deployment to the strategic allocation of resources by "focusing enhanced capabilities against the highest threats and rapidly responding along the border. .

from an operational perspective , this plan emphasizes the collection and analysis of information about evolving border threats ; integration of border patrol and cbp planning across different border sectors and among the full range of federal , state , local , tribal , and international organizations involved in border security ; and rapid border patrol response to specific border threats .

since its enactment in 1952 , the immigration and nationality act has given the attorney general and more recently the dhs secretary discretion to exercise the power to remove foreign nationals .

since at least 1975 , a series of policy memorandums published by the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) and dhs has provided guidance to immigration officers who institute removal proceedings against an alien .

the guidance noted which categories of foreign nationals to prioritize for removal ( i.e. , prosecutorial discretion ) .

ice enforcement and removal operations ( ero ) is chiefly responsible for locating removable aliens , managing custody of aliens undergoing removal procedures , and ensuring that aliens directed to depart from the united states do so ( either by witnessing their removals or by physically removing the aliens ) .

in addition , certain other dhs personnel may initiate a removal process against an alien .

on november 20 , 2014 , the dhs secretary announced new department - wide policies for enforcement priorities and the apprehension , detention , and removal of aliens .

this guidance is effective on january 5 , 2015 .

in addition , secretary johnson announced a review and steps to overhaul the pay scale for immigration officers in ero .

how to address the unauthorized alien population in the united states has arguably been the most divisive issue in recent discussions about immigration reform .

proposals to enable unauthorized aliens to become u.s. lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) have been key flash points in the congressional debate .

various legalization proposals have been introduced in recent congresses , but none have been enacted .

one key difference among these proposals has been their scope .

some bills have been targeted at particular segments of the unauthorized population .

for example , legislation known as the development , relief , and education for alien minors ( dream ) act has proposed to enable certain unauthorized aliens who arrived in the united states as children to obtain lpr status through a two - stage process .

other more controversial measures , such as the major senate immigration reform bill considered in the 113 th congress , have aimed to provide lpr status more broadly .

while only legislative action can bestow legal immigration status , the obama administration has used other mechanisms to enable unauthorized aliens to remain in the united states .

the administration has also taken steps to address the impact of provisions in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) that make aliens who have been unlawfully present in the united states for more than 180 days and then depart , inadmissible to the country for a specified period of time .

these provisions are known as the 3- and 10-year bars .

through the president's executive action of november 20 , 2014 , the obama administration would be providing eligibility for two forms of temporary immigration relief — deferred action and parole — for certain segments of the unauthorized population , and would expand the availability of certain types of waivers of the unlawful presence grounds of inadmissibility in the ina .

a key principle underlying u.s. immigration policy is facilitating the permanent and temporary entry of foreign nationals with needed skills .

admitting professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers raises a series of policy tensions as the united states attempts to compete internationally for the most talented workers without negatively impacting wages and working conditions of native workers and students entering the u.s. labor market .

the president's immigration accountability executive action announced on november 20 , 2014 , includes provisions meant to alleviate uncertainty for potentially millions of unauthorized aliens through deferred action and the use of provisional waivers and parole .

it is also intended to revise enforcement priorities and improve and coordinate strategic initiatives across a range of immigration policy areas , including border security , high skilled immigration , and naturalization .

whether this executive action can accomplish these objectives and prompt congress to pass more permanent legislative solutions is unclear .

accomplishing such goals in the face of a potentially resistant congress may prove challenging .

uscis , the agency tasked with carrying out sizable portions of the executive action , would be relying upon an indeterminate amount of additional fee revenue from deferred action petitions to implement some of these objectives , while other agencies , lacking congressional appropriations , would be attempting to implement changes to current policies and procedures mostly through increased coordination and more innovative marshaling of existing resources .

