asset forfeiture has a long and storied history in anglo - saxon law , beginning hundreds of years ago in the common law of england and developing in the united states into a complex body of federal statutes .

for purposes of this report , "asset forfeiture" is the process of confiscating either property or money from a person because it is illegal to possess ( contraband ) , constitutes the proceeds of a crime , or was used to facilitate a crime .

asset forfeiture comes in two forms , civil and criminal , each with its own set of intricate rules .

in civil asset forfeiture , the government proceeds against the offending property , not the property owner , in what is known as an in rem proceeding ( which results in awkward case captions such as united states v. $52,000.00 , more or less , in united states currency ) .

in civil forfeiture cases , the guilt of the property owner is not in question .

in fact , in many cases , there is no criminal prosecution at all .

rather , these cases turn on whether the property was sufficiently connected to a federal crime .

because these are civil proceedings , many of the constitutional safeguards accorded to criminal defendants in the bill of rights have been held not to apply .

criminal forfeiture , on the other hand , is an in personam proceeding that follows a criminal prosecution .

the defendant does not forfeit his property unless he is convicted of a qualifying crime .

while civil asset forfeiture began with the very first congress , it took on a much greater role during the war on drugs in the 1970s and 1980s .

the efficacy of the program , however , soon created concerns of overreach , prompting congress to take up forfeiture reform in the 1990s .

after considerable hearings and debate , congress enacted the civil asset forfeiture reform act of 2000 ( cafra ) , the first major overhaul in federal forfeiture law in 200 years .

while this law brought about significant reform to federal forfeiture policy and procedures , some have questioned whether cafra went far enough to rein in what they characterize as overzealous police forfeiture tactics .

others have questioned the legitimacy of the institution of civil forfeiture itself .

the department of justice ( doj ) , on the other hand , has asserted that asset forfeiture plays a "critical and key role in disrupting and dismantling illegal enterprises , depriving criminals of the proceeds of illegal activity , deterring crime , and restoring property to victims. .

concerns about the current legal framework are evidenced in new reports of possible police misuse of federal forfeiture laws .

contemporaneously , a new round of reform proposals have been introduced , including two identical bills introduced in the 114 th congress , the fifth amendment integrity restoration act of 2015 , or fair act ( s. 255 and h.r .

540 ) , and the civil asset forfeiture reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

5212 ) , introduced in the 113 th congress .

with these proposals in mind , this report will provide an overview of select legal issues and reforms surrounding asset forfeiture , including the burden of proof standard and innocent owner defense in civil asset forfeiture cases , access to counsel in both civil and criminal forfeiture cases ( including a discussion of the 2014 supreme court asset forfeiture decision kaley v. united states ) , allocation of profits from confiscated assets , and doj's equitable sharing program .

before addressing these issues , a brief history and overview of civil and criminal asset forfeiture will put these legal issues and reforms into context .

asset forfeiture comes in two forms: civil and criminal .

the most significant legal distinction surrounding civil asset forfeiture is the principle that the defendant in the case is property — whether a vehicle , a house , or money — rather than a person .

this "legal fiction" that property should be "held guilty and condemned" allows the government to proceed against people's property without ever bringing charges against them .

this practice can be traced back to english law , which permitted the forfeiture of property that killed a person ( known as a deodand ) , forfeitures at common law for the property of those convicted of a felony or treason , and statutory forfeitures of offending property in violation of customs laws .

whatever the original rationale , the concept of forfeiture was adopted in american customs laws beginning with the first congress .

it applied to ships and cargoes in violation of customs laws , vessels used to deliver slaves to other countries , and vessels used to deliver slaves to the united states .

while congress enacted various civil forfeiture statutes over the subsequent 150 years , this practice became a major part of federal law and federal law enforcement policy during the war on drugs , beginning with the comprehensive drug abuse prevention and control act of 1970 .

this law permitted the confiscation of any substances manufactured or distributed in violation of federal drug laws and any conveyances — such as aircraft , vehicles , and vessels — used to facilitate the transportation and sale of these drugs .

in 1978 , civil forfeiture was extended to include the forfeiture of money , negotiable instruments , and other proceeds connected to a drug transaction .

in 1984 , congress added real property to the list of forfeitable property .

while drug crimes may constitute the bulk of federal forfeitures , federal law permits forfeitures in a host of other areas .

one of the major complaints of these civil asset forfeiture laws was how the procedural rules generally favored the government .

the government was not required to prove guilt of the property or its owner beyond a reasonable doubt , nor even by a preponderance of the evidence .

instead , probable cause to believe that the property was connected to the prescribed federal crimes was enough to confiscate the property .

if the government made this showing , the burden would shift to the property owner to prove that the property was not implicated in the alleged crime .

additionally , claimants had to file a bond with the court in order to contest a forfeiture of their property .

although these statutes were a favored tool during the zenith of the war on drugs , in the 1990s , congress took up various legislative proposals to reform the civil forfeiture system .

after years of legislative debate , congress enacted the civil asset forfeiture reform act of 2000 ( cafra ) .

this legislation was not a comprehensive overhaul of the asset forfeiture system based upon "first principles" but instead constituted a set of discrete legislative fixes .

these changes included shifting the burden of proof to the government and raising it to the preponderance of the evidence standard , creating a uniform innocent owner defense , eliminating the bond requirement , imposing stricter filing deadlines for the government and the claimant , creating a statutory hardship provision , and authorizing appointment of counsel in certain cases .

the civil forfeiture process generally begins when the government seizes someone's property that was connected to a criminal offense .

at that point , the government must provide notice to any interested persons .

if no one makes a claim on the property , the property can be forfeited under a process known as "administrative" or "nonjudicial" forfeiture without the government having to file a case in district court ( so long as it meets the statutory class of property ) .

the rationale for this streamlined process is that requiring the government to obtain a default judgment for uncontested forfeitures is too time consuming and expensive .

if anyone makes a claim to the property , however , or if the property does not fall within the statutorily defined categories of property subject to administrative forfeiture , the case must be referred to the u.s. attorney to be handled in a judicial forfeiture proceeding .

prior to the passage of cafra , administrative forfeitures were primarily governed by customs laws .

with cafra , congress consolidated many of the procedural rules for administrative forfeitures in 18 u.s.c .

§ 983 ; however , the customs laws still apply as a gap filler when the new rules are silent on a particular issue .

because cafra does not delineate what categories of property are subject to administrative forfeiture , this facet of forfeiture is still governed by customs laws .

under 19 u.s.c .

§ 1607 , the government can use the administrative process to forfeit any property that does not exceed $500,000 ; any vehicle or other conveyance that was involved in a drug crime , regardless of value ; and all monetary instruments , including u.s. currency , regardless of value .

real property , such as a home or business , is not subject to administrative forfeiture .

under pre - cafra law , there were no strict deadlines governing when the government had to file an administrative or judicial forfeiture claim .

the law required only that cases be commenced and prosecuted "without delay. .

cafra altered this by placing time restrictions on both the government and claimants .

it requires that "in any nonjudicial civil forfeiture , with respect to which the government is required to send written notice to interested parties , such notice shall be sent in a manner to achieve proper notice as soon as practicable , and in no case more than 60 days after the date of the seizure. .

this time limit is extended to 90 days in "adoptive forfeiture" cases where the property was seized by a state or local law enforcement agency and turned over to a federal law enforcement agency .

if the government fails to provide notice of the seizure in accordance with these rules and fails to get an extension , it must return the property to the owner "without prejudice to the right of the government to commence a forfeiture proceeding at a later time. .

doj reads this provision , and the majority of courts have accepted , that even if doj misses the deadline , it may still initiate a judicial or criminal forfeiture without first having to return the property .

if notice is sent to an interested party , he has 35 days after the date the letter is mailed to file a claim .

if the letter is not received , he has 30 days after the date of final publication of the notice of seizure .

filing such a claim is where the property owner gets his or her "day in court. .

a claim must identify the specific property being claimed and the claimant's interest in the property and must be made under oath , subject to penalty of perjury .

to simplify the process of making a claim , cafra mandated that each federal agency conducting administrative forfeitures make claim forms available upon request and ensure that they are "written in an easily understandable language. .

if no one makes a claim to the property within the time specified , the government can issue a declaration of forfeiture and sell the property at public auction .

while claimants cannot seek judicial review of the merits of the administrative forfeiture , cafra created a mechanism to ensure that the government followed the required procedural safeguards .

under section 983 ( e ) , a property owner can file a motion in district court to have the court set aside an administrative forfeiture on the grounds that he or she was not provided notice of the forfeiture proceeding .

to satisfy the due process clause , the government need not provide actual notice , but its efforts must be "reasonably calculated" to provide notice to interested parties .

section 983 ( e ) is the "exclusive remedy" to set aside a declaration of forfeiture , and it must be filed within five years of the date of final publication of the seizure .

if the court sets aside the forfeiture , the government is permitted to commence a subsequent forfeiture proceeding against that person .

it has 60 days to file an administrative action or six months to file a judicial action .

if a claim is filed , the administrative forfeiture process is terminated and the case is referred to the u.s. attorney's office for initiation of judicial forfeiture proceedings .

the government has 90 days to file its complaint .

at this point , any person claiming an interest in the property may file a claim pursuant to the supplemental rules for certain admiralty claims not later than 30 days after the date of service of the government's complaint or , if applicable , not later than 30 days after the date of final publication of the filing of the complaint .

the claimant then has an additional 20 days after filing the claim to file an answer to the government's complaint .

as will be discussed in detail below , the burden of proof is on the government to prove that the property is forfeitable by a preponderance of the evidence .

if the government meets its burden , the property owner can then raise an affirmative defense , such as the innocent owner defense , again , discussed more thoroughly below .

under the seventh amendment , claimants have a constitutional right to a jury trial as to any issue of fact .

at this point , the case will proceed like other civil suits: both sides will conduct discovery under the federal rules of civil procedure , one or both sides will move for summary judgment , and , like many forfeiture cases , it is likely to be resolved without a full - blown trial .

unlike civil forfeitures , which are in rem actions brought directly against the offending property , criminal forfeitures are in personam actions in which the government proceeds against the person as part of a criminal prosecution , and only property owned by the defendant — and not third parties — is subject to forfeiture .

until 1984 , there were only two criminal forfeiture statutes on the books: the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations act ( rico ) and continuing criminal enterprise ( cce ) statutes .

congress expanded criminal forfeitures as part of the comprehensive crime control act of 1984 to cover all federal drug crimes , not just cce violations .

and in an effort to shift more forfeiture cases from the civil to the criminal side , congress enacted 28 u.s.c .

§ 2461 ( c ) as part of cafra .

this so - called "bridge statute" allows the government to confiscate any property in a criminal proceeding that is forfeitable under the civil forfeiture provisions .

as with the civil forfeitures , the first task of the government in criminal forfeitures is generally to secure the property subject to confiscation .

the government can seek a pretrial restraining order by alleging that the property sought to be restrained would be subject to forfeiture upon conviction .

as will be discussed in more detail below , the supreme court has held that probable cause is the appropriate standard for such a pretrial restraining order and that this determination can conclusively be made by the grand jury .

if the government seeks a pretrial restraining order before obtaining an indictment , it must meet the more stringent standard of demonstrating that there is a "substantial probability" that the government will prevail on the issue of forfeiture , that failure to issue the restraining order will result in the destruction or removal of the property , and that the need to preserve the availability of the property outweighs the hardship on the property owner .

alternatively , under section 853 ( f ) , the government can request the issuance of a warrant authorizing the seizure of the property in question .

to issue a warrant , the court must find that there is probable cause that the property will be subject to forfeiture in the event of a conviction and that a pretrial restraining order as provided under section 853 ( e ) would be insufficient to assure the availability of the property .

in addition to securing the property , the government must provide notice to the defendant .

prior to 2000 , the federal rules of criminal procedure required that an indictment state with specificity "the extent of the interest or property subject to forfeiture. .

rule 32.2 was amended in 2000 to require only that the government inform the defendant that it will seek forfeiture generally but "need not identify the property subject to forfeiture or specify the amount of any forfeiture money judgment that the government seeks. .

today , instead of listing the specific property to be forfeited in an indictment , the defendant can seek a bill of particulars from the prosecutor listing the property subject to forfeiture .

the courts that have addressed this issue disagree about the appropriate timing and scope of the government's disclosure .

like any other criminal prosecution , at the guilt phase of the trial the elements of the offense must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt .

upon securing a conviction , the court will then proceed to the forfeiture phase of the trial .

the majority of courts apply the preponderance standard of proof in these proceedings , reasoning that forfeiture is part of the criminal sentence and not the substantive offense .

for federal narcotics crimes , property will be presumed forfeitable if the government proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the property was acquired during the time of the violation ( or within a reasonable time after ) and there was not a lawful source for such property .

if the government meets its burden , the court will issue a preliminary order of forfeiture .

any third party alleging claim to an interest in the property is resolved through a post - judgment ancillary hearing .

in addition to procedural reforms , considerable attention has been given to the structural aspects of civil asset forfeiture .

one issue in this context is what some perceive as the misallocation of forfeiture revenues directly back to law enforcement agencies rather than into the general fund of the united states .

another issue is the program referred to as "equitable sharing," in which the federal government either assists state and local law enforcement in seizing assets or "adopts" a seizure made solely by local entities and remits up to 80% of the revenue upon completion of a federal forfeiture proceeding .

in its 2010 report policing for profit: t he abuse of civil asset forfeiture , the institute for justice stated its view that "the most troubling aspect of modern civil asset forfeiture laws is the profit incentive at their core. .

part of the concern is that law enforcement agencies are utilizing revenues from asset forfeiture to supplement their shrinking budgets , a power that is somewhat anomalous for a government agency .

another concern is that the government has been subsuming other law enforcement priorities in an "overzealous pursuit of forfeiture. .

some federal courts have also expressed concern about the "corrupting incentives" that arise from the current arrangement .

by contrast , the treasury department noted during debate on cafra that allowing law enforcement agencies to keep the profits of asset forfeiture helps pay for its own property management costs , relieves burdens that would otherwise fall on taxpayers , and overall "strengthens law enforcement by rechanneling forfeited value back into this most fundamental societal purpose.... " prior to 1984 , this issue of profit motive was largely nonexistent or , at best , indirect , since the proceeds from forfeited assets were deposited directly in the general fund of the united states treasury .

however , as part of the comprehensive crime control act of 1984 , codified at 28 u.s.c .

§ 524 , congress diverted these funds into the newly created department of justice assets forfeiture fund .

as initially established , any amount in the fund in excess of $5 million not appropriated that fiscal year was required to be deposited in the treasury's general fund .

however , in 1986 this cap was eliminated .

funds are deposited into the assets forfeiture fund via several statutes .

section 524 ( c ) ( 4 ) of title 28 provides that "all amounts from the forfeiture of property under any law enforced or administered by the department of justice" ( except for several limited carve outs ) and all funds received through the federal equitable sharing program shall be deposited into the assets forfeiture fund .

section 881 ( e ) of title 21 provides that the proceeds of any sale of forfeited property and forfeited moneys must also be deposited in the assets forfeiture fund .

section 524 of title 28 establishes how money from the assets forfeiture fund can be spent .

section 524 ( c ) provides that money in the fund is available to the attorney general for the following purposes: forfeiture - related expenses payment to informants in drug - related cases awards for information leading to civil or criminal forfeitures payment of liens or mortgages against property that has been forfeited remission and mitigation payments related to forfeited property equipping vehicles , vessels , or aircrafts of federal agencies participating in the fund , or state or local law enforcement agencies engaged in a joint law enforcement operation with a federal agency payments for other equipment directly related to seizure or forfeiture , including laboratory equipment , protective equipment , communications equipment , and the operation and maintenance costs of such equipment purchase evidence of federal drug or money laundering offenses payment of state and local real estate taxes on forfeited property payment of overtime salaries , travel , fuel , training , equipment , and other similar costs of state and local law enforcement officers that are incurred in a joint law enforcement operation with a federal law enforcement agency participating in the fund federal correctional construction costs additionally , section 524 ( c ) ( 8 ) provides that any excess unobligated balance remaining in the fund "shall be available to the attorney general , without fiscal year limitation , for any federal law enforcement , litigative / prosecutive , and correctional activities , or any other authorized purpose of the department of justice. .

also established in the comprehensive crime control act of 1984 is the department of the treasury forfeiture fund , then called the "customs forfeiture fund. .

this fund is administered by the secretary of the treasury and receives deposits of currency and proceeds from forfeitures under laws enforced or administered by the treasury or the coast guard , amounts received by the treasury or the coast guard as an equitable share of a forfeiture conducted by other authorities , or income realized from investments on behalf of the fund .

similar to doj's fund , this statute establishes how these funds can be used .

some have suggested that the most appropriate method of removing the profit motive from forfeiture cases would be to stop diverting assets to the very law enforcement agencies conducting the seizures .

s. 255 and h.r .

540 would take this general approach by requiring confiscated funds to be deposited back into the treasury's general fund and would eliminate the various provisions that allow property to be transferred to another federal agency or to any state and law enforcement agency that participated directly in the seizure of the property .

congress may also consider allocating such funds for a specific program .

during the debates on asset forfeiture reform in the 1990s , representative john conyers introduced h.r .

3347 , which would have required that not less than 50% of funds disbursed from the assets forfeiture fund be spent on a "community - based crime control program ( including private , nonprofit programs ) for drug education , prevention , and treatment. .

various states have employed a similar approach of diverting funds to specific programs , such as substance abuse programs or public education .

in addition to the issue of allocation of forfeiture revenues , some have voiced concern about the appropriateness of the "equitable sharing" program .

equitable sharing is a policy in which federal law enforcement agencies can share forfeiture revenues with participating state and local law enforcement agencies .

some federal courts and commentators had expressed concern that this policy allows law enforcement agencies to circumvent local laws that might impose more stringent procedural requirements , such as higher burdens of proof , or laws that do not funnel assets directly into law enforcement budgets .

doj has lauded equitable sharing generally for "fostering cooperation among federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies" and allowing the federal government "to provide valuable additional resources" to local police .

on january 16 , 2015 , attorney general holder issued new guidelines pertaining to one of the more controversial aspects of equitable sharing known as "adoptive seizures," which might alleviate some apprehensions about this program .

equitable sharing is authorized and regulated by several federal statutes .

section 881 ( e ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of title 21 provides that "[w]henever property is civilly or criminally forfeited under this subchapter the attorney general ma y ... transfer the property ... to any state or local law enforcement agency which participated directly in the seizure or forfeiture of the property. .

subsection ( e ) ( 3 ) provides that: attorney general shall assure that any property transferred to a state or local law enforcement agency ... has a value that bears a reasonable relationship to the degree of direct participation of the state or local agency in the law enforcement effort resulting in the forfeiture , taking into account the total value of all property forfeited and the total law enforcement effort with respect to the violation of law on which the forfeiture is based ; and ( b ) will serve to encourage further cooperation between the recipient state or local agency and federal law enforcement agencies .

likewise , 18 u.s.c .

§ 981 ( e ) ( 2 ) provides that "notwithstanding any other provision of the law , except section 3 of the anti drug abuse act of 1986 , the attorney general , the secretary of the treasury , or the postal service , as the case may be , is authorized to retain property forfeited pursuant to this section , or to transfer such property on such terms and conditions as he may determine to ... to any state or local law enforcement agency which participated directly in any of the acts which led to the seizure or forfeiture of the property. .

under 19 u.s.c .

§ 1616a , the secretary of the treasury may "transfer any of the [forfeited] property to ... any state or local law enforcement agency that participated directly or indirectly in the seizure or forfeiture of the property. .

presumably based on this statutory authority , the attorney general has issued guidelines to regulate the equitable sharing program .

these guidelines were first issued in 1985 as part of the u.s .

attorneys manual entitled "guidelines on seized forfeited property" and were recently updated in 2009 as the "guide to equitable sharing for state and local law enforcement agencies. .

prior to attorney general holder's announcement , agencies participated in the equitable sharing program in two ways .

the first is "joint investigations," in which federal agencies work with state or local agencies to enforce federal law .

a state or local agency's share is based on "a reasonable relationship to the agency's direct participation in the investigation or law enforcement effort resulting in the forfeiture .

in some instances , joint task forces involving federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies have written equitable sharing agreements based upon numbers of personnel and other contributions to the task force .

doj's new rules do not alter this part of equitable sharing — the sharing of proceeds when both federal and local law enforcement agencies are involved .

the second method , called "adoptive forfeitures," which has been curtailed by the new doj guidelines , allowed federal authorities to "adopt" assets that were seized solely by a local law enforcement agency .

doj's new order prohibits "the federal adoption of property seized by state or local law enforcement under state law in order for the property to be forfeited under federal law. .

while generally ending the practice of adoptive forfeitures , the new order creates an exception for property "that directly relates to public safety concerns , including firearms , ammunition , explosives , and property associated with child pornography. .

it also creates three additional exceptions: " ( 1 ) seizures by state and local authorities working together with federal authorities in a joint task force ; ( 2 ) seizures by state and local authorities that are the result of joint federal - state investigations or that are coordinated with federal authorities as part of ongoing federal investigations ; or ( 3 ) seizures pursuant to federal seizure warrants , obtained from federal courts to take custody of the assets originally seized under state law. .

notably , the first two exceptions allow the continued practice of sharing assets that are the result of joint participation between federal and state / local authorities .

notwithstanding doj's new policy , the three recent bills addressing asset forfeiture would amend the various equitable sharing provisions .

if enacted , s. 255 and h.r .

540 would appear to completely end equitable sharing — both adoptive forfeitures and forfeitures obtained through joint investigations .

h.r .

5212 would not have eliminated equitable sharing altogether but would have instead prohibited the use of federal forfeiture laws to circumvent state or local laws: "the attorney general shall assure that any equitable sharing between the department of justice and a local or state law enforcement agency was not initiated for the purpose of circumventing any state law that prohibits civil forfeiture or limits use or disposition of property obtained via civil forfeiture by state or local agencies. .

based on comments by incoming senate judiciary committee chairman chuck grassley and other lawmakers , it is apparent that asset forfeiture , including equitable sharing , will remain on the congressional radar in the 114 th congress .

