prior to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , insurance covering terrorism losses was normally included in general insurance policies without additional cost to the policyholders .

following the attacks , both primary insurers and reinsurers pulled back from offering terrorism coverage .

because insurance is required for a variety of economic transactions , particularly borrowing for commercial development , many feared that a lack of insurance against terrorism loss would have a wider economic impact .

congress responded to the disruption in the insurance market by passing the terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 ( tria ) .

tria created a temporary , three - year terrorism insurance program to calm the insurance markets through a government reinsurance backstop sharing in terrorism losses .

the idea was to give the private industry time to gather the data and create the structures and capacity necessary for private insurance to cover terrorism risk .

tria requires insurers to offer terrorism coverage but does not require commercial policyholders to purchase the coverage .

congress extended the program in 2005 and 2007 .

in 2005 , the extension legislation focused on reducing the government's exposure from tria by increasing the minimum covered event size , raising the insurer deductible , reducing the government share of losses , and increasing the post - event mandatory recoupment .

in 2007 , the primary change was to accelerate the after - the - fact recoupment .

although the prospective government share of losses has been reduced over time , the 2007 reauthorization also expanded the program to cover losses from acts of domestic terrorism .

both the house and the senate passed different tria extension bills in the 113 th congress , but final legislation was not enacted .

thus , the tria program expired at the end of 2014 , as provided for in the 2007 extension .

the initial thresholds of the program when it expired were as follows: 1 .

a terrorist act must have caused $5 million in insured losses to be certified for tria coverage .

2 .

the aggregate insured losses from a certified act of terrorism must have been $100 million in a year for government coverage to begin .

3 .

an individual insurer must have met a deductible of 20% of its annual premiums for government coverage to begin .

once these thresholds were met , the government would have covered 85% of insured losses due to terrorism , with the private insurers retaining 15% of the losses .

the government did not charge premiums for this coverage .

instead , if the insured losses were under $27.5 billion , the secretary of the treasury was required to recoup 133% of government outlays through a surcharge on commercial property / casualty insurance policies .

if insured losses rose above $27.5 billion , the secretary was required to recoup a reduced amount of the outlays .

at some high insured loss level , which depended on the exact distribution of losses , the secretary no longer was required to recoup outlays but retained the discretionary authority to do so .

under the law when it expired , all mandatory recoupment was required to be completed by the end of fy2017 .

since tria's passage , private industry's willingness and ability to cover terrorism risk have increased .

according to industry surveys , prices for terrorism coverage have generally trended downward and approximately 60% of commercial policyholders have purchased coverage over the past few years .

the price drops and coverage increases , however , occurred under the umbrella of tria coverage , and it is unclear how the insurance market would have reacted to a lasting expiration of the federal program .

representative randy neugebauer introduced h.r .

26 on january 6 , 2015 , and the house passed the bill by a vote of 416-5 with one member voting present on january 7 , 2015 .

the senate passed the bill on january 8 , 2015 , on a vote of 93-4 and the president signed p.l .

114-1 on january 12 , 2015 .

the language of h.r .

26 / p.l .

114-1 is identical aside from technical corrections to that of the amended version of the 113 th congress bill , s. 2244 , which passed the house on december 10 , 2014 .

p.l .

114-1 includes provisions to extend the tria program nearly six years , until the end of 2020 ; decrease the federal loss sharing gradually from 85% to 80% ; increase the program trigger by $20 million per year until it reaches $200 million from $100 million in 2015 ; increase the insurance marketplace aggregate retention amount by $2 billion per year until it reaches $37.5 billion from the $27.5 billion .

after it reaches $37.5 billion , the amount is to be set by the secretary of the treasury to equal the annual average of aggregate insurer deductibles for the previous three years ; extend the various dates for mandatory recoupment by seven years ; change the mandatory recoupment provisions to require that 140% of the federal payments be recouped ; require the treasury to study the certification process and issue final rules governing the process , including a timeline ; require the treasury to collect additional data on the terrorism insurance market and include that data in an annual report ; and require a government accountability office ( gao ) study on the possible effects of instituting insurer premiums for tria coverage and requiring capital reserve funds for terrorism .

in addition to the tria provisions , p.l .

114-1 also includes a title ii relating to insurance agent licensing , a section relating to the makeup of the federal reserve board of governors , and a title iii amending statutory provisions originating in the 2010 dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act relating to derivatives and margin requirements for end users .

similar provisions to title ii and title iii passed the house in the 113 th congress .

table 1 below presents a side - by - side analysis of the tria law as it existed upon expiration and p.l .

114-1 .

a side - by - side comparison of legislation in the 113 th congress can be found in the appendix .

