for four decades , congress has intermittently debated whether the public would be better served if air traffic services currently provided by the federal aviation administration ( faa ) were instead provided by an independent entity .

the many proposals and bills on this subject put forth over the years have distinguished two main alternatives to continued operation of the air traffic control system by a federal agency: corporatization , which , in this context , generally refers to establishing air traffic services as a wholly owned government corporation or quasi - governmental entity ; and privatization , which would entail creating some form of private ownership and control of an air traffic services corporation .

proposals under both of these models have generally sought to establish stakeholder involvement in the business entity providing air traffic services though representation on a board of directors or other similar oversight body .

aviation stakeholders include the airlines , various general aviation interests , other aviation businesses , and military users of the airspace .

interest in restructuring air traffic services , relatively dormant in recent years , reemerged in 2013 after budget sequester - related funding cuts led to staggered furloughs of faa controllers at air traffic facilities across the country , deferral of plans to upgrade air traffic control facilities , and suspension of hiring and training of air traffic controllers .

delays in implementing the satellite - based nextgen air traffic control system have renewed interest in corporate or private models for providing air traffic services .

a november 2016 audit report issued by the department of transportation office of inspector general found that costs and timelines for delivering core nextgen transformational technologies remain unclear and that several key elements of nextgen will provide only limited benefits to users for the foreseeable future .

in august 2016 , the office of inspector general found that faa lacks a clear process for identifying and coordinating high - priority research and development projects to support nextgen development , and ongoing efforts have not be aligned with any long - term vision for nextgen .

while a proposed privatized model was offered as part of the faa reauthorization bill considered by the house transportation and infrastructure committee in the 114 th congress ( see h.r .

4441 ) , congress included no such proposals in reauthorizing faa through the end of fy2017 ( p.l .

114-190 ) .

the need to reauthorize faa programs and revenue authority beyond the end of fy2017 and the trump administration's stated desire "to shift the air traffic control function of the federal aviation administration to an independent , non - governmental organization" have brought air traffic control reform to the fore once more .

this report looks at past proposals to corporatize or privatize faa air traffic functions and examines the way air traffic management is structured in other countries , particularly focusing on those that have opted for corporatization or privatization .

faa , an agency of the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) , oversees all civilian air traffic control operations across the united states .

air traffic control and modernization of air traffic facilities are funded through two accounts in the faa budget .

the operations and maintenance account , with an authorization of $9.91 billion in fy2016 , funds air traffic operations , as well as aviation safety programs not related to air traffic control .

the facilities and equipment account , authorized at $2.85 billion in fy2016 , provides funding for the acquisition and maintenance of air traffic facilities and equipment , and for engineering , development , testing , and evaluation of technologies related to the federal air traffic system .

under faa's operations and maintenance account , faa's air traffic organization ( ato ) operates 315 air traffic facilities , including 21 en route control centers , 24 stand - alone terminal radar approach control ( tracon ) facilities , and more than 260 airport control towers ( including towers with combined radar approach control facilities ) across the country .

ato federal employee staffing totals about 35,000 , of which more than 14,000 are air traffic controllers .

in addition , ato oversees more than 250 airport towers run by private operators under the federal contract tower program .

controllers and other staff in a contract tower are employees of the contractor , not of the federal government .

faa also has contracted out operations at flight service stations that provide weather briefings and flight planning services to owners of private aircraft ( general aviation ) .

slightly over two - thirds of faa's total funding , and all funding for the facilities and equipment account , is provided through the airport and airway trust fund ( aatf ) .

revenue sources for the trust fund include a 7.5% passenger ticket tax , a 4.3-cent - per - gallon tax on commercial jet fuel , a 21.8-cent - per - gallon tax on general aviation jet fuel , and other taxes on cargo , frequent flyer awards , international departures and arrivals , and fuel used by planes with fractional ownership .

faa also collects user fees from aircraft that fly in u.s. - controlled airspace but do not take off from or land in the united states .

a portion of this fee , which is similar to overflight fees charged by other countries in conformance with agreements of the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) , is used to fund atc services .

proposals to restructure air traffic control have been offered since at least 1974 .

while many of these proposals have been drafted into legislation introduced in congress , none of the measures has ever made it out of committee .

these various proposals have purported to offer means of minimizing or avoiding a number of identified problems: faa funding is tied to annual appropriations and multiyear authorizations that can suffer delays or cuts due to political wrangling , making it difficult to carry out long - range planning .

faa lacks a dedicated budget for long - term capital expenditures and has no independent access to financial markets to fund such investments ; faa management and procurement processes have proven inadequate for meeting equipment and facilities modernization needs , leading to lengthy delays , cost overruns , and failures to fully achieve stated objectives ; federal workforce restrictions have encumbered faa's ability to recruit and maintain highly qualified air traffic controller and technical personnel , particularly in high - cost areas ; strained relations between management and labor have , at times , impeded progress in developing new air traffic technologies and procedures ; and inadequate stakeholder engagement in planning and executing technological and procedural initiatives has resulted in approaches that have not fully met users' expectations .

historically , most proposals to corporatize or privatize air traffic services have envisioned user fees , rather than taxes , as the revenue source for the proposed corporation .

such fees , which could be based on aircraft weight and distance flown , air traffic services provided during approach and landing , and airport surface movements , would be compelled to adhere to policies agreed upon by icao .

proposals to replace or augment u.s. aviation taxes with user fees linked to air traffic services have met with considerable opposition .

the george w. bush administration's proposal to establish user fees for commercial jets and certain other aircraft using busy terminal airspace was not accepted by the 110 th congress .

in both the 110 th and 111 th congresses , a senate proposal to impose a $25-per - flight surcharge on commercial flights and general aviation jet traffic was sharply criticized by general aviation interests and was not approved .

a proposal by the obama administration for a per - flight user charge of $100 on commercial and general aviation jets and turboprops that fly in controlled airspace , first introduced in 2011 and reintroduced in each subsequent faa budget submission , has not been acted upon by congress .

general aviation groups have argued that they would have a relatively small stake in the governance and oversight of an air traffic corporation , and that the concerns of private pilots , corporate jet operators , and noncommercial airports would be overshadowed by those of the airline industry and the major passenger airports .

additionally , general aviation users have often raised concerns that the funding mechanisms for a privatized or corporatized air traffic system could cost them more than the current system of fuel taxes .

after indicating its openness to proposals that could lower the costs of flying for general aviation users and address inefficiencies at faa , the aircraft owners and pilots association , a general aviation group , opposed the 2016 reform proposals because they would have shifted the financing of air traffic services to a system that is user fee - funded .

business aviation interests also raised concerns that the proposed scheme would replace congressional oversight of faa with a privatized corporate "board dominated by big airlines," warning that "[g]iving the airlines the unbridled power over our air traffic system , as they have long sought is a dangerous proposition" offering "no means for recourse over the decisions of the board. .

labor organizations representing air traffic controllers and faa technicians had historically favored a move away from faa to a corporate structure for air traffic control .

this sentiment , however , largely shifted to general support of the faa - managed system after labor gained collective bargaining rights following personnel reforms made in the 1990s .

under these reforms , controllers and other faa employees were able to bargain collectively for pay , a situation unique in the federal government .

despite contentious contract negotiations between faa and controllers during the george w. bush administration , the national air traffic controllers association ( natca ) did not advocate for corporatization or privatization .

instead , in 2003 it commissioned a study highlighting the pitfalls of corporatization or privatization .

in 2016 , natca reversed its position and came out in support of h.r .

4441 , indicating that , in its opinion , the proposed legislation addressed its ongoing concerns by offering stable , predictable funding that would address staffing needs to promote safety , efficiency , and innovation and provide services to all segments of the aviation community .

controller support for the proposal was likely bolstered by the inclusion of labor provisions in the bill that would allow employees transferred from faa to the corporation to continue coverage under federal retirement systems , health benefit programs , and other federal employee benefit programs , and would have provided unions with statutory dispute resolution requirements to smooth collective bargaining negotiations with the corporation .

airlines for america , an advocacy group representing several airlines in the united states , has also expressed concern that progress on nextgen , faa's initiative to modernize the air traffic system by converting to satellite - based navigation and aircraft tracking and digital voice and data communications , has lagged and that congress has been unable to "'fix' nextgen through annual appropriations bills , the faa reauthorization bill , or additional oversight. .

airlines for america supported h.r .

4441 , finding that similar reforms have been successful in other countries and would promote funding stability and greater accountability , and would "make nextgen a reality instead of an unrealized dream. .

congressional reluctance to accept aviation user fees leaves unanswered the question of how a corporatized or privatized air traffic control system would be funded .

in the 114 th congress , h.r .

4441 would have limited the applicability of user fees to commercial airline operations , thus excluding general aviation and business aviation in particular .

this limitation , however , was insufficient to gain the support of important interest groups representing general aviation and business aviation .

while opposition to corporatization and user - fee funding of air traffic services stalled the legislation to implement the usats proposal in the 1990s , the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-264 ) instead included language authorizing reform of the faa procurement and personnel management systems in order to keep pace with new technology and match resources with personnel needs .

the act mandated the creation of a 15-member faa management advisory council designated by the secretary of transportation , including 13 members representing aviation interests , 1 member from the department of defense , and 1 member from dot .

the council is charged with providing guidance to faa with respect to operations and regulatory matters affecting industry stakeholders .

as noted above , this council recently recommended further action to fully corporatize or privatize faa air traffic control functions ( see " faa management advisory council report ( 2014 ) " ) .

the same law established the national civil aviation review commission and tasked it with analyzing alternative financing and funding for the aviation system .

the commission's report , released in december 1997 , proposed moving to an atc system financed by user fees .

the commission argued that a fee - based system could be more adaptive to changes in priorities and programs , and was likely to be treated more favorably in the budget process .

it called for a user fee - funded air traffic performance fund to replace the airport and airway trust fund , which was to be phased out .

it also called for the creation of a performance - based structure ( i.e. , a data - driven , results - oriented business approach ) for air traffic services , managed by a chief operating officer and overseen by a stakeholder board .

the commission recommended that faa adopt a comprehensive set of system performance metrics to gauge service and safety .

several countries have established government corporations or private entities to provide air traffic services .

such organizational forms are permissible under international law , which gives countries the exclusive right to regulate and control the use of navigable airspace overlying territorial lands and waters , as well as to regulate and control flight operations in designated airspace regions overlying international waters .

while most countries have established governmental civil authorities to regulate the use of sovereign airspace , the air traffic services that manage the use of that airspace need not be part of the same entity that establishes regulations .

broadly , these air traffic services include air traffic control functions to maintain safe separation between aircraft ; acquisition and maintenance of air navigation equipment and development and dissemination of procedures and data for safe navigation of the airspace ; and air traffic management techniques to make efficient use of available airports and airspace , improve traffic flow , and expand airspace and airport capacity .

the term "air navigation services" encompasses all of these components , and has been adopted internationally to refer to the activities carried out by entities performing these functions , which are known globally as air navigation service providers ( ansps ) .

in addition to its regulatory authority over civilian aircraft operations and airspace , faa is the ansp for the united states .

regulation of flight operations remains mostly a governmental function .

increasingly , however , countries are establishing independent government - owned or private corporations to carry out the operational delivery of air navigation services , including air traffic control , weather reporting , flight planning , and traffic flow management .

wholly government - owned corporations are the predominant organizational structure of air navigation service providers outside the united states , while some countries , like france , greece , japan , and mexico , operate as government agencies similar to faa and the ato .

a 2005 gao study of ansps in australia , germany , new zealand , the united kingdom , and canada found that all were subject to external safety regulation , operated as self - financed businesses , and , as monopoly providers of their services , constrained by procedural guidelines or economic review and oversight by government .

gao also found that all five of these ansps had improved productivity and operational efficiency through investments in facilities and equipment .

gao concluded that commercialization had allowed these ansps to implement modernization projects more efficiently through access to cash flow and borrowed funds .

some ansps indicated that the corporate model enabled them to buy and modify commercially available products , allowing them to achieve benefits faster and at lower cost than if they had designed and built systems from the ground up .

additionally , the corporate structure allowed european ansps to form partnerships for large - scale procurement .

table 1 provides a general overview of the size and complexity of selected global corporate ansps .

data for faa are provided in the table for comparison .

none of the ansps in other countries are comparable to faa in terms of their size or complexity .

nonetheless , collectively , the ansps in europe bear some similarities to faa , although european airspace is not as busy as u.s. airspace , primarily because it does not have the volume of nonairline general aviation traffic that the united states does .

the prospect of reforming faa air traffic services into a government corporation or private entity raises many unique challenges to be considered in crafting and debating enabling legislation .

this section reviews some of the key considerations .

the organizational structure and managerial and financial oversight of a new air traffic services entity could take one of many forms .

the u.s. government already has made use of most of these models for other purposes , and they have been employed for air traffic control in other countries .

a number of entities fall under the broad rubric of "quasi - governmental organizations" and exist as hybrids between governmental and private sectors .

examples include the tennessee valley authority , mortgage lender fannie mae , intercity passenger rail provider amtrak , the smithsonian institution , and the national academies .

faa itself works closely with the mitre center for advanced aviation system development , a congressionally chartered not - for - profit corporation , on air traffic control technologies .

many federal agencies rely on contracts with private - sector entities to provide goods and services .

faa itself has extensive experience with outsourcing both major acquisitions of air traffic control technologies and certain operational aspects of the national airspace system .

to date , faa has not outsourced any operations associated with radar control of air traffic , such as terminal radar approach control ( tracon ) facilities and en route centers , and has contracted out air traffic services only at low - activity nonradar towers .

although nats uk is a unique example of public - private partnerships ( p3s ) in air traffic control , congress has shown great interest in p3s in other fields as a means to leverage government assets , potentially reduce federal government costs , and share risks with private firms .

some federal agencies , especially the department of defense and the department of veterans affairs , have relied extensively on public - private partnerships for real - property management .

dot has encouraged states to use p3s to design , build , maintain , and operate highway and public transportation projects .

a p3 approach could be regarded as a hybrid between a government - owned corporation and a completely private entity , with both the federal government and aviation industry stakeholders sharing in financial and organizational oversight .

creation of a private corporation regulated by the faa could be similar in corporate structure to nav canada , in which stakeholders with diverse interests are represented in corporate governance through the board of directors .

while a private air traffic services corporation could be publicly traded , it may be preferable to be closely held only by aviation industry stakeholders .

nav canada , the one clear example of a private corporation , is relatively closely held by a relatively small group of industry stakeholders .

this is considerably different from a company whose stock or shares are publicly traded .

in theory , ownership of switzerland's skyguide , which can profit from the fees collected for its services , could be more widely distributed to interested public parties .

however , limited investor interest has meant that skyguide has remained almost totally under government ownership .

the "faa management advisory council report ( 2014 ) " called for separating out faa's air traffic organization as a service - oriented unit that could be spun off as a corporate entity .

however , corporatizing ato as it currently exists could prove problematic because certain closely related functions , such as facilities and equipment acquisition and maintenance , would be left with faa .

this might leave ato to use buildings and equipment over which it would not have control .

while the current federal contract tower program operates in this way , it is not the model employed in most international examples of completely corporatized air traffic service organizations .

in most countries that have corporate air traffic organizations , the air navigation service provider owns the communications , navigation , and surveillance equipment that provides the technology for air traffic control .

such ownership generally allows air traffic services corporations to invest directly in service contracts , equipment replacement , and large - scale technology modernization initiatives .

it is unclear how such arrangements would work in the united states if ato were spun off without the associated facilities and equipment procurement and maintenance functions .

one of the purported advantages of corporatization or privatization of faa is that this could facilitate efforts to modernize equipment and technology , particularly the complex and costly nextgen air traffic systems modernization initiative .

if the proposed corporation does not have specific ownership of the equipment and facilities it operates , its role in modernization efforts may be more limited , and procurement activity might remain within faa and under existing legal authorities and appropriations .

a more comprehensive transition to a corporate structure allowing for greater autonomy with respect to acquisitions and maintenance might include facilities and equipment functions directly tied to air traffic services .

these functions are now funded through faa's facilities and equipment account .

while they could logically be transitioned to a corporate air navigation service provider , policy makers may wish to retain functions related to performance testing or certification of air traffic and air navigation equipment as governmental regulatory functions .

for example , flight testing that checks and certifies the operational performance of navigation facilities like instrument landing systems could arguably be regarded as regulatory certification activities and thus retained under faa's safety functions .

on the other hand , it could be argued that certain elements of such activities are central to maintaining operational reliability of air traffic control .

the one past legislative attempt to deal directly with this issue , the united states air traffic service corporation act ( h.r .

1441 , 104 th congress ) , expressly directed faa to transfer to usats possession , use , and control of all real property , equipment , frequency licenses , patents , and software rights necessary to carry out the functions being transferred to the corporation .

however , the bill would have left it up to the faa administrator and the chief executive officer of the newly formed usats to determine which functions and employees would be transferred from faa to the corporation .

similarly , h.r .

4441 ( 114 th congress ) would have transferred to the proposed atc corporation without any cost all property , including air navigation facilities , as well as any rights to licenses , patents , software , and access to radio frequency spectrum systems and data determined necessary and appropriate to carry out air traffic services .

it stipulated that if the corporation were to sell assets provided to it by the federal government without charge , it would use any proceeds for the acquisition of air navigation facilities or other capital assets of the corporation .

any property conveyed to the corporation that is located at an faa technical facility would have been required to be reverted to federal government ownership and placed under the control the secretary of transportation if either the corporation determined that it no longer needed the property to carry out air traffic services or the secretary determined that the reversion was necessary to protect the interests of the united states .

historically , proposals to corporatize or privatize air traffic services in the united states have been intertwined with debate over the implementation of user fees for air traffic services .

although a government - owned corporation could be financed much as the faa is financed today , through a combination of taxes and fees on passengers and cargo , an air traffic control organization owned by stakeholders or investors presumably would seek a fee structure that would enable it to recover the costs of providing various types of service .

nav canada offers one example of such a fee structure .

nav canada is required by law to set rates for recreational and private aircraft in a manner that is not unreasonable and undue .

it charges propeller aircraft weighing less than 2 metric tons ( about 4,400 pounds ) an annual fee of c$68 ( us$59 ) , and propeller planes weighing between 2 and 3 metric tons pay a c$227 ( us$196 ) annual fee .

small propeller planes do not pay additional fees for using traffic control services , except when they fly to or from certain international airports .

for larger private planes and commercial aircraft , on the other hand , nav canada charges fees that take into account aircraft weight and distance flown through controlled airspace .

rates , based on the maximum operating weight of each type of aircraft , are applied to a formula to assess each flight's costs for air traffic services .

for example , a boeing 737 flying from toronto to winnipeg may incur the following charges: e n route c harge = en route rate ( 0.03194 ) x en route weight factor ( 8.24621 ) x en route distance ( 1,374 km ) = c$ 3 61.89 ; plus terminal services charge ( toronto and winnipeg ) = terminal rate ( 24.14 ) x terminal weight factor ( 29.242 ) = c$705.90 .

the total user fee for air traffic services provided for this hypothetical flight ( excluding temporary adjustments ) would therefore be c$1,067.79 .

the same route flown with a different aircraft would incur a different fee .

operators of smaller jets are permitted to pay a daily use charge that covers both en route and terminal services rather than fees based on weight and distance , and may find this more advantageous .

for example , a 15,000-pound business jet making a round trip from toronto to winnipeg in a single day would incur charges totaling approximately c$460 based on the aircraft's weight and distance flown , but the operator could elect to pay a flat daily charge of c$331.34 instead .

the united states air traffic service corporation act ( h.r .

1441 , 104 th congress ) would have authorized the usats corporation to impose fees on commercial air traffic for its services .

similarly , the next generation air transportation system financing reform act of 2007 ( h.r .

1356 , 110 th congress ) sought authorization for faa to implement a schedule of user fees for air traffic control in terminal , en route , and oceanic airspace .

most small general aviation aircraft would have been exempt from the fees , unless operating in busy terminal airspace , but would have paid higher fuel taxes .

a changeover to user fees to fund air traffic services could create uncertainty as to how other elements of faa's budget , including airport improvement grants , would be paid for .

currently , aatf revenue collections fund these activities , while faa operations are funded in part by treasury general fund appropriations .

under a system in which an air traffic services corporation is funded by user fees , the aatf could be retained and the fee collection schedule revised to provide funding for airport improvements and faa aviation safety and research and development functions .

alternatively , additional fee structures and funds could be established for these activities .

however , attempting to encompass faa funding in the user fee structure for an air traffic services corporation poses several challenges , as outlined below .

a 2016 gao report offered several suggestions on transitioning to a user fee - funded structure based on input from officials in selected countries that had implemented user fee systems and transitioned to corporate models for providing air traffic services .

those suggestions included communicating with stakeholders early in the transition about the changes to the financing structure ; adopted a transitional or phased approach for moving from current revenue streams such as taxes to user fees ; and incorporating risk mitigation mechanisms , such as a dedicated reserve fund , into the finance structure .

the aviation innovation , reform , and reauthorization act ( h.r .

4441 , 114 th congress ) would have authorized the proposed atc corporation to assess and charge fees for air traffic services and would have required that any proposed charge or fee be approved by the corporate board of directors .

the bill stipulated that the fees must comport with the international civil aviation organization's policy on charges for air navigation services .

it would have prohibited fees on military aircraft , piston engine aircraft , noncommercial jets and turboprops , and air taxi flights servicing remote locations .

h.r .

4441 did not specify any faa operations and maintenance or any facilities and equipment funding derived from the airport and airway trust fund beyond fy2019 , the point at which the proposed corporation was to take over air traffic services .

the bill , however , sought to authorize treasury general fund amounts of roughly $1.7 billion annually for faa operations and maintenance in fy2020 , 2021 , and 2022 .

this would presumably have allowed for the continued funding of faa aviation safety programs , including safety oversight or airlines and other aircraft operators as well as safety oversight of the proposed atc corporation , included in its operations and maintenance portfolio .

for fy2019 , h.r .

4441 specified $8.374 billion from the trust fund for operations and maintenance , and $3,048 for facilities and equipment .

beyond fy2019 , activities funded under this authorization were to be carried out by the corporation and the costs for conducting those activities were to be recovered through user fees .

the bill was silent with respect to how the underlying tax scheme that currently funds the airport and airway trust fund might be modified to reflect that trust fund revenue would no longer be required to provide for providing air traffic services and for related facilities and equipment costs .

while it was not addressed in the bill , one option would be to eliminate or reduce passenger ticket taxes and cargo taxes that currently provide substantial revenue to the airport and airway trust fund .

this could , in effect , act as an offset to the proposed user fee for commercial operators .

if fuel taxes were to remain , revenue collected from these taxes could be used to offset the cost of faa safety and airport grant programs rather than being applied to the costs of air traffic services .

h.r .

4441 did specify funding authorizations for airport grants of more than $3.6 billion annually in fy2020 , 2021 , and 2022 , suggesting that some modification of the current aviation tax scheme would be sought to continue airport grant funding while adjusting tax revenues to reflect the transfer of air traffic services and associated costs to the proposed atc corporation .

funding stability has been one of the key challenges facing corporate air traffic entities , whose operations and fee structures fall under varying degrees of governmental economic regulation .

in some cases , government overseers have blocked proposed fee increases , notably in cases where they perceived economic factors contributing to revenue declines to be temporary .

such restrictions can in some case have a destabilizing effect .

for example , at its inception , nats uk was restricted from raising rates beyond a certain level tied to retail price index .

this proved problematic following the 9 / 11 attacks in 2001 , when significant declines in commercial aviation activity led to revenue shortfalls for nats uk .

various countries have adopted different approaches to addressing the challenge of maintaining fiscal stability for air traffic service providers while controlling rates .

nav canada is required to set rates at reasonable levels commensurate with current and future financial requirements , but has been permitted to establish a formal rate stabilization account so it need not raise or lower rates every time air traffic declines or increases .

new zealand has approached this issue quite differently by giving airways nz more autonomous self - regulation with regard to fee setting .

under this arrangement , airways nz has entered into agreements with stakeholders to create a structure under which airways nz sets rates in a stabilized manner , applying excess revenues as adjustments or credits to reduce user charges in subsequent years .

this approach , which yielded minimal increases in user charges during the post - 2001 decline in air traffic , was lauded by the international air transport association , an international trade organization for airlines , in 2003 .

the 2016 gao report concluded that building risk mitigation mechanisms into the financial structure of a stand - alone air traffic services corporation may help establish fiscal resilience to downturns in air traffic that reduce user fee revenues .

to avoid situations in which a highly leveraged company may become troubled if faced with an unanticipated drop in air traffic and user fee revenues , gao pointed to nav canada's establishment of its rate stabilization account as a means to provide reserve funds to offset decreased revenues , maintain strong liquidity for covering operating costs and servicing debt , and help stabilize user fees so that they are less likely to rise significantly during economic downturns , when fee increases would most likely impose a larger burden on system users .

one possible advantage of a private or corporate model would be the corporation's ability to issue equity and bonds .

advocates of corporatization or privatization argue that access to bond markets could provide capital to fund major technology upgrades and system modernization projects , such as the nextgen initiative .

the ability to issue equity would be more significant if the corporation were to be under private ownership ; shares of stock could be sold to attract additional participants to the ownership consortium , to compensate employees , or to acquire other companies .

in 1993 , the national commission to ensure a strong competitive airline industry recommended that the corporate entity it proposed to establish within dot have the ability to issue long - term bonds for capital purchases .

similarly , the united states air traffic service corporation act ( h.r .

1441 , 104 th congress ) would have given the proposed usats corporation specific authority to incur debt through notes or other obligations either to the u.s. treasury or to private entities through instruments such as corporate bonds .

the bill would have capped the corporation's total outstanding balance on all debts at $15 billion .

plans to incur debt would have required the review and approval of the secretary of transportation under the proposal .

if it wished to give an independent air traffic control corporation the ability to issue bonds , congress would face consideration of the tax status of those instruments .

publicly owned airports generally issue tax - favored municipal bonds to meet their capital needs ; as investors are not liable for taxes on the interest payments , the issuers can obtain lower interest rates than are available with taxable bonds .

privately owned companies and u.s. government entities , however , generally do not have access to the tax - exempt bond market .

unless congress were to dictate otherwise , debt issued by an air traffic control corporation owned by private investors or by the u.s. government would be taxable to investors , requiring the corporation to pay higher interest rates than borrowers of similar credit quality in the municipal bond market .

in addition , the corporation might have to pay higher interest rates on borrowings than the u.s. government itself , unless the government pledged its full faith and credit to servicing the corporation's debt .

the united states air traffic service corporation act ( h.r .

1441 , 104 th congress ) would have specifically exempted the proposed usats and interest on its debts from any state and local taxes , although the bill was silent with respect to federal taxes imposed on holders of the corporation's debt .

h.r .

4441 ( 114 th congress ) included language specifying that any debt assumed by the proposed atc corporation would not have any implied or explicit backing or guarantee from the federal government .

while the bill sought to establish the atc corporation as a not - for - profit entity exempt from corporate taxes under the provisions of section 501 ( a ) the internal revenue code of 1986 , this would not create any particular tax - related incentives for investors owning the corporation's bonds .

the legislation did not provide any explicit tax - preferred treatment to debt issued by the proposed corporation .

the lack of government backing or tax incentives may make debt instruments issued by the corporation less attractive to investors .

therefore , the corporation may need to repay money at higher interest rates than , for example , municipal bonds that may offer tax - related incentives for investing or government - backed bonds that may be regarded as less risky investment alternatives .

initially , the workforce would change little under a gradual transition from faa air traffic operations to an air traffic services corporation .

the only source for sufficient numbers of qualified air traffic controllers and technicians would be faa , and under any transition plan , the large majority of the faa workforce ( roughly 35,000 positions tied to air traffic services ) would need to be shifted to the new corporation .

the new management would face a need to maintain pay and benefits to assure workforce stability and continuity during the transition .

the situation might be different for management personnel , as the new organization might favor different managerial practices and approaches to meeting objectives .

for this reason , reform proposals might include long - range plans for aligning the workforce with stated organizational objectives .

these might involve performance - driven compensation , rewarding employees who achieve specific targets and deadlines , or providing wider incentive pay if the new organization reaches specified milestones for organizational change , cost savings , and system performance .

there is limited research on the experiences of other air traffic service providers who have transitioned from a government agency to a corporate entity .

anecdotal accounts of fiscal problems faced by corporate and private air traffic service providers suggest that the availability of start - up capital or other mechanisms to stabilize funding during the transition period may be important considerations .

during the transition , a start - up fund or similar instrument may help assure that the entity has sufficient operating funds to stabilize itself in the case of unforeseen external events that could significantly impact revenues .

transition plans may therefore want to consider explicit provisions regarding financing for startup and transition costs and mechanisms to ensure the corporation's fiscal stability during the early years .

the united states air traffic service corporation act ( h.r .

1441 , 104 th congress ) would have transferred from the aatf the obligated but unexpended balance of appropriations for air traffic services and facilities to the proposed usats to cover the commencement of operations .

the 2016 gao report concluded that transitioning air traffic services from faa to a separate ansp would be moderately challenging and would likely involve legal , financial , and administrative costs .

experts interviewed by gao estimated that it may take about a year to negotiate and plan the transfer of duties and responsibilities , and another two years or so to implement the required actions under the transfer .

gao noted that establishing and maintaining good lines of communication between the safety regulator , the new corporate ansp , employees of the corporation , and stakeholders could help ease the transition .

h.r .

4441 ( 114 th congress ) set up a timeframe of roughly three years before the proposed corporation was to take over responsibility for air traffic services at the beginning of fy2020 .

the bill would have required faa and the corporation to meet with labor representatives to resolve issues related to the transition at least one year before the transfer date and included specific provisions for handling disputes that may arise regarding matters pertaining to the transition .

it would have also required the department of transportation office of inspector general to issue quarterly reports informing congress regarding the progress made on plans to transfer operational control of air traffic services by the department and the corporation .

in general , faa controllers and technicians , as government employees , are entitled to collective bargaining under the terms set forth in title 5 u.s.c. , chapter 71 .

labor organizations representing faa employees , however , are prohibited from calling a strike , work stoppage , or slowdown , or organizing a picket that disrupts operations .

president reagan invoked these statutes in 1981 , revoking recognition of the professional air traffic controllers organization and firing controllers who continued to strike .

in contrast , corporations and labor organizations representing employees outside of government are generally covered under the labor provisions of title 29 u.s.c. , and in particular chapter 7 — labor - management relations , of that title .

in general , those provisions allow for lawful strikes or lock - outs as a measure of last resort once collective bargaining obligations have been met .

a special provision in law requires a labor organization to give notification 10 days prior to striking , picketing , or engaging in any other concerted refusal to work at any health care facility .

no similar provision currently exists for air traffic facilities .

the united states air traffic service corporation act ( h.r .

1441 , 104 th congress ) would have given corporation employees the right to form a union and bargain collectively , but would have expressly prohibited strikes , work stoppages , or slowdowns .

airlines are generally covered under the railway labor act , which bars strikes over minor disputes and permits them over major disputes only after all other negotiations and mediation procedures have been exhausted .

the railway labor act also gives the courts authority to order strikers back to work if legal conditions are not met .

such a framework could potentially be an alternative model for an air traffic services corporation , as it would not expressly prohibit strikes , but would place strong legal restrictions on such actions .

h.r .

4441 ( 114 th congress ) included extensive language on employee management .

the bill would have given the proposed corporation's ceo full authority over defining needed positions , hiring , and setting the compensation and benefits for employees .

in setting wages , hours , and other terms and conditions of employment the corporation would have been required to negotiate with designated labor organizations representing workers , and the bill included extensive rights for designated employee representatives to collectively bargain over such matters .

for faa employees transferred to the corporation , the bill offered specific provisions allowing workers to keep most of their federal retirement , health care , and certain other benefits .

under the terms of the bill , choosing whether to remain under the federal benefit programs would have been the choice of the transferred employee , and the corporation would have been responsible for paying appropriate costs associated with an employee's continued participation in such benefit programs .

newly hired employees of the corporation would not have had any right to participate in these federal benefit programs , but instead would have been covered under benefit programs established by the corporation and agreed to through collective bargaining .

the bill would have specifically required the corporation to recognize and engage in collective bargaining with labor organizations chosen to represent employees regarding such matters .

currently , faa promulgates orders and procedures governing air traffic operations and procedures for both ato and contract towers .

internal oversight and disciplinary action are largely handled within faa .

however , broad oversight is provided by the dot office of inspector general , as well as by the department of justice regarding matters of potential criminal wrongdoing .

faa's current safety oversight of commercial airlines could readily serve as a framework for safety oversight of one or more air traffic services entities .

also , within the current ato structure , faa already oversees operations at federal contract towers , and it has processes in place for monitoring the safety of air traffic operations internally .

these various elements could be combined to create safety regulations and policies for an independent air traffic services entity , whether it be a government corporation , a private corporation , or a public - private partnership .

a 2016 gao survey of aviation experts and stakeholders concluded that delineating roles and responsibilities between faa and a separate ansp would be a key consideration in transitioning to a private or corporate ansp model .

all experts polled by gao agreed that aviation safety oversight and regulation should remain an faa responsibility .

however , experts were split on whether a newly formed ansp should play a role in defining navigational procedures and other flight operational standards regarding airspace users' interactions with and use of air traffic services .

most experts surveyed expressed the view that global harmonization efforts should be a responsibility of both the safety regulator and the ansp .

gao emphasized the importance of clearly delineating and documenting roles , noting that current faa orders and directives would need to be codified to clearly document regulatory requirements of any new stand - alone ansp that was completely separate from the safety regulator .

it also concluded that a defined transitional period would likely be needed to clearly establish roles and responsibilities , noting that during the transition in canada , the safety regulator ( transport canada ) and the ansp ( nav canada ) agreed not to make any changes regarding operations during the first two years , keeping procedures and manuals of operation consistent during that time .

such a moratorium on procedural or operational changes could be difficult to accomplish if the separation of air traffic services from faa were to overlap with transformational efforts such as changes to air traffic separation standards , flight routes , approach procedures , and pilot - controller communications envisioned under the nextgen program .

h.r .

4441 , 114 th congress , would have required the secretary of transportation to develop performance - based regulations and safety standards for air traffic services prior to the transfer .

the corporation would have been required to integrate conforming airspace management and operational procedures under a comprehensive safety management system that would be subject to regulatory oversight .

under the scheme for delineating roles and responsibilities , the proposed atc corporation or other interested parties , such as airlines , the military , and other airspace users , would have been allowed to submit proposals for changes to air traffic management procedures , airspace classifications , or other actions affecting airspace access to the secretary of transportation for review , consideration , and action .

the bill included language generally requiring the secretary to issue decisions within 45 days and allowing for judicial review of those decisions .

temporary airspace actions and emergency actions would generally have been exempt from this process .

concerns over potential conflicts between safety and profit have been a central theme of criticisms of a corporate or private approach .

nav canada was structured as a nonprofit corporation to address concerns that profit motives could interfere with safety objectives .

other ansps , however , including nats uk and skyguide in switzerland , are operated on a for - profit basis .

safety is not incongruent with for - profit models in aviation ; the entire u.s. airline industry is privately owned , with a government agency , faa , providing oversight .

however , the analogy is imperfect because air traffic services typically exist as monopolies , similar to utility companies ; the lack of competition eliminates the ability for a customer to choose a provider based on its safety record .

safety of a for - profit monopoly air traffic services provider would likely be overseen predominantly by faa , which would need the power to impose fines or other punitive actions to address regulatory violations .

establishing the ansp as a nonprofit organization , as nav canada has done , may help improve cooperation among operators and regulators and improve safety culture .

the air traffic services corporation that would have been chartered under h.r .

4441 would have been operated as a not - for - profit entity , without outside investors .

nonetheless , since the proposed corporation was to be user fee - funded , system users might have balked at significant fee increases to support safety programs without direct benefits for themselves .

for example , airlines may be hesitant to agree to increased user fees to improve the safety of air traffic procedures at small general aviation airports that they do not use .

balancing the makeup of stakeholder representation on the corporate board may be a prerequisite for assuring that safety initiatives are supported and funded .

financial liability is a potential concern for a corporatized air traffic services entity .

tort claims may arise against the corporation .

for example , if the actions of an air traffic controller are implicated in an aviation accident , individuals may seek restitution .

also , the corporation may be sued over its business practices .

for example , if one airline perceives that traffic flow management practices at a particular airport disadvantage it by giving preferential treatment to a competitor , it might seek damages through the legal system .

under current law , faa is covered under the federal torts claims act ( 28 u.s.c .

§§1346 ( b ) , 2671-2680 ) , which defines the conditions under which tort claims involving property damage or loss , personal injury , or loss of life can be brought against federal agencies and employees .

under the federal tort claims act , the united states government may not be held liable , although there are several exceptions .

in contrast , a private company could be held liable under a much broader array of scenarios under certain state and federal laws as well as under civil torts .

the united states air traffic service corporation act ( h.r .

1441 , 104 th congress ) would have made the federal tort claims act applicable to activities of the proposed united states air traffic services corporation .

additionally , it sought to establish a formal legal framework for suits against the corporation challenging final orders or procedures regarding air traffic control .

under the proposal , the corporation would have been represented in the courts by the department of justice .

however , with the consent of the attorney general , the corporation could have contracted for legal services or employed its own attorneys .

the proposed legislation would have prohibited the use of the judgment fund of the united states for satisfying the payment of any claims against the corporation , thus appearing to leave the corporation fully at risk for liabilities against it .

in contrast , the aviation innovation , reform , and reauthorization act of 2016 ( h.r .

4441 , 114 th congress ) explicitly stated that the proposed atc corporation could sue or be sued and could be held liable under civil and criminal law .

the atc corporation would have received no special status or apparent protections under the law against civil and criminal actions stemming from its operations , practices , and corporate decisions .

the bill specified that the proposed corporation would need to acquire adequate liability insurance to cover its risks and liabilities , including complete indemnification of employees performing duties within the scope of their employment .

the secretary of transportation would have been responsible for determining the adequate amounts of insurance coverage and insurance policies required of the corporation .

equitable treatment of all airspace users could be an important concern under a corporate air traffic services model .

this would especially be the case if certain airspace users , such as airlines , were to own a significant portion of the entity's voting shares or to control a large proportion of the seats on the corporate board .

absent restrictions , such an entity could potentially favor commercial airline traffic over general aviation traffic , or could put a new passenger air carrier at a disadvantage by making its planes fly less favorable routings than competitors .

legislation to corporatize or privatize air traffic services could include provisions to safeguard against discrimination in the delivery of air traffic services .

as with safety , assuring that the makeup of any proposed corporate board appropriately reflects the diversity of airspace users and stakeholder groups may mitigate concerns regarding potential inequities regarding access to airspace , airports , and air traffic services .

airports that receive federal funding are required to provide equitable , nondiscriminatory access to national airspace system users under specific grant assurances .

specifically , 49 u.s.c .

§47107 ( a ) ( 1 ) mandates that such airports "be available for public use on reasonable conditions and without unjust discrimination. .

provision ( a ) ( 2 ) of that section requires that air carriers "be subject to substantially comparable charges" for similar use of the airport and its facilities .

these provisions generally provide a framework under which federally funded airports must provide equitable treatment to all users of that airport .

similar provisions governing access to airspace and air traffic services could be included in legislation seeking to create an air traffic services corporation .

canadian legislation has addressed the issue of price discrimination by requiring that nav canada's fees be set so as to not differentiate among air carriers , including both foreign and domestic carriers .

additionally , charges imposed on recreational and private aircraft must not be unreasonable or undue .

h.r .

4441 ( 114 th congress ) included language stating that user fees imposed by the corporation were not to be determinants for airspace access .

it also provided that general aviation operators could not be denied access to airspace as a consequence of being exempt from paying user fees under the terms of the bill .

coordination with military , law enforcement , and emergency management agencies may require access and utilization of air traffic service facilities , equipment , and data .

in some cases , coordination and data sharing agreements between the ansp and military , law enforcement , and homeland security agencies ( such as customs and border protection and the u.s. coast guard ) , may be needed to assure appropriate government access to airspace surveillance data and records that may be collected or stored by the corporation .

such data could be important for law enforcement and homeland security functions , particularly monitoring of airspace activities in proximity to u.s. borders and over territorial waters .

the united states air traffic service corporation act ( h.r .

1441 , 104 th congress ) would have required the usats corporation to develop processes for assigning military personnel within the corporation , continue to share logistics and command and control systems with the military , and share aircraft tracking data with law enforcement agencies at no cost to track drug smuggling .

the act would have authorized the president to transfer functions of the corporation to the department of defense in the event of war or national emergency .

h.r .

4441 ( 114 th congress ) provided that during times of war , the president could temporarily transfer duties , powers , activities , facilities , and employees of the proposed atc corporation or of faa to the department of defense .

