as a signatory member of the world trade organization ( wto ) , the united states has committed to abide by wto rules and disciplines , including those that govern domestic farm policy .

the wto's general rules concerning subsidy disciplines , trade behavior , and market access concessions apply to all members .

in addition , each individual member country also negotiated its own specific policy commitments — spelled out in a document called a schedule of concessions ( or country schedule ) .

trade plays a critical role in the u.s. agricultural sector .

usda estimates that exports account for about 20% of total u.s. agricultural production .

because the united states plays such an important role in so many agricultural markets , its farm policy is often subject to intense scrutiny , both for compliance with current wto rules and for its potential to diminish the breadth or impede the success of future multilateral negotiations — in part because a farm bill locks in u.s. policy behavior for an extended period of time , during which the united states would be unable to accept any new restrictions on its domestic support programs .

current u.s. farm policy is authorized by the 2014 farm bill ( the agricultural act of 2014 ; p.l .

113-79 ) for the 2014-2018 crop years .

the 2014 farm bill made significant changes to u.s. farm price and income support programs .

these changes could have important implications for u.s. commitments to the wto in terms of compliance with current spending limits and with rules on mitigating program spillover effects and distortions in international markets .

this report assumes knowledge of the u.s. farm safety net programs and their function .

it briefly describes the relevant wto rules governing domestic support programs under the agreement on agriculture ( aoa ) and the agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures ( scm ) .

the report then reviews the current u.s. farm safety net programs , including changes made under the 2014 farm bill , particularly to title i price and income support programs , in light of their potential for compliance with the aoa and scm and their potential to affect the success of the current doha round of multilateral trade negotiations .

table 1 provides a list of current farm safety net programs .

table 2 lists key parameters of the farm support programs referenced in this report .

table 3 , at the end of the report , briefly reviews each of the individual 2014 farm bill provisions that are relevant to wto commitments , including a description of their function , average outlays , any changes made under the 2014 farm bill , wto status , and related potential wto effects .

a domestic farm support program can violate wto commitments in two principal ways — first , by exceeding amber box spending limits ( see box below ) , and second , by generating market distortions that spill over into the international marketplace and cause significant or measurable adverse effects .

for such a violation to be meaningful , another wto member country must successfully challenge the violation under the wto dispute settlement process .

the agricultural act of 2014 reshaped the structure of u.s. commodity support , otherwise known as the farm "safety net. .

in general , the new suite of farm support programs shifts support away from the green / amber boxes and toward the blue / amber boxes , thus indicating greater potential for market distortion .

in particular , the 2014 farm bill: terminated several of the core "farm safety net" programs from the previous 2008 farm bill , including direct payments ( dp ) , the counter - cyclical payment ( ccp ) program , and the average crop revenue election ( acre ) and supplemental revenue assurance ( sure ) programs ; retained the traditional marketing loan program ( mlp ) — which triggers payments when market prices drop below support levels ( referred to as loan rates ) — but with a single adjustment to the loan rate for upland cotton ( which is now allowed to float within a formula - determined range of 45¢ / lb to 52¢ / lb as compared with the previous fixed value of 52¢ / lb ) ; replaced ccp with a similar counter - cyclical payment program called price loss coverage ( plc ) using substantially higher reference support prices ; added several new shallow - loss programs , including agricultural risk coverage ( to replace acre ) with county - level ( arc - co ) and farm - level ( arc - id ) options , a supplemental coverage option ( sco ) , and stacked income protection ( stax ) ; and repealed the previous dairy product price support ( dpps ) and milk income loss contract ( milc ) programs and replaced them with a new dairy margin protection program ( dmpp ) and dairy product donation program ( dpdp ) .

prior to the 2014 farm bill , spending under most price and income support programs was notified as amber box: either product - specific in the case of mlp , acre , and the dairy and sugar price support programs , or non - product - specific in the case of the ccp , sure , and crop insurance programs .

the non - product - specific amber box spending was then excluded from counting toward the amber box limit by the dm exemption .

an exception to this notification pattern was the direct payment ( dp ) program , which was notified as fully decoupled green box and thus did not count toward the amber box limit .

it is unclear how usda will classify several of the new farm programs , such as arc and plc , which could potentially be notified as either blue box or non - product - specific amber box outlays in accordance with precedence and their similarity to ccp as partially decoupled programs with payments limited to 85% of historical base .

any assessment of the wto classification and potential market effect of the new domestic support programs authorized under the 2014 farm bill is very preliminary at this time .

many of the new programs have yet to be fully implemented , and an estimate of spending under their first year ( i.e. , 2014 ) will have to wait until late 2015 for the relevant marketing year to end .

the programs likely will not be notified by usda until early 2017 , when a more "final" estimate of outlays becomes available .

with these caveats in mind , the new programs are discussed in light of their potential market distortions , using previous u.s. notifications as a guide , to better understand how the new u.s. farm commodity support programs of the 2014 farm bill might comply with wto rules .

a consideration for u.s. policymakers is the potential for expanded domestic support programs to sidetrack or delay progress in multilateral trade negotiations .

from the u.s. perspective , a successful doha agreement ( under the current negotiating text ) would significantly lower allowable spending limits for certain types of u.s. domestic support and eliminate export subsidies , while allowing u.s. agricultural products wider access to foreign markets .

key proposals with respect to new or revised disciplines on farm programs under the 2008 doha round texts include two objectives .

first , spending limits ( total and product - specific ) for the amber box and the two dm exemptions would be reduced substantially , while a limit would be established on the otherwise unbounded blue box .

the total limit for u.s. amber box spending would be reduced to $7.6 billion ( down from the current $19.1 billion limit ) , while new product - specific limits would be established at the average annual support received during the 1995-2000 period .

dm exemption limits for non - product - specific outlays would be set at $4.85 billion ( as compared to the current variable limit based on total u.s. production , which has averaged $16 to $20 billion ) , and for product - specific outlays at 2.5% of the average annual production value during the 1995-2000 period , thus establishing a historical base at a level substantially below current production values .

blue box limits would be established for non - product - specific outlays at $4.85 billion , and for product - specific outlays at 110% or 120% of the annual average during the 2002-2007 period .

second , a global spending limit — referred to as the overall trade - distorting domestic support ( otds ) — encompassing the four categories of the amber box , the two dm exclusions , and the blue box would be established at a level substantially smaller than the sum of their individual limits .

finally , the criteria for exemption status in the green box would be tightened .

potential program spending under the new suite of domestic support programs authorized by the 2014 farm bill might exceed the tighter spending limits proposed under the doha round draft modalities .

for example , the proposed limits for amber box outlays of $7.6 billion are well below usda's may 2014 projections for plc and arc outlays of $10.1 billion in crop year 2015 and $10.9 billion in 2016 .

assessments of the potential effect of the new domestic support programs authorized by the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) , and their compliance with wto restrictions , are very preliminary at this time .

many of the new programs have yet to be fully implemented , producer participation is uncertain , and program outlays hinge on future market conditions .

for example , under a relatively high price environment , as existed during the 2010-2013 period , u.s. program outlays would fall within proposed doha round limits with no or only modest changes .

however , if market prices were to decline substantially below support levels for an extended period , then outlays could escalate and potentially exceed the proposed spending limits .

all of the new farm safety net programs — plc , arc , sco , stax , and dmpp — might be notified as amber box , although plc , arc , and sco could be notified as non - product - specific amber box .

alternatively , plc and arc - co might be notified as blue box .

usda is responsible for making this determination .

of all the price and income support programs , mlp benefits alone are fully coupled to producer behavior , while plc and arc are paid on a portion of historical plantings and thus are decoupled from producer planting decisions , making them less vulnerable to wto challenge .

however , because both plc and arc would make payments when current market prices are low relative to historical market prices , both programs reduce producer risk associated with price variability and thus likely result in greater acreage and production than would occur in their absence .

the new shallow - loss programs — sco and stax — could prove more problematic .

both programs provide revenue ( or potentially yield in the case of stax ) guarantees that are very near to the market averages , in addition to reducing farm - level risk by protecting revenues when market prices are low .

accordingly , they may incentivize greater acreage and production than would occur in their absence .

most studies suggest that , for u.s. program spending to exceed the $19.1-billion amber - box limit , a combination of worst - case events would have to occur , for example , low market prices generating large simultaneous outlays across multiple programs , in addition to the $1.4 billion of implicit costs associated with the sugar program .

such a scenario is unlikely , although not impossible , particularly since outlays under several of the programs ( including the new dairy program , sco , stax , and crop insurance ) are not subject to any per - farm subsidy limit .

perhaps more relevant to u.s. agricultural trade is the concern that — because the united states plays such a prominent role in most international markets for agricultural products — any distortion resulting from u.s. policy would be both visible and vulnerable to challenge under wto rules .

furthermore , projected outlays under the new 2014 farm bill's shallow - loss and counter - cyclical price support programs may make it difficult for the united states to agree to future reductions in allowable caps on domestic support expenditures and related dm exclusions as envisioned in ongoing wto multilateral trade negotiations .

