the funding authorization for the federal aviation administration ( faa ) , included in the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-95 ) , expires on september 30 , 2015 .

in addition to setting spending levels , faa authorization acts typically set policy on a wide range of issues related to civil aviation .

this report considers topics that are likely to arise as the 114 th congress debates reauthorization .

it does not attempt to be comprehensive .

many issues debated prior to passage of the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 are not discussed unless further congressional consideration appears probable .

additional issues , not discussed in this report , may arise as congress moves forward .

most faa programs are financed through the airport and airway trust fund ( aatf ) , sometimes referred to as the aviation trust fund .

the aatf was established in 1970 under the airport and airway development act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-258 ) to provide for expansion of the nation's airports and air traffic system .

since fy2009 , the aatf has provided between 66.6% and 71.4% of faa's total annual funding , with the remainder coming from general fund appropriations .

revenue sources for the trust fund include passenger ticket taxes , segment fees , air cargo fees , and fuel taxes paid by both commercial and general aviation aircraft ( see table 1 ) .

in addition to excise taxes deposited into the trust fund , faa imposes air traffic service fees on flights that transit u.s. - controlled airspace but do not take off from or land in the united states .

these overflight fees partially fund the essential air service ( eas ) program .

in 2013 , the aatf had revenues of almost $12.9 billion and maintained a cash balance of more than $13 billion .

however , the uncommitted balance has declined considerably since 2001 , when it exceeded $7 billion .

following the onset of the global economic crisis in 2008 , the aatf uncommitted balanced dropped to $299 million at the end of fy2009 , but has since rebounded ; it was estimated to be $1.3 billion at the end of fy2014 .

the trust fund balance is projected to grow in the near term , as aatf revenue continues to rise and airport capital needs are projected to decline over the next five years .

in the longer term , however , the vitality of the aatf remains a concern , as reductions in general fund appropriations to faa have increased the proportion of faa funding that is derived from the trust fund .

changes in airline business practices pose a risk to the aatf revenue structure .

trust fund revenue is largely dependent on airlines' ticket sales , and the spread of low - cost air carrier models has held down ticket prices and therefore aatf receipts .

in addition , airlines increasingly impose fees for a variety of options and amenities , such as checked bags and onboard meals , rather than including them in the base ticket price .

generally , fees not included in the base ticket price are not subject to federal excise taxes .

the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) estimated that the trust fund could have received $186 million in fy2009 from untaxed baggage fees alone , had these fees been subject to the 7.5% excise tax .

airlines have long contended that general aviation operators , particularly corporate jets , should provide a larger share of the revenues supporting the trust fund .

general aviation interests dispute this , arguing that the air traffic system mainly supports the airlines , and that nonairline users pay a reasonable share given the relatively small incremental costs arising from their flights .

proposals in 2012 to increase the general aviation jet fuel tax were not adopted .

the clinton , george w. bush , and obama administrations all proposed per - flight user charges ; president barack obama has proposed a $100-per - flight charge on commercial and general aviation jets and turboprops that fly in controlled airspace each year since 2011 .

in the 110 th congress , the senate voted to impose a $25-per - flight fee on all commercial and general aviation flights ( see s. 1300 , 110 th congress ) as an additional revenue source for the aatf .

none of those proposals has been enacted into law .

the federal government supports the development of airport infrastructure in three different ways .

first , the aip provides federal grants to airports for planning and development , mainly of capital projects related to aircraft operations such as runways and taxiways .

second , congress has authorized airports to assess a local passenger facility charge ( pfc ) on each boarding passenger , subject to specific federal approval .

pfc revenues can be used for a broader range of projects than aip funds , including "landside" projects such as passenger terminals and ground access improvements .

third , federal law grants investors preferential income tax treatment on interest income from bonds issued by state and local governments for airport improvements ( subject to compliance with federal rules ) .

airports may also draw on state and local funds and on operating revenues such as lease payments and landing fees .

different airports use different combinations of aip funding , pfcs , tax - exempt bonds , state and local grants , and airport revenues to finance particular projects .

small airports are more likely to be dependent on aip grants than large or medium - sized airports .

larger airports are much more likely to issue tax - exempt bonds or finance capital projects with the proceeds of pfcs .

each of these funding sources places various legislative , regulatory , or contractual constraints on airports that use it .

the availability and conditions of one source of funding may also influence the availability and terms of other funding sources .

in a 2007 study , gao found that bonds financed 50% of airports' capital spending , aip 29% , pfcs 17% , state and local contributions 4% , and airport revenue 4% .

almost all commercial service airports in the united states are owned by local and state governments , or by public entities such as airport authorities or multipurpose port authorities .

in 1996 , congress established the airport privatization pilot program ( appp ) to explore the prospect of privatizing publicly owned airports and using private capital to improve and develop them .

in addition to reducing demand for government funds , privatization has been promoted as a way to make airports more efficient and financially viable .

participation in the appp has been limited .

two airports have completed the privatization process , and one of them later reverted to public ownership .

owners of other airports considered privatization , but eventually chose not to proceed .

the lack of interest in privatization among u.s. airports could be the result of ( 1 ) readily available financing sources for publicly owned airports ; ( 2 ) barriers or lack of incentives to privatize ; ( 3 ) the potential implications for major stakeholders ; and ( 4 ) satisfaction with the status quo .

privatization refers to the shifting of governmental functions , responsibilities , and sometimes ownership , in whole or in part , to the private sector .

with respect to airports , "privatization" can take many forms up to and including the transfer of an entire airport to private operation and / or ownership .

in the united states , most cases of airport privatization fall into the category of "partial privatization" ; full privatization , either under or outside the appp , has been rare .

section 149 of the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 ( 49 u.s.c .

§47134 ; p.l .

104-264 ) authorizes the faa administrator to exempt participating airports from all or part of the requirements to use airport revenue for airport - related purposes , to repay federal grants , or to return airport property acquired with federal assistance upon the lease or sale of the airport deeded by the federal government .

the law originally limited participation in the appp to no more than five airports .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-95 ) increased the number of airports that may participate from 5 to 10 .

only one large hub commercial airport may participate in the program , and that airport may only be leased , not sold .

only general aviation airports can be sold under the appp .

table 5 provides a comparison of the requirements and regulations governing airport privatization under and outside the appp .

noise from aircraft taking off and landing is an issue at many airports .

under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , faa and airport operators are required to assess environmental impacts , including noise impacts , associated with federally funded airport projects and airspace redesigns .

noise has been a contentious issue in the redesign of airspace in the new york city , new jersey , and philadelphia region .

similarly , noise concerns have been raised regarding a number of airport expansion projects , including the completion of a new runway at chicago's o'hare international airport in 2013 .

the number of residents in the united states exposed to significant amounts of aircraft noise has declined precipitously , from about 7 million in 1975 to an estimated 320,000 in 2012 .

major reductions in aircraft noise levels have been achieved over the past 30 years .

louder stage 2 airliners over 75,000 pounds were phased out in the 1990s , and a provision in the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 required that all jet airplanes , regardless of size , meet quieter stage 3 or stage 4 noise standards by the end of 2015 .

newly introduced aircraft types must meet stage 4 noise standards , and faa plans to issue rules for even more stringent stage 5 noise standards .

noise reductions have been achieved through quieter engine technologies , greater use of lightweight aircraft materials , and advances in aerodynamics .

faa , in cooperation with the national aeronautics and space administration and industry , has invested in the research and development of quiet aircraft technologies .

while reducing aircraft noise emissions has been highly successful and new aircraft are significantly quieter than their predecessors , the volume of air traffic , particularly around major airports , has increased over the past 30 years .

historically , congress has addressed airport noise concerns by setting aside 35% of discretionary funding under the aip for noise mitigation and abatement .

generally , these funds may be used only within the day night average sound level ( dnl ) 65 decibel ( db ) noise impact area around an airport .

proposals to grant faa the flexibility to fund noise mitigation projects in areas with lower dnl levels would enable it to support additional abatement projects , but could divert resources from capacity and safety projects .

a related issue is whether to make the planning for noise - mitigating air traffic control procedures at individual airports eligible for aip funding .

nextgen refers to the next generation air transportation system , a large - scale modernization of air traffic technologies and procedures intended to expand national airspace system capacity to meet future demand .

nextgen is a multiyear initiative to modernize and improve the efficiency of the national airspace system , primarily by migrating to technologies and procedures using satellite - based navigation and aircraft tracking .

initiated in legislation in 2003 ( see p.l .

108-176 ) , the nextgen system targets full - scale implementation by 2025 .

with regard to air traffic management , the goals of nextgen include reduced air traffic separation ; flexible spacing and sequencing of aircraft , both in the air and on the ground ; increased utilization of airspace , airports , and runways , particularly those that are currently underutilized ; improved and tailored weather forecasts ; and reductions in environmental impacts of noise and emissions .

in 2003 , vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 ) established an interagency joint planning and development office ( jpdo ) within faa to develop and implement an integrated plan for the next generation air transportation system ( ngats , now known as nextgen ) capable of meeting the needs associated with projected air traffic demands in 2025 .

the act also established a senior policy committee to consult with industry stakeholders and advise the secretary of transportation on goals and strategic objectives for transforming the national airspace system to meet future needs and provide policy guidance to the jpdo .

in 2004 , the jpdo released its first iteration of the integration national plan for nextgen .

the nextgen integrated plan , as envisioned , seeks to ensure that the nextgen system meets air transportation safety , security , mobility , efficiency , and capacity needs by 2025 .

it contends that if steps are not taken to alleviate air travel congestion through nextgen in concert with airport capacity expansion , the annual cost to consumers related to air traffic delays and flight cancellations could be as high as $20 billion by 2025 .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 refined and expanded several facets of nextgen implementation .

it established the position of chief nextgen officer within faa , and redesignated the jpdo director as associate administrator for nextgen planning and development and interagency coordination .

the act required the nextgen senior policy committee to submit annual progress reports to congress .

it also ordered a u.s. department of transportation office of inspector general ( dot oig ) review of the automated dependent surveillance ( ads - b ) ground system installation and deployment of ads - b services , and a national research council review of the enterprise architecture for nextgen .

the act directed faa to accelerate the deployment of nextgen technologies and procedures at airports with implementation schedules to complete the process by july 2015 at the nation's busiest airports , and by july 2016 at other airports .

the legislation defined specific national airspace performance metrics that faa must track .

other provisions required faa to evaluate the role of airport surveillance technologies in the implementation of nextgen airport surface operations management ; authorized the establishment of a nextgen research and development center of excellence ; and authorized public - private partnerships to leverage and maximize private - sector capital for the purpose of equipping general aviation and commercial aircraft with nextgen avionics .

faa is to report to congress on its initiatives to encourage nextgen equipage , including policies that give priority handling to ads - b - equipped aircraft .

the consolidated appropriations act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) defunded the jpdo for fy2014 and directed faa to absorb the jpdo's functions into its operations account under the nextgen and operations planning activity .

in may 2014 , faa moved the jpdo functions into a newly created nextgen interagency planning office .

faa research and development focuses on aviation system safety , efficiency , and the reduction of environmental impacts .

historically , about half of faa research funding has addressed efficiency and economic competitiveness , largely supporting modernization efforts like nextgen .

about 37% of funding has gone toward research addressing safety issues , and the remainder has funded projects addressing energy and environmental impacts .

faa receives advice and recommendations regarding its research program from industry through the research , engineering , and development advisory committee ( redac ) , which assesses research needs in five major areas: operations , airport technology , aviation safety , human factors , and environment and energy .

forty - nine u.s.c .

section 44501 ( c ) requires faa to develop an annual national aviation research plan that is to be submitted to congressional oversight committees prior to the submission of the president's budget to congress .

the plan lays out the five - year research and development goals and anticipated funding requirements .

faa's annual research funding in recent years has totaled about $300 million , and projected research needs are anticipated to rise to about $350 million annually by fy2018 .

the majority ( roughly 56% in recent years ) of faa research funding is designated specifically through the research , engineering , and development account .

p.l .

112-95 authorized the research , engineering , and development account at a specified level of $168 million annually through fy2015 .

authorization and funding for research activities in this account encompass work performed at the william j. hughes technical center in atlantic city , nj , as well as aeromedical and human factors research conducted at the civil aerospace medical institute in oklahoma city , ok. additionally , it funds academic research through a joint university program , aviation research grants , and various air transportation centers of excellence .

in addition to specific research , engineering , and development amounts , faa research activities are funded by faa's other major accounts .

about 29% of faa research is funded through the facilities and equipment ( f&e ) account , including that related to advanced technology development and prototyping and nextgen system development .

f&e also provides funding for the center for advanced aviation system development ( caasd ) , a federally funded research and development center managed by the mitre corporation .

some research funding , including monies for the airport cooperative research and development program ( managed by the transportation research board of the national academies ) and for the airport technology research program , is derived from the aip , which provides about 15% of all faa research funding .

the distribution of historical and projected funding for faa research activities across major funding accounts is provided in figure 5 .

\s p.l .

112-95 called for a specific research initiative on unmanned aircraft systems , continued funding of research on airfield pavements and design certification , and the creation of new centers of excellence for nextgen technologies and for aviation human resources research .

the act directed faa to coordinate with nasa to carry out interagency research on the potential effects of aviation activities on the environment .

it also authorized the continued funding of research on transitioning to unleaded aviation fuels for piston aircraft , the establishment of a program on alternative jet fuel sources for civil aircraft , and a separate research program to study methods for deriving jet fuel from clean coal .

it additionally directed research on wake vortices that could lead to the reduction of spacing requirements between aircraft , as well as research programs on volcanic ash avoidance , weather hazards , and cleaning and sensor technology for cabin air supplied from engines and auxiliary power supplies .

the small community air service development program was established in the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21 st century ( air - 21 ; p.l .

106-181 ) to help small communities improve air service at small hubs or smaller airports .

the program provides grants to selected communities for implementing strategies to improve the availability and pricing of air service .

all grants require significant local financial or other participation .

since the program first received funding in fy2002 , dot has awarded 365 grants .

although the program was authorized at $35 million annually by the vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 ) , appropriators have funded it at a significantly lower level in recent years .

in fy2014 , for example , it received a $7 million appropriation .

as the program has matured , the annual number of applications for new grants has dropped , although the amount of grants sought still exceeds available funding .

recent testimony by gao suggests that the results of the program have been mixed over the years , with fewer than half of the grants achieving their goals .

the metropolitan washington airports authority ( mwaa ) was established by congress to operate and manage the two major washington , dc - area airports , ronald reagan washington national airport ( reagan national , known by the code letters dca ) and washington dulles international airport ( dulles , known by the code letters iad ) .

these two airports are owned by the federal government and were transferred to mwaa under a 50-year lease authorized by the metropolitan washington airports act of 1986 .

the lease has been extended for 30 years , and is currently set to expire in 2067 .

mwaa is governed by a 17-member board of directors , with 7 members appointed by the governor of virginia , 4 by the mayor of washington , dc , 3 by the governor of maryland , and 3 by the president .

mwaa is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the two airports and the dulles toll road , a highway in virginia , as well as the construction and funding of the dulles corridor metrorail project , which , upon completion , would extend washington's metrorail public transit system to dulles airport and beyond into loudoun county , va .

since the 1960s , the federal government has restricted air traffic at reagan national to reduce congestion and to spur growth at dulles airport .

faa controls the number of "slots" available each hour for takeoffs and landings at reagan national .

that airport's growth also has been constrained by limiting the distance that flights are permitted to travel .

under faa's "perimeter rule," nonstop flights from dca could serve only airports within 1,250 miles .

two faa reauthorization acts , air - 21 in 2000 and vision 100 in 2003 , increased the number of slots and established exemptions to the perimeter rule .

these laws required the secretary of transportation to permit 44 slot - exempt operations ( 22 round trips ) per day , of which 24 ( 12 round trips ) must be used for beyond - perimeter flights .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 required the secretary of transportation to grant eight additional beyond - perimeter slot exemptions and to consider certain criteria when granting exemptions .

the specified criteria include the benefits of increased service outside the perimeter and of service to small communities .

dulles airport has maintained strong performance in international traffic , but its domestic traffic , which accounts for nearly 70% of iad's passengers , has been slipping since it peaked at 22.1 million passengers in 2005 .

in 2013 , iad's domestic passenger count fell below 15 million .

reagan national , however , has seen steady traffic growth in recent years , and surpassed 20 million total passengers in 2013 for the first time .

iad's high cost per enplanement , $26 , has been identified as making the airport less competitive than dca , which has a cost per enplanement of $14 .

in addition , dca's proximity and convenient transportation links to central washington , dc , have strengthened its position as the primary facility for domestic flights .

mwaa officials reportedly attribute the steady erosion of domestic traffic at dulles airport to "congress and its tinkering with decades - old rules that limit the number of takeoffs and landings at national as well as the distance that planes can fly. .

mwaa recently approved a new use and lease agreement for airlines operating at dca and iad .

the new agreement , effective january 1 , 2015 , includes a number of new provisions to help lower airline costs at iad while working to keep pace with growing demand at dca .

the new agreement allows up to $300 million in revenue to be shifted from dca to help offset operating costs at iad over 10 years .

the new agreement also includes a $1 billion capital construction program at dca .

mwaa's management and policies have been criticized by state and federal authorities .

a 2012 audit report by the dot oig , requested by congress , found significant issues of concern including mwaa's contracting and procurement practices , its code of ethics , its hiring and compensation practices , and the accountability and transparency of mwaa's board of directors .

another report by the dot oig , issued in january 2014 , found that a significant portion of federal grants for phase 1 of the dulles corridor metrorail project had been spent in questionable transactions .

by and large , the rights of airline passengers are defined by congress .

congress determines the extent to which airline consumer rights are codified in law , authorizes federal agencies to enforce those rights , and directs or authorizes federal agencies to define and enforce passenger rights that are not specifically enumerated in legislation .

over the years , congress has intervened directly in numerous issues related to passengers' rights .

one example stems from a number of incidents between 2007 and 2009 in which passengers were held aboard planes that had either departed airport gates but were not allowed to take off or had landed but were not allowed to disembark passengers .

congressional hearings ensued in 2009 .

in the wake of this attention , dot issued rules on tarmac delays in 2010 , and language on this subject providing a firmer statutory footing for those rules was incorporated into the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 .

the dot office of the assistant general counsel for aviation enforcement and proceedings ( oaep ) , including its aviation consumer protection division , monitors airline compliance , investigates reported violations of dot regulations , and enforces rules and regulations .

it may negotiate consent orders with air carriers and fine violators .

in 2012 , dot issued 49 consent orders related to aviation consumer rule violations and assessed $3,610,100 in civil penalties — both record figures .

oaep considers a number of factors in determining the civil penalty it would seek in an enforcement proceeding , such as the harm caused by the violations , the alleged violator's compliance disposition , the alleged violator's financial condition and ability to pay , how long the violations continued , and the strength of the case .

currently , large air carriers are subject to a maximum civil penalty of $27,500 per violation , under 49 u.s.c .

46301 and 14 c.f.r .

part 383 .

small businesses or individuals are subject to a maximum penalty of $1,100 .

notwithstanding this limit , small businesses and individuals are subject to higher maximum penalties for discrimination ( $11,000 per violation ) and for engaging in unfair or deceptive practices ( $2,500 per violation ) .

if oaep believes enforcement action is appropriate , it would seek a civil penalty and consent order .

a consent order typically relates the facts of the case to law and regulation , sets forth the penalty the violator has agreed to pay , and incorporates language ordering the air carrier to cease and desist from further violations .

if the air carrier refuses to settle , the case may go to an enforcement hearing before a dot administrative law judge .

dot also may request injunctive relief from a federal district court , although this is unusual .

since the economic deregulation of the domestic airline industry in 1978 , the federal government no longer has control over airlines' prices or routes .

contracts of carriage , the legally binding rules airlines post on their websites and apply to passengers , are not subject to federal review or approval .

however , a contract of carriage that conflicts with federal laws or regulations may not be enforceable by the airline .

the intense price competition of recent years has prompted airlines to respond by "unbundling" their offerings and charging separately for services that once were included in the price of a ticket .

among these charges are fees for checked baggage , early / priority boarding , and seat change on a flight .

such ancillary fees have become major causes of consumer complaints .

carriers' treatment of passengers booked on delayed or canceled flights is also a leading cause of complaints .

following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , coverage for such attacks , and for "war risks," became difficult , if not impossible , for airlines to purchase from private insurers .

in response , congress passed expansions of the faa aviation war risk insurance program .

the amended statute ( 49 u.s.c .

§44301 et seq. ) .

required that faa offer war risk insurance to u.s. airlines , with the premiums based on the cost of such coverage prior to the september 11 terrorist attacks .

the federal coverage under the program was relatively expansive , with coverage provided after the first dollar of losses and with a broad definition of what constitutes a war risk loss .

the expansion of the program was limited in time , but was extended several times over the years , often as part of appropriations legislation .

the last instance was in the continuing appropriations resolution , 2015 , which extended the expanded program until december 11 , 2014 .

up until 2014 , most u.s. airlines purchased the faa coverage and generally supported the existing program against proposed changes .

in 2014 , the number of air carriers purchasing insurance and the premium volumes dropped .

this movement away from government insurance occurred against a backdrop of increased private insurance capacity and lower prices , despite several large aircraft losses involving war risks in 2014 .

three claims were filed by airlines under the aviation war risk insurance program , and claims payouts have been minimal .

the premiums paid for the insurance were deposited in a dedicated fund at the treasury , with the balance , over $2 billion , invested in u.s. treasury securities .

while this may seem a large sum , according to faa , the statutory cap on premiums resulted in past premium amounts insufficient to cover the full risks assumed by the government .

for example , the september 11 attacks are estimated to have caused approximately $5.6 billion in aviation hull and liability losses , adjusted for inflation .

a much smaller event could have caused losses large enough to deplete the fund and require general fund revenue to cover claims .

several presidential budgets in recent years called for changes to the program to reduce government exposure .

on march 31 , 2014 , the secretary of transportation submitted a draft legislative proposal to congress that would have made the program permanent but reduced its scope .

specifically , the administration proposal would have created permanent coverage for war risk losses from nuclear , chemical , biological , and radiological events , while giving the secretary the authority to offer full war risk coverage for 90 days after a widespread disruption in the insurance market , such as that following the september 11 attacks .

congress did not accept the administration proposal .

in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 , it terminated the expanded program effective december 11 , 2014 .

customs and immigration preclearance facilities are inspection stations operated in foreign airports by the u.s customs and border protection ( cbp ) office of field operations .

established via a formal agreement between the united states and the host country , preclearance allows cbp to staff offices at host airports and complete customs and immigration clearance for airline passengers prior to their departure for the united states .

the presence of a preclearance facility makes an airport more attractive to u.s. - bound travelers , as they are not delayed by the need to pass through immigration and customs controls upon arrival in the united states .

since the first u.s. air passenger preclearance facility was established at toronto pearson international airport in 1952 , additional locations have been opened in canada , ireland , the caribbean , and the united arab emirates ( uae ) .

currently , cbp has 15 airport preclearance locations in operation .

the program has generally not been controversial .

however , the newest location in abu dhabi international airport in the uae , which began operation in january 2014 , was strongly opposed by some u.s. air carriers , labor unions , and members of congress .

etihad airways , owned by the government of abu dhabi , is the only airline that operates nonstop flights from abu dhabi to the united states .

opponents were concerned that u.s. carriers , which rely on code - sharing partners to serve abu dhabi via connections in europe , would be competitively disadvantaged because those passengers are not eligible for preclearance .

since 1992 , the united states has reached 114 "open skies" agreements governing international air passenger and air freight services .

these agreements typically allow any airline based in either signatory jurisdiction to offer service between the two jurisdictions , and let the airlines determine their flight routes , frequencies , fares , and aircraft types according to market demand .

an application by norwegian air international ( nai ) for a foreign air carrier permit under the u.s. - eu open skies agreement has proven controversial .

nai is a subsidiary of norwegian air shuttle , the third - largest discount carrier in europe .

norwegian air shuttle and its intercontinental arm , norwegian long haul , hold faa - issued airline certificates under norwegian license and provide nonstop services to several u.s. destinations from several european countries , including norway .

these services are authorized under the u.s. - eu agreement , which has applied to norway , not an eu member state , since 2011 .

on december 3 , 2013 , norwegian air shuttle submitted an application for nai , which is registered in ireland , to operate transatlantic flights to u.s. destinations .

nai's application has been pending before dot for nearly a year .

in general , dot approves most eu carriers' application within weeks , making the delay unprecedented .

at issue is nai's plan to operate with an irish air operator certificate , using not only norwegian , eu , and u.s. citizens as crew members , but also contracting for crew members from other countries .

opponents , including labor groups , some airlines , and many members of congress , allege that nai violates article 17 bis of the u.s. - eu open skies agreement , which states that "opportunities created by the agreement are not intended to undermine labour standards.... " they contend that nai's plan would create precedent for using low - wage crew members from third countries aboard flights to the united states .

on the other side of the argument , several former u.s. secretaries of transportation , as well as eu officials and the irish aviation authority , say the application is valid under the terms of the u.s. - eu open skies agreement , and would encourage competition and bring lower fares .

on september 2 , 2014 , dot issued an order dismissing nai's request for a temporary exemption from the rules so that it could begin flights to the united states while dot considers its application for a foreign air carrier permit .

this dismissal is not for a ruling on the merits of nai's permit application .

in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 , congress adopted two provisions related to the nai issue .

section 419 ( a ) of division k prohibits any expenditure of funds to approve a foreign air carrier permit that would contravene article 17 bis .

the section immediately following , section 419 ( b ) , provides that the language of section 419 ( a ) does not bar issuance of a foreign air carrier permit that is consistent with the u.s. - eu open skies agreement and u.s. law .

neither section binds dot to reach any particular conclusion with respect to the nai application .

norwegian air shuttle is one of the few european discount carriers now flying to the united states .

however , other low - fare airlines in europe are known to be interested in offering transatlantic service , making it possible that the controversy raised by the nai application will reappear in other contexts in the future .

current u.s. law requires that to operate as an air carrier in the united states , a carrier must be a "citizen of the united states. .

to be considered a citizen for civil aviation purposes , an entity must be owned by an individual u.s. citizen , a partnership of persons who are each u.s. citizens , or a corporation ( 1 ) whose president and at least two - thirds of whose directors and other managing officers are u.s. citizens , ( 2 ) that is under the actual control of u.s. citizens , and ( 3 ) has at least 75% of its voting stock owned or controlled by u.s. citizens .

this limits foreign ownership of any u.s. airline to 25% , considerably lower than the 49% limit set by the eu .

the citizenship requirements can be altered only through changes to the statute .

however , dot initiated a rulemaking proceeding in 2005 and 2006 in which it proposed exercising its discretionary authority to interpret the statue's requirement of "actual control" in a manner that would have increased opportunities for foreign investment in u.s. airlines .

after receiving extensive comments , dot did not proceed with the proposed change of regulations .

legislative proposals to keep dot from proceeding with its rulemaking were introduced in the 109 th congress , but were not enacted .

the restrictions on foreign ownership have been an issue with respect to some u.s. carriers .

virgin america , which is closely related to virgin atlantic group , is based in the united kingdom , but is now 49.9% owned by delta airlines .

virgin has stated that no more than 24.9% of its voting shares are owned by non - u.s. citizens , and that provisions in its charter limit voting and share ownership by non - u.s. citizens .

german - based carrier lufthansa holds 16% of the shares of u.s. carrier jetblue , according to jetblue's financial reports .

following the 2007-2009 recession , as many u.s. carriers experienced extreme financial distress , increased foreign ownership was advanced as a way of injecting additional capital into the industry .

calls for greater foreign ownership have diminished as the industry's financial position has stabilized , but the issue may reemerge if u.s. ownership limits become an obstacle to foreign acquisitions by u.s. airlines .

