this report analyzes the establishment of an air defense identification zone ( adiz ) over the east china sea in november 2013 by the people's republic of china ( prc , or china ) , international responses to that action , its consequences , and related matters of national interest and strategy .

the report examines the legal , military , and diplomatic aspects of china's adiz , with a focus on u.s. interests and issues of concern to congress .

the most salient issues include bilateral relations with the prc , relations with u.s. partners in east asia , u.s. military posture in the asia - pacific region , and international law ( especially regarding freedom of navigation ) .

the 113 th congress addressed china's adiz in resolutions s.res .

412 and h.res .

714 , among others .

the 114 th congress may choose , in its oversight of u.s. foreign and defense policy and in its legislative activities , to further shape u.s. responses to china's adiz and related policies .

the prc's east china sea adiz has implications for , and is influenced by , numerous other issues .

a partial list of crs reports on related topics includes: crs report r42930 , maritime territorial disputes in east asia: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] crs report r42784 , maritime territorial and exclusive economic zone ( eez ) disputes involving china: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r42761 , senkaku ( diaoyu / diaoyutai ) islands dispute: u.s. treaty obligations , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41108 , u.s. - china relations: an overview of policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl32496 , u.s. - china military contacts: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41952 , u.s. - taiwan relationship: overview of policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rl33436 , japan - u.s. relations: issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41481 , u.s. - south korea relations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed .

an adiz is a designated area of airspace over land or water within which a country requires the immediate and positive identification , location , and air traffic control of aircraft in the interest of the country's national security .

while many nations have established one or more adizs in the interest of national security , no international agreement or consensus exists regarding the establishment of or the flight operations and air traffic procedures related to such airspace .

adizs are located primarily over waters off coastal nations and often include large swaths of airspace beyond the boundaries of territorial lands and waters .

in 1948 , the u.s. air force designated several offshore areas as "active defense areas" or "defense zones. .

from these , the first adizs in the world were established in 1950 , under an executive order directing the secretary of commerce to exercise security control over aircraft .

various defense zones were redesignated as adizs .

the present - day u.s. adizs , including the contiguous u.s. adiz ( over atlantic , pacific , and gulf of mexico waters , see figure 1 ) , the alaska adiz , the guam adiz , and the hawaii adiz , are codified in title 14 , part 99 , of the code of federal regulations , along with the procedural requirements for flights operating in these designated areas .

they are predominantly located over water and typically do not extend to the shore , leaving a narrow strip of sovereign airspace parallel to the coastline that is not within the adiz .

u.s. adiz procedures apply to aircraft operating to , from , or within the united states through a designated adiz .

the adiz procedures do not apply to u.s. military and law enforcement aircraft .

foreign aircraft , including foreign military aircraft , may generally operate freely within any portion of an american adiz not considered part of domestic airspace without complying with the regulatory procedures for communications and positive aircraft identification so long as they do not intend to enter or depart from sovereign u.s. airspace .

if however , foreign state or military aircraft are authorized to operate to or from sovereign u.s. airspace , they generally would be required to follow all applicable adiz procedures when operating in an adiz .

procedural regulations mandate that all civil aircraft entering an adiz maintained by the united states must be equipped with an operating two - way radio , and in general , unless otherwise authorized by air traffic control , an operating radar beacon transponder with altitude reporting capability .

by regulation , flights operating within an adiz must file a flight plan and provide required information regarding aircraft and operator identification and planned flight trajectory .

pilots must make position reports to air traffic controllers before entering the adiz and upon reaching certain designated reporting points , and must notify controllers of any deviations from the flight plan or from air traffic clearance instructions .

additionally , regulations require that aircraft operating in an adiz comply with any special security instructions that the federal aviation administration ( faa ) may issue .

the canadian adiz , along with the u.s. adiz , is jointly monitored and enforced by the militaries of both nations .

monitoring and enforcement of adiz procedures is the responsibility of the north american aerospace defense command ( norad ) , a bi - national united states and canadian organization charged with the missions of aerospace warning and aerospace control for north america .

in the united states , faa handles flight plans and requests , while in canada nav canada provides air traffic services for aircraft operating within the adiz under canadian civil aviation regulations set forth by transport canada .

procedures and regulations are harmonized across both the u.s. and canadian adiz regions .

among asian countries , japan , south korea , taiwan , the philippines , vietnam , burma , and india all established adizs more than 20 years ago .

japan's adiz first came into existence during post - world war ii reconstruction to aid japanese civil air defense initiatives , and japan codified the zone in 1969 .

south korea's adiz came into existence in 1951 , during the korean war , to aid military forces in positive identification of non - hostile civil aircraft .

see table 1 for a comparison of adiz features among the united states and selected asian countries .

pla actions in the ecs adiz have been largely in line with international norms regarding adizs , with a few exceptions .

despite initial concerns that the pla would conduct assertive interceptions of foreign aircraft that did not comply with the identification requirements , there were few incidents in late 2013 and early 2014 .

in mid - 2014 , however , pla air force aircraft flew in immediate proximity to japanese surveillance aircraft on multiple occasions , according to japanese reports .

in october 2014 , u.s .

commanders of the pacific air forces and navy's seventh fleet said that the pla's intercepts in its ecs adiz generally have been professional .

one question regarding the prc's ecs adiz announcement is whether it was primarily a politically symbolic statement or instead represented a plan to advance the prc's administrative control of disputed territory and / or its military anti - access / area - denial ( a2 / ad ) strategy .

prc official media stated that "in fact , prior to the announcement of the air defense identification zone , china already instituted early - warning mechanisms and adopted specific air traffic control measures with regard to the islands over which it claims jurisdiction , including the diaoyu islands , and the east china sea airspace over the related waters. .

the pla air force has managed air traffic control for the prc , largely for security reasons , and long before announcing an ecs adiz , the pla scrambled fighters to intercept foreign aircraft , including u.s. reconnaissance aircraft ( such as the prc's april 2001 interception of a u.s. navy ep - 3 plane that resulted in a collision and crisis ) .

the ecs adiz announcement could be primarily a symbolic political statement .

an expert on the pla navy at the u.s. national war college said that the ecs adiz is more a "political declaration than anything that contributes materially to the military capability to carry out" an a2 / ad strategy .

the prc leadership could have proclaimed the ecs adiz for political reasons to ameliorate internal pressure or struggles inside china .

however , prc leaders agree generally on territorial and maritime claims , especially against japan .

also , the prc took assertive or aggressive actions to advance its claims before and after the transition of power from hu jintao to xi jinping as the top leader in late 2012 to early 2013 .

there were no nationalistic , violent anti - japan protests surrounding the ecs adiz announcement , unlike the rare protests that erupted during similar periods of heightened tensions with japan in september 2010 and september 2012 .

the absence of protests may have been a sign that chinese leaders did not seek to rally domestic political forces .

comments in china about the ecs adiz on the internet were generally muted .

over the longer run , xi could be using the formal ecs adiz as a mechanism to push the pla to higher readiness or alert levels as well as to promote joint operations .

indeed , in asserting that the pla air force scrambled fighters in late november to patrol the ecs adiz , the pla air force spokesman specifically stated that both the pla air force and pla navy would be on constant alert and jointly safeguard the prc's ecs adiz .

such an effort is consistent with the widely reported exhortations ( particularly since 2013 ) in the defense - related white paper and in numerous articles that stressed to the pla that it should promote realistic training to prepare for actual combat and should develop stronger capabilities , including in maritime actions .

the "decision" of the third plenum of november 2013 stipulated that , as part of military reform , the pla should "restructure and rationalize border , sea , and air defense management systems and mechanisms. .

one analyst assessed the ecs adiz announcement as part of the prc's international legal assertion of eez claims and noted that the eastern edge of the prc ecs adiz closely follows the eastern edge of the prc's claim to an extended continental shelf in the east china sea .

the ecs adiz could have been intended to elicit an overreaction from japan , so that the prc could advance its interests while claiming to be a target of japanese provocations ( see section " focus on japan " ) .

indications are that the prc's administration of its ecs adiz has targeted japanese aircraft in particular , rather than u.s. , south korean , taiwanese , or other foreign aircraft .

the mnd justified extending the prc's ecs adiz to within 130 km of a "certain country," apparently japan , by pointing to that country's establishment of an adiz in 1969 that was 130 km from the coast of the prc .

as of january 2015 , the japanese military has not taken any actions in the contested airspace that have drawn criticism from the international community .

another motivation for the ecs adiz announcement could have been a desire for parity with japan and other countries that have established adizs and have scrambled fighters in response to foreign aircraft .

japan's frequent scrambling of fighters could have increased the prc's interest in setting up its own adiz .

the prc's aircraft , including official , non - pla planes , have encountered fighters scrambled by the japanese air self - defense force ( asdf ) .

japan's asdf scrambled fighters 415 times to respond to prc aircraft from april 2013 to april 2014 , an increase by 109 sorties from the previous year .

relatedly , beijing might have set up the ecs adiz for prestige .

a major general in the pla air force asserted that the prc set up its ecs adiz for political - strategic significance as a "great power" because , according to the major general , an adiz is an important symbol of modern countries with air defense capability .

tested by the ecs adiz , the pla air force will become stronger , he stressed .

in this view , the lack of consultation with other countries is consistent with the prc's position , as seen in its 2012 defense white paper , that it is a major power safeguarding its rights .

another possible motivation for declaring the ecs adiz is the pla's objection to u.s. navy and air force reconnaissance flights , which pla officials have identified as an "obstacle" in the military relationship with the united states .

a pla navy expert noted the ecs adiz provides the "legal" authority to track the reconnaissance planes , even though the pla may not "shoot them down. .

the u.s. military maintains that its flights operate legitimately in international airspace , not the prc's airspace .

promptly after the prc announced the ecs adiz on november 23 , 2013 , defense secretary hagel called the development a destabilizing attempt to alter the status quo , stated that the announcement would not change u.s. military operations , and reaffirmed that the u.s. - japan mutual defense treaty applies to the senkaku islands .

secretary of state john kerry expressed concern that the unilateral action was an attempt to change the status quo in the east china sea and would increase tensions and create risks of an incident .

he also stated that the united states does not recognize efforts by any country to apply its adiz procedures to foreign aircraft not intending to enter national airspace nor does the united states apply its adiz procedures to foreign aircraft not intending to enter u.s. airspace .

secretary kerry urged the prc not to implement its "threat" to take action against aircraft that do not identify themselves or obey orders from the prc .

he urged the prc to exercise restraint .

the white house called the prc's announcement an "escalatory development" that increased tensions .

u.s. concerns focus in part on the way in which the prc set up its ecs adiz .

a senior official on the u.s. national security council ( nsc ) staff said that "we [the obama administration] saw it as a provocative and escalatory act that increased tensions in the region and reduced the prospect for diplomacy .

regardless of whether china had a right to establish the adiz , the way china did it was dangerous. .

the prc's ecs adiz overlaps with other adizs , raising the potential for accidents or incidents that could involve interceptions by fighters .

the united states received less than one hour's formal notice before the prc's ecs adiz announcement .

two days after the prc's declaration of the ecs adiz , the u.s. navy announced the start of the annual exercise ( annualex ) 2013 involving the carrier strike group led by the uss george washington in training with japan's maritime self - defense force .

the u.s. air force flew two b - 52 bombers from the u.s. territory of guam on a training flight into the ecs adiz without informing china .

a pentagon spokesman said that "we have conducted operations in the area of the senkakus .

we have continued to follow our normal procedures , which include not filing flight plans , not radioing ahead , and not registering our frequencies. .

although the bombers' flight reportedly had been planned far in advance , going through with the flight conveyed continuity of operations , sustained support for japan , and non - compliance with the prc's ecs adiz .

in august 2014 , a pla fighter aircraft intercepted at close range a u.s. p - 8 surveillance aircraft in international airspace near china's southeastern coast , providing further evidence that the u.s. military continues its normal pattern of operations .

the initial reaction of japanese leaders to the ecs adiz announcement was highly critical .

top officials called on china to rescind its decision to establish the adiz , terming it "dangerous" and "one - sided," and prime minister shinzo abe declared that it would not have any effect on japan .

japanese military aircraft transited the chinese adiz as part of planned exercises within a week of beijing's initial announcement .

when it was reported that japanese commercial airlines initially obeyed chinese requests for identification in the adiz , the japanese government ordered its airlines to effectively ignore chinese administration of the adiz .

japanese commercial aircraft do not file flight plans with chinese authorities nor respond to requests for identification on routes transiting the adiz but not entering chinese territorial airspace , for example on the route from tokyo to taipei .

since late november 2013 , japan has taken a series of actions designed to thwart chinese administration of the adiz while not further escalating the tense situation .

japan submitted a proposal to the icao to examine whether china's actions threatened the order and safety of international aviation .

japan's adiz overlaps airspace managed by south korean air traffic controllers ( the incheon fir ) , but the two countries have managed this contradiction for decades without conflict .

the abe cabinet in mid - december 2013 approved new defense guidelines that emphasize the defense of japan's southwest islands against incursions from china .

the guidelines state , "china is ... showing its attempts to change the status quo by coercion. .

japan's parliament , called the diet , passed a resolution labeling the ecs adiz a violation of international law and called for china to withdraw the ecs adiz immediately .

foreign minister fumio kishida , in a major speech before the diet in january 2014 , indicated tokyo's intention to gain international support for the freedom of flight above the high seas .

while the abe administration has made enhancing defense capabilities a top priority , japan has not taken concrete steps to adjust its defense posture or activities to account for the ecs adiz .

 ( the ministry of defense had already re - deployed 13 e2-c early warning and surveillance aircraft to okinawa from northern japan in late 2012. ) .

as in the past , japanese fighter aircraft continue to scramble and intercept foreign military aircraft that do not identify themselves within the japanese adiz .

reportedly , the united states and japan agreed to increase their reconnaissance and surveillance activities in the east china sea , presumably to monitor chinese practices in the new adiz .

south korean leaders initially voiced their strong displeasure with the prc's ecs adiz announcement , but their criticism was not as strident as japan's .

 ( one news report stated that the rok government had been informed of china's adiz announcement several days in advance. ) .

south korean foreign minister yun byung - se said on november 27 , 2013 , "the issue of the air defense identification zone is making the already difficult regional situations even more difficult to deal with.... we see competition and conflict in the region deepening. .

in a bilateral meeting of senior defense officials on november 28 , south korea reportedly asked china to redraw its adiz so that it did not overlap with the korean adiz , but the chinese officials rejected this request .

on december 8 , south korea announced that it would expand its own adiz to include area overlapping with the japanese and chinese adizs , though conforming to the south korean fir .

the rok military expressed its intent to increase patrols in the adiz and on december 9 flew a patrol aircraft through the zone without notifying china .

the decision by south korea to expand its adiz to include airspace overlapping with chinese and japanese adizs showed elements of both consideration and parochialism .

on the one hand , the south korean adiz respects the freedom of overflight , including foreign state aircraft .

seoul also consulted with the united states , china , and japan before making its announcement on december 8 , 2013 .

the calm reactions of chinese and japanese officials to the expanded adiz likely reflected this consideration .

on the other hand , the response in kind to china could appear to legitimize some of beijing's claims about a need to safeguard national interests through an enlarged adiz .

south korea's pursuit of its national interest may have undercut attempts by the united states and japan to de - escalate the situation based on mutually acceptable principles .

furthermore , the new overlapping area could increase the risk of an incident .

the establishment of the prc's ecs adiz came at a time when south korea was building closer ties to china and rok - japan relations remained mired in acrimonious historical issues regarding imperial japan's actions in the early 20 th century .

the ecs adiz episode appears to have cooled the china - south korea relationship temporarily by casting a negative light on china's strategy and intentions , although china - rok relations improved noticeably in 2014 .

washington and seoul are attempting to maintain a strong bilateral relationship while navigating around sensitivities with neighboring countries .

one american scholar ( and former white house official ) argued that the apparent willingness of seoul to seek a separate accommodation with beijing , while ignoring the concerns of tokyo and washington , was short - sighted and raised questions about south korea's strategic alignment .

the adiz incident also rekindled the long - simmering dispute between china and south korea over a submerged rock in the yellow sea .

the undersea feature , called socotra rock by the united states , ieodo by south korea , and suyan rock by china , is located in the area of the sea claimed by both china and south korea as within their eezs .

since 2003 , south korea has maintained an ocean research station built on a raised platform above the submerged rock .

the new chinese adiz includes airspace over socotra rock , which had previously been within the japanese but not the korean adiz , although it is now included within the expanded korean adiz .

on november 23 , 2013 , the taiwan government declared that ( 1 ) taiwan has sovereignty over the diaoyutai ( senkaku ) islands with no change due to the prc's ecs adiz and that taiwan will continue to defend that sovereignty over the islands and continue operations to protect fishermen ; ( 2 ) each side should use peaceful dialogue to resolve disputes in line with president ma ying - jeou's "east china sea peace initiative" of august 2012 ; ( 3 ) taiwan's military will use peaceful principles of ma's initiative and adopt appropriate measures in light of the overlap between the prc and taiwan adizs ; and ( 4 ) taiwan is "gravely concerned" and will maintain close contact with all sides to maintain peace and stability .

in contrast to japan , taiwan instructed its commercial airlines to submit flight plans to the prc's authorities , arguing that the general directive is in accordance with international regulations rather than in recognition of the prc's ecs adiz .

the democratic progressive party ( dpp ) , an opposition party more wary of the prc than the ruling nationalist party ( also known as the kuomintang ) , urged a stronger protest .

taiwan's legislators from both parties issued a joint statement from the legislative yuan urging the ma administration to lodge a strong protest , commercial airlines not to submit flight plans to the prc , and the prc to rescind its ecs adiz .

in 2010 , taiwan protested strongly to japan when it expanded slightly its adiz to fully cover the airspace over japan's yonaguni island , though there is no dispute over the island .

taiwan opposed the change to japan's adiz line , and taiwan's foreign minister raised a question about whether japan's redrawn adiz would "threaten" taiwan's airspace .

after the lawmakers' joint statement , taiwan's executive yuan , or cabinet , added that the military would not change its operations as a result of the prc's ecs adiz announcement and would conduct patrols and reconnaissance operations in taiwan's adiz .

although taiwan demarcates its adiz as extending west of the taiwan strait to cover part of the mainland , taiwan's air force and the pla air force have a tacit understanding that their fighters should not cross the median line in the taiwan strait ( taiwan does not attempt to administer the portion of the adiz over mainland china ) .

taiwan's air force patrols and training continued unchanged , including up to 30 patrols in the overlap between their adizs in the week after the prc's announcement .

taiwan has protested and scrambled fighters in response to the flights of the pla's aircraft through taiwan's adiz , including aircraft not flying toward taiwan .

for example , taiwan's military announced that on august 25 , 2014 , a pla y - 8 surveillance aircraft flew four times through the southwestern corner of taiwan's adiz .

taiwan's air force scrambled fighters to intercept the y - 8 aircraft and "escort" it out of the adiz , though the prc planes did not fly toward taiwan .

the prc's ecs adiz has implications for u.s. policy in terms of the potential for conflict , escalation of tension , sino - japanese tensions , a strategic challenge to the united states , and u.s. - china military - to - military exchanges .

the prc has a wide array of options related to the ecs adiz .

actions likely to be seen as constructive by other countries include restrained enforcement of the ecs adiz rules ; prevention of nationalist activists from landing on the disputed islands ; and consultations with other countries and the icao to conform its ecs adiz to international rules and practice .

however , in an indication that the ecs adiz poses a challenge beyond the island dispute with japan , beijing stated that it was considering other adizs .

on the day of the ecs adiz announcement , the mnd stated that the prc will establish other adizs "at the right moment after necessary preparations are completed. .

the mnd spokesperson reiterated that position at a news conference on november 28 , 2013 .

as possible future steps , china could announce an adiz for the south china sea , an adiz for the tonkin gulf , and / or an adiz for the yellow sea .

although the mnd spokesman assured that the ecs adiz is beyond national airspace and not a "no - fly zone," the pla in the past has tried to assert that it may deny access to the yellow sea for foreign military exercises or transit .

the prc also could declare an adiz for the taiwan strait or extend the ecs adiz toward taiwan .

these possible future steps raise questions about the need for international talks with beijing and about u.s. strategy for discouraging china from announcing new , problematic adizs ( see section " oppose other prc adizs " for u.s. official statements ) and for responding to potential new adizs .

in the near term , the prc would face significant challenges in implementing an adiz over the south china sea .

the pla may need to build up its radar and other capabilities to support another adiz , especially to cover the southern part of the south china sea , which is a great distance from pla bases .

the pla air force has limited ability to project power farther from prc territory , including over the south china sea , although these limitations will depend on the pla's aerial refueling capability .

the prc occupies the paracel islands as well as seven reefs , but no islands , in the spratly islands .

however , since 2013 chinese ships have been dredging the seabed around several reefs to construct artificial islands that could support airfields , a development that may alleviate the pla's need for in - flight refueling to maintain air control of the south china sea .

official prc media indicated that an aircraft carrier could help with the problem of limited endurance of fighters flying patrols over the south china sea , especially out to the southern edge of china's claimed jurisdiction .

in december 2013 , the pla navy's first aircraft carrier , the liaoning , sailed to the south china sea for testing and training .

at a congressional hearing in february 2014 , the director of the defense intelligence agency lieutenant general michael flynn testified that china's first aircraft carrier , commissioned in late 2012 , will not reach its full potential until it acquires an operational fixed‐wing air regiment over the next several years .

announcing an adiz for the south china sea could create political problems for the prc .

such a move could exacerbate tense ties with some countries and could spur a more coordinated approach at the 10-nation association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) , which , in turn , could compel beijing to deal multilaterally with several southeast asian countries instead of beijing's preferred use of leverage in bilateral contacts .

indeed , prc media indicated that a "south china sea adiz" would present complicated problems for the prc's external engagement with southeast asian countries , drive a wedge between china and asean , and raise concern about a "china threat. .

in early 2014 , the prc mfa denied that china was preparing to announce a "south china sea adiz" by saying that china does not feel a threat from southeast asian countries and that reports of such an adiz were rumors created by japan .

in november 2014 , a prc mnd spokesperson addressed the possibility of a south china sea adiz , "we have said on many occasions that whether or not to set up an [adiz] depends upon various factors , for example , the air threat that the country faces and the overall security environment .

and we have confidence as to our relationship with the countries surrounding the south china sea and we also have confidence in the overall stability of the situation in the area. .

following the establishment of the ecs adiz , china could challenge operationally japan's administrative control of the senkaku / diaoyu islands .

for example , the pla could fly aircraft , including helicopters or fixed - wing aircraft , into the airspace over disputed islands or reefs , or pla aircraft could intercept foreign aircraft .

official prc agencies or the pla could land uavs on a disputed island .

china coast guard or pla navy ships could enter the territorial waters of the senkaku islands for longer periods of time .

the prc could then portray the reactions of japan ( and / or other countries ) as "provocations" and exploit them to advance the prc's control .

possible congressional actions or oversight of policy include legislation , hearings , and other options that could focus on addressing the prc's ecs adiz , u.s. military contacts with the pla , strategic reviews of policy , crisis - management and confidence - building measures , international institutions and rules , alliances with japan and south korea , and standards and procedures at the icao .

although the issue of adizs is not central to u.s. - china relations or to china's overall foreign and defense policies , the prc's actions regarding the ecs adiz and its decisions to designate ( or not ) other adizs will continue to shape perceptions of china and influence the narratives surrounding its rise to major power status .

in particular , the prc's handling of any new adiz , should it choose to designate one , will be watched very closely for what it says about chinese attitudes toward its neighboring countries and toward the rules and norms of the existing international order .

congress and the executive branch likely will calibrate u.s. policy toward the prc based in part on beijing's actions in its maritime periphery , and the adiz issue now figures in that policy analysis .

in a more narrow sense , the prc's approach to the senkaku / diaoyu island dispute will also influence how observers interpret the decision to designate the ecs adiz in late 2013 .

if china uses the ecs adiz as an instrument to increase pressure on japan and the u.s. - japan alliance , that may suggest that beijing's goals were not defensive but rather coercive in nature .

the prc mnd issue the following statement on november 23 , 2013: the ministry of national defense of the people's republic of china , in accordance with the statement by the government of the people's republic of china on establishing the east china sea air defense identification zone , now announces the aircraft identification rules for the east china sea air defense identification zone as follows: first , aircraft flying in the east china sea air defense identification zone must abide by these rules .

second , aircraft flying in the east china sea air defense identification zone must provide the following means of identification: 1 .

flight plan identification .

aircraft flying in the east china sea air defense identification zone should report the flight plans to the ministry of foreign affairs of the people's republic of china or the civil aviation administration of china .

2 .

radio identification .

aircraft flying in the east china sea air defense identification zone must maintain the two - way radio communications , and respond in a timely and accurate manner to the identification inquiries from the administrative organ of the east china sea air defense identification zone or the unit authorized by the organ .

3 .

transponder identification .

aircraft flying in the east china sea air defense identification zone , if equipped with the secondary radar transponder , should keep the transponder working throughout the entire course .

4 .

logo identification .

aircraft flying in the east china sea air defense identification zone must clearly mark their nationalities and the logo of their registration identification in accordance with related international treaties .

third , aircraft flying in the east china sea air defense identification zone should follow the instructions of the administrative organ of the east china sea air defense identification zone or the unit authorized by the organ .

china's armed forces will adopt defensive emergency measures to respond to aircraft that do not cooperate in the identification or refuse to follow the instructions .

fourth , the ministry of national defense of the people's republic of china is the administrative organ of the east china sea air defense identification zone .

fifth , the ministry of national defense of the people's republic of china is responsible for the explanation of these rules .

sixth , these rules will come into force at 10 a.m. november 23 , 2013 .

