in the context of legislative action to fund the government through september 30 , 2015 , congress considered new funding requests from the president to counter two global issues — the ebola crisis and the islamic state ( is ) .

in 2014 these two threats became major concerns within the obama administration and among many members of congress .

the first cases of ebola in guinea , west africa were reported in march 2014 and the outbreak proceeded to spread rapidly .

the is threat quickly came to be viewed as an immediate threat to u.s. partners and allies in the middle east region , and a concern around the world , in late summer 2014 .

on november 5 , 2014 , the president requested fy2015 appropriations of $6.18 billion for health and human services ( hhs ) , the department of state and international assistance programs , and the department of defense ( dod ) to contain the ebola crisis domestically and overseas .

on november 10 , 2014 , the president increased the fy2015 overseas contingency operations ( oco ) request by $5.5 billion to combat is .

congressional action on both occurred within the omnibus appropriations bill ( h.r .

83 / p.l .

113-235 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ) , providing a total of more than $10.8 billion in emergency and oco funds to address ebola and counter the islamic state .

the president signed the full - year funding bill into law on december 16 , 2014 .

the november 5 , 2014 request of $6.18 billion was for u.s. government efforts to contain the ebola outbreak , enhance domestic preparedness , and improve global capability to prevent the spread of other infectious diseases .

of the $4.64 billion for immediate needs , $2.43 billion was sought for hhs and $2.10 billion for the department of state and international programs .

additionally , dod would receive $112 million to advance its research and technologies to end the ebola outbreak and other infectious diseases .

for flexibility , an additional $1.54 billion would be for a contingency fund to be available for use within hhs and state or for transfer to other agencies , as needed .

the ebola request would designate all requested budget authority as emergency requirements , so that it would effectively not be subject to the statutory discretionary spending limits established by the budget control act of 2011 , as amended ( p.l .

112-25 , bca ) .

congress included $5.41 billion in its final appropriation bill: $2.77 billion for health and human services , $2.53 billion for the department of state , and $112 million for the department of defense .

amounts were designated as emergency spending , and transfer authority for hhs and state was also included ; however , the contingency fund was not .

funds requested and appropriated are displayed in table 1 , followed by a discussion of funding for each department .

departments were required to provide the appropriations committees with detailed spending plans within 30 days of enactment , and additional reporting over time ( see table 1 ) .

within the fy2015 appropriations ( p.l .

113-235 ) , congress included $5.4 billion in oco funds for the department of defense for operation inherent resolve , its ongoing efforts against the islamic state in iraq and syria through u.s. airstrikes and training of iraqi and syrian opposition forces .

while the oco request of $520 million for the department of state specifically designated to counter the islamic state ( is ) was not provided in the appropriations act , some state department oco accounts were increased with broader explanatory statement language for "other assistance" or "other areas of unrest," or "extraordinary costs , including those resulting from conflict. .

earlier , on november 10 , 2014 , the administration had amended its fy2015 overseas contingency operations request by adding $4.94 billion for dod and $520 million for the department of state to support efforts to combat the islamic state ( is ) .

dod's earlier oco request in june 2014 already had included an illustrative allocation of $500 million from the $4.0 billion requested in the counterterrorism response fund ( ctpf ) to train and equip syrian opposition forces to fight the islamic state .

including this allocation , dod's request to combat the islamic state totaled $5.4 billion .

these amendments brought the fy2015 oco request to a government - wide total of $71.7 billion — $7.8 billion for state and $63.9 billion for dod .

this compares with $91.5 billion — $6.5 billion for state and $85.0 billion for dod — appropriated in fy2014 .

budget authority designated as overseas contingency operations / global war on terrorism ( oco / gwot ) , which is how all oco funds are designated , is effectively not subject to the statutory discretionary spending limits established by the bca .

contingency funds .

p.l .

113-235 did not provide the requested contingency funds .

some in congress had expressed concern about the request for $1.54 billion in an ebola contingency fund for hhs and state .

as worded in the request , the broader transfer authority , in addition to existing authority , would have allowed these funds to be transferred to any agency and among appropriation accounts , as long as the funds are used "for emergency expenses related to the humanitarian , economic , and stabilization crisis due to the ebola outbreak. .

of further note was the notwithstanding language included in the sfops esf contingency fund .

that would have allowed these funds to be provided to countries that may currently be prohibited in law from receiving u.s. aid , or otherwise bypass other congressional restrictions or mandates .

the administration stated that given the changing nature of the ebola epidemic and the need to address unforeseen outbreaks before they become epidemics , hhs and state department contingency funds must be accompanied by the authority giving the administration "maximum flexibility to respond quickly," both domestically and overseas .

only the funds designated by the president as critical to address the ebola outbreak and global health security would have been obligated , according to the request , and a 10-day advance notification to house and senate appropriations committees would have been required before funds could be transferred .

the administration said that structuring the contingency fund in this way would have supported its whole - of - government approach while allowing the secretaries of hhs and state to oversee the allocation of the funds toward the most pressing needs .

ebola emergency response act ( h.r .

5710 ) .

on november 14 , 2014 , representative christopher smith ( nj ) introduced the ebola emergency response act ( h.r .

5710 ) .

it was reported out of the house committee on foreign affairs on november 20 , 2014 , with no further action taken .

it would have authorized $1.801 billion for fy2015 emergency aid for countries directly affected by an ebola outbreak .

similar to the president's request , it included notwithstanding language and required consistency with international disaster assistance law within section 491 of the foreign assistance act of 1961 that would allow any country to receive u.s. aid for natural or manmade disasters and humanitarian concerns .

the legislation was an authorization of funds , not an appropriation , and also would have authorized the president to use resources from any agency on a non - reimbursable basis , subject to consent of the agency head and notwithstanding any provision of law related to limitations on the use of authorities or funding of such other agency .

the bill would have required notification to the house committees on foreign affairs , energy and commerce , armed services , and appropriations , and the senate committees on foreign relations , health , education , labor , and pensions , armed services , and appropriations within 15 days after use of this authority .

a report to the above congressional committees would have been required within 6 months after the ebola epidemic has been contained .

state department a mended oco for c ombatting is .

within the amended sfops oco request was a general provision notwithstanding language that would have allowed any fy2015 funding in the sfops appropriations act ( not just oco ) to be used for combatting is .

this would have allowed both enduring and oco funds to be used to support the syrian opposition .

while congress did include some limited transfer authority for oco funds , it did not agree to the notwithstanding language requested .

dod a mended oco for combatting is h.r .

3979 , the conference version of the fy2015 ndaa , continued the continuing resolution provision that funds training of vetted syria opposition forces , and approved the dod request for $1.618 billion for a new iraq train - and - equip account .

the conference also rejected the broad authorities for the ctpf requested and included additional reporting requirements for both the iraq and syria train - and - equip authorities .

as this program is implemented , congress may want to raise several budgetary and policy oversight issues about the funding provided: will the $1.6 billion provided cover dod's iraq training plans and could some funding be available from other dod oco funds that may be larger than needed ? .

what are the pros and cons of the requested train - and - equip authority for iraq for syria , and how might congress make adjustments during implementation if problems develop ? .

is the cost - sharing arrangement with iraq practical ? .

would congress want to define or limit the missions of u.s. troops deployed in iraq or training syrian forces through an authorization for the use of military force ? .

oco and emergency spending designations .

the president's $6.18 billion request to counter ebola designated those funds as "emergency" requirements and the $5.4 billion budget authority to counter the islamic state as "oco / gwot. .

as enacted , this funding is exempt from statutory discretionary spending limits under the budget control act .

the fy2016 budget and beyond may include additional funding for these missions .

congress may want to consider whether these programs are temporary or enduring requirements that would be funded in dod's base budget .

