from 1988 until 2008 , the state department designated the government of north korea , officially known as the democratic people's republic of korea ( dprk ) , as a state sponsor of terrorism .

since the bush administration's october 2008 removal of the dprk from the three state sponsors of terrorism lists ( see " listing a country as a state sponsor of terrorism ," below ) , provocative actions by north korea periodically have been followed by calls for the obama administration to redesignate pyongyang as a terrorism sponsor .

the state sponsors lists include governments that the secretary of state determines have "repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism. .

as of january 2015 , the governments of cuba , iran , sudan , and syria are on the lists .

the calls to redesignate north korea were particularly intense in 2010 , following the sinking of a south korean naval vessel , as well as in late 2014 , following a cyberattack against sony pictures entertainment and a threat against theater - goers to sony's movie , the interview .

the film depicts the fictional assassination of north korean leader , kim jong - un .

u.s. and foreign government sources have implicated north korea in all three incidents .

interdictions of north korean missile and conventional arms shipments to iran and syria , and from cuba — as well as reports of north korean arms sales to and training of known terrorist actors such as hezbollah and hamas — also have fueled the calls to redesignate the dprk government as a state sponsor of terrorism .

since 2008 , members of congress have made several legislative attempts to challenge the bush administration's decision to remove north korea's state sponsor of terrorism designation .

in the 114 th congress , h.r .

204 expresses the sense of congress that the secretary of state should redesignate north korea as a state sponsor of terrorism .

h.r .

1771 , the north korea sanctions enforcement act from the 113 th congress , would have imposed many of the restrictions on the dprk that would be triggered if it were redesignated as a state sponsor of terrorism .

the house passed h.r .

1771 in july 2014 , and many expect that a similar bill will be introduced in the 114 th congress .

the bush administration's removal of the dprk from the state sponsor of terrorism lists does not appear to have provided pyongyang with significant tangible economic benefits .

two main reasons are north korea's widely perceived lack of appeal as a trade and investment partner and the numerous u.s. legal restrictions on doing business with and in north korea .

commercial u.s. - dprk trade has remained virtually at zero , as in the years before the delisting .

the u.s. department of commerce continues to treat north korea as a supporter of terrorism when it considers export license applications for dual - use and restricted goods and services ; commerce's bureau of industry and security keeps north korea in its most restricted trade categories .

annual foreign assistance appropriations laws continue to prohibit direct bilateral aid to north korea ; the united states withholds contributions to united nations programs proportionate to u.n. spending in the dprk .

although some u.s. companies , including dhl and the associated press , have opened offices in north korea since 2008 , the number and scope of these operations appear to be small in scale , and likely would require a special license from the treasury department's office of foreign assets control if the north korean government is redesignated .

thus , redesignating the dprk as a terrorism sponsor appears unlikely to inflict significant direct economic punishment on north korea , particularly in the short term .

however , even if redesignation directly causes only a small practical effect , north korea - watchers who want to increase pressure on north korea may favor such a move because the kim regime likely would perceive it as a sign of a tougher u.s. approach .

for a number of reasons , a decision to redesignate the dprk as a state sponsor of terrorism could have a significant impact on diplomacy with north korea .

the kim regime has been promoting a two - track policy ( the so - called byungjin line ) of nuclear development and economic development , with the latter goal partially dependent upon influxes of foreign investment .

some analysts of north korea have pointed to signs that the kim regime is pursuing economic reforms more earnestly than commonly is thought and is poised to accelerate the reforms in 2015 .

the dprk could be particularly sensitive to a redesignation , which could be perceived as a threat to the potential economic gains the north korean government expects from its byungjin policy .

therefore , those who wish to encourage north korea's economic reforms , in the belief that they eventually would lead to changes in the government and / or the government's behavior , may oppose redesignating the dprk .

in contrast , those who wish to increase economic pressure on north korea by undercutting the byungjin line may favor redesignating the dprk .

for more on u.s. - north korea relations , see crs report r41259 , north korea: u.s. relations , nuclear diplomacy , and internal situation , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

placing north korea back on the lists could forestall any future diplomatic initiatives between the united states and north korea .

one of north korea's long - standing foreign policy goals is improving relations with the united states , particularly if this can be accomplished on pyongyang's terms and can be paired with economic benefits .

many analysts interpreted pyongyang's decision in the fall of 2014 to release three u.s. detainees as a sign that north korea is seeking a new diplomatic breakthrough with washington , part of a broad outreach that also included overtures to south korea , japan , and russia .

redesignation could be interpreted by north korean leaders , as well as officials in other countries , as a sign that the obama administration is not interested in dialogue .

additionally , given previous patterns of north korean behavior , it is possible that pyongyang would respond to a redesignation by taking additional provocative actions , such as more nuclear - weapon or long - range - missile tests .

north korea has not conducted such tests since early 2013 .

additionally , north korean leaders might try to use a redesignation to convince other countries , particularly china , that the united states is to blame if tensions between pyongyang and washington increase .

even without encouragement from north korea , china may be inclined to use redesignation as a pretext for opposing u.s. and south korean efforts to increase pressure on north korea through other means .

although the south korean government of park geun - hye has maintained a relatively hard line towards north korea , she has made improved relations with pyongyang a signature goal for her term and has pressed north korea to improve relations and open negotiations over various issues .

returning pyongyang to the terrorism sponsor list could complicate these initiatives , particularly her desire to encourage multinational companies to invest in the inter - korean kaesong industrial complex , which operates in north korea .

nonetheless , many people in south korea — as well as in japan — who favor adopting a tougher approach to north korea likely would welcome the dprk's redesignation as a terrorism sponsor .

one proponent of redesignating the dprk argues that if the u.s. government explicitly links the north korean government to terrorism , it would give encouragement to north korean refugees , helping them to resist intimidation .

north korean refugees have become an important source of information about and insights into north korean politics , economics and society .

additionally , some see these defectors as a means to spread news about the outside world into north korea , such as through operating radio stations in seoul , some of which have received u.s. democracy assistance funds .

there have been reports that north korean agents have targeted some refugees for harassment , kidnapping , and assassination .

if redesignated , north korea might make removal from the list a precondition for cooperation in any future talks over its nuclear , missile , chemical , biological , or cyber weapons programs .

redesignation could create both an obstacle to future talks and a possible bargaining lever for the united states if negotiations restart .

crs report r43835 , state sponsors of acts of international terrorism — legislative parameters: in brief , by [author name scrubbed] , provides more information and analysis about the state sponsors of terrorism lists .

events in late 2014 again led to calls to redesignate the government of north korea as a state sponsor of terrorism .

in june 2014 north korean officials reacted to sony pictures entertainment's forthcoming film , the interview , about the fictional assassination of north korean leader kim jong - un .

north korea's foreign ministry said that "a movie of a plot to hurt our top - level leadership is the most blatant act of terrorism and war" and threatened a "merciless countermeasure" if the interview was released .

on november 24 , sony pictures entertainment experienced a cyberattack that disabled its it systems , destroyed data , and released to the public internal emails .

north korea denied involvement in the attack , but praised the hackers , who called themselves the "guardians of peace," as having done a "righteous deed. .

weeks later , anonymous emails threatened "9 / 11-style" terrorist attacks on theaters showing the film , leading some theaters to cancel screenings and subsequently to sony's cancelling the film's scheduled widespread christmas day release .

in responding to the possibility of such attacks , department of homeland security secretary jeh johnson noted that the united states has "no specific , credible intelligence of a plot to launch attacks on movie theaters. .

sony later announced the film would be shown in a small number of theaters and available on some online streaming services .

as concerns about the violent threats and challenge to freedom of expression grew in u.s. media , the u.s. government more publicly weighed in on the incident .

the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , which had been investigating the cyberattacks , and the director of national intelligence ( dni ) declared that north korean government was responsible for the intrusions into sony's systems .

during a december 19 , 2014 , press conference , president obama pledged to "respond proportionally" against north korea .

in an interview with cnn , obama called the incident "cyber - vandalism," implying that it was not an act of war .

on december 20 , cyber analysts and news media reported that the north korean network providing access to the internet faltered and then eventually went offline for approximately 10 hours .

many cyber analysts said the disruption pointed to an attack on north korea's network , although they could not rule out either an overload or a preventive shutdown by north korea .

two groups linked to the hacker collective anonymous claimed responsibility for shutting down north korea's internet connection using denial - of - service attacks .

u.s. officials would not comment on whether this constituted the "proportional response" promised by obama .

on january 2 , 2015 , the white house issued an executive order authorizing additional sanctions on north korean individuals and entities , calling it a "first aspect" of its proportional response .

pyongyang denied any responsibility for the cyberattack on sony , and some cybersecurity experts expressed skepticism that the north korean government executed the attack , while others point to evidence of growing north korean capabilities in cyber warfare .

the fbi claimed that the sony attack used the same malware as previous attacks attributed to north koreans , but some cyber experts say that evidence is circumstantial and speculative .

administration officials have claimed that other intelligence used to make the determination is classified and unavailable for public consumption .

on january 7 , 2015 , at a cybersecurity conference in new york city , fbi director james comey , in discussing whether north korea was behind the cyberattack , stated "there is not much in this life that i have high confidence about — i have very high confidence about this attribution , as does the entire intelligence community. .

at this same event dni james clapper noted that this cyberattack was "the most serious ever against u.s .

interests. .

as of january 2015 , a cyber - related incident directed at the united states has never been used as justification for inclusion on the state sponsors of terrorism lists .

it could be argued that current laws relating to the state sponsor of terrorism lists may be viewed as sufficiently broad and ambiguous to allow for the inclusion of cyber - based incidents as a designation criterion .

conversely , it might be argued that the laws supporting the state sponsor of terrorism designation were focused on physical acts of politically motivated violence and amendments to existing legislation would be required to include unauthorized cyber - based intrusions of networks owned by u.s. entities   as a viable criterion .

however , changing current legislation to include cyber - related incidents as acts of terrorism could lead to calls for designating other governments as state sponsors of terrorism .

for instance , on may 19 , 2014 , the u.s. department of justice indicted five chinese military hackers for computer hacking and economic espionage directed at six american victims in the u.s. nuclear power , metals , and solar products industries .

in discussing the details related to this indictment , u.s. department of justice attorney general eric holder stated "this is a case alleging economic espionage by members of the chinese military and represents the first ever charges against a state actor for this type of hacking. .

a suggestion to add the government of china to the state sponsors of terrorism lists does not appear to have been voiced after this incident .

since 2003 , the state department's annual report on global terrorist activities has stated that north korea has not been conclusively linked to any terrorist acts since the 1987 kal bombing .

some observers have questioned the basis for the state department's claims .

they point to several pieces of evidence and reports , which generally fall in five categories .

for more on north korea's relationship with the iranian , syrian , and libyan ballistic missile and nuclear programs , see crs report r43480 , iran - north korea - syria ballistic missile and nuclear cooperation , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

p roliferation of weapons of mass destruction , including: u.s. government statements that north korea helped syria build the al kibar nuclear reactor , which israel destroyed in 2007 , and could have been used to produce plutonium for nuclear weapons .

three seizures — in october 2009 , november 2009 , and april 2013 — of shipments of north korean chemical protective suits , gas indicator ampoules , and gas masks to syria , which had an active chemical weapons program .

press reports that north korea and iran are cooperating in developing nuclear capabilities or nuclear weapons .

u.s. officials have stated publicly that there is no nuclear cooperation between iran and north korea .

u.s. government statements that north korea provided nuclear materials to libya in the early 2000s .

missile sales to and co - development with other countries , including: long - standing statements by various u.s. government officials that north korea and iran maintain a close working relationship on various missile programs , including ballistic missile systems ; u.s. government accounts of north korea missile sales and transfers to syria , buttressed by the seizure by japanese , south korean , thai and other government authorities of north korean missile parts heading to syria and burma ( myanmar ) ; conventional a rms s ales and t ransfers , including: the july 2013 interdiction in panama of the chong chon gang , a north korean cargo ship carrying fighter aircraft parts and engines , surface - to - air missile parts , ammunition , and other military equipment from cuba .

the cuban government claimed the materials were to be "repaired" in north korea before being returned to cuba , though some analysts have expressed skepticism that some of the weapons systems were meant to be returned ; and reports of north korean arms shipments to iran , as well as to syria via iran and via turkey .

ties to hezbollah and hamas , both of which the state department has designated as foreign terrorist organizations .

see the text box below for more information .

kidnapping , a ssassination , and other d irect a ctivities against c ivilians , including: accounts of attempted and successful assassinations and kidnappings of north korean refugees , critics of the dprk , and foreigners attempting to help north koreans defect .

notable accounts include december 2014 news reports of north korean agents attempting to murder a north korean refugee in denmark , 2013 news reports of an attempt to kidnap a north korean student in paris , and accounts of the abduction and murder of the reverend kim dong - shik , a korean - american , in 2000 .

since the dprk was removed from the state sponsors of terrorism lists in 2008 , actions that north korea has taken and been accused of taking have fueled an ongoing discussion about whether it should be re - listed .

to date , cyber - related incidents such as the late 2014 attack on sony have not been used as justification for inclusion on the state sponsors of terrorism lists .

the 2009 and 2013 seizures of chemical protection equipment bound for syria appear to be the only dprk actions since 2008 that both ( 1 ) were recognized by official u.s. or u.n. bodies , and ( 2 ) conceivably could have met the statutory criteria for relisting .

official u.s. government and united nations sources have concluded that the dprk sold missile parts and conventional weapons to a variety of countries , including a number of state sponsors of terrorism .

north korea also has launched a conventional military attack against a south korean island that killed civilians , and has been implicated in a torpedo attack against a south korean naval vessel .

however , none of these activities are included in the statutory criteria for adding a government to the state sponsors of terrorism lists .

the same is true of cyberattacks , such as the 2014 attack on sony that rekindled the debate over whether to re - list the dprk .

the north korean government has been linked to a number of other actions — such as helping designated terrorist organizations as well as conducting kidnappings and assassinations in foreign countries — that some have argued should be grounds for returning the dprk to the state sponsors of terrorism lists .

as of early 2015 , the information to support these claims has not been presented by the u.s. government .

of these alleged activities , perhaps the most significant are north korea's reported weapons sales to and training of hezbollah and hamas .

as discussed earlier , historically , diplomatic and policy considerations appear to have played a prominent role in the state department's decisions about the dprk's place on the state sponsors of terrorism lists .

thus , even if the north korean government's actions are deemed to meet the re - listing criteria , the state department is likely to weigh the prospective positive and negative consequences that re - listing would have on international diplomacy with north korea .

