medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term services and supports .

medicaid is jointly funded by the federal government and the states .

participation in medicaid is voluntary for states , though all states , the district of columbia , and the territories choose to participate .

each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules .

while states that choose to participate in medicaid must comply with all federal mandated requirements , state variability is the rule rather than the exception in terms of eligibility levels , covered services , and how those services are reimbursed and delivered .

the federal government pays a share of each state's medicaid expenditures .

this report describes the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) calculation used to reimburse states for most medicaid expenditures , and it lists the statutory exceptions to the regular fmap rate .

the federal government's share of most medicaid service costs is determined by the fmap rate , which varies by state and is determined by a formula set in statute .

the fmap rate is used to reimburse states for the federal share of most medicaid expenditures , but exceptions to the regular fmap rate have been made for certain states , situations , populations , providers , and services .

the fmap rate is also used in determining the phased - down state contribution ( "clawback" ) for medicare part d , the federal share of certain child support enforcement collections , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) contingency funds , a portion of the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) , and foster care and adoption assistance under title iv - e of the social security act .

an enhanced fmap ( e - fmap ) rate is provided for both services and administration under the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , subject to the availability of funds from a state's federal allotment for chip .

the e - fmap rate is calculated by reducing the state share under the regular fmap rate by 30% .

the fmap rate is used to reimburse states for the federal share of most medicaid expenditures .

in fy2019 , 13 states are to have the statutory minimum fmap rate of 50% , and mississippi is to have the highest fmap rate of 76.39% .

from fy2018 to fy2019 , the regular fmap rates for 36 states is to change , while the regular fmap rates for the remaining 15 states ( including the district of columbia ) is to remain the same .

exceptions to the regular fmap rate have been made for certain states , situations , populations , providers , and services .

the aca added a number of exceptions to the fmap for "newly eligible" individuals , "expansion states," disaster - affected states , specified preventive services and immunizations , smoking cessation services for pregnant women , specified home and community - based services , health home services for certain people with chronic conditions , and home and community - based attendant services and supports .

the federal share of medicaid expenditures used to be about 57% in a typical year , which meant the state share was about 43% .

however , with the exceptions to the fmap added by the aca ( mainly the "newly eligible" matching rate ) , the federal share of medicaid expenditures has increased .

in fy2014 , the federal share of medicaid expenditures was 61% on average , and it is estimated to have increased to 63% for fy2015 and fy2016 .

the average federal share is expected to decrease to 61% by fy2020 as the "newly eligible" matching rate phases down to 90% .

appendix a. fmap rates for medicaid , by state table a - 1 shows regular fy2014-fy2019 fmap rates calculated according to the formula described in the text of the report ( see " how fmap rates are calculated " ) .

in fy2019 , fmap rates range from 50% ( 14 states ) to 76% ( mississippi ) .

from fy2018 to fy2019 , regular fmap rates are to decrease for 13 states , increase for 23 states , and remain the same for 15 states ( including the district of columbia ) .

most of the states ( 14 states ) for which the fmap rates do not change have the statutory minimum fmap rate of 50% , and the fmap rate for the district of columbia is statutorily set at 70% .

appendix b .

past fmap rate exceptions although fmap rates are generally determined by the statutory formula described above , table 1 lists current exceptions that have been added to the medicaid statute and regulations over the years , and table b - 1 lists past fmap exceptions .

