businesses generally use one of two accounting methods for calculating their federal tax liabilities or for financial reporting .

the choice of accounting method determines the timing of the recognition of revenue and expenses .

under cash basis accounting , revenue and expenses are recorded when cash is actually paid or received .

under accrual basis accounting , revenue is recorded when it is earned and expenses are reported when they are incurred .

in other words , under accrual accounting revenue and expenses are recognized regardless of when payment is actually made or received .

a number of recent congressional proposals would change the tax accounting requirements for certain businesses , which could result in changes in tax liabilities .

similarly , a number of proposals would change how the u.s. government's financial reports are prepared .

this report introduces the differences between cash and accrual methods of accounting .

the explanations and examples provided in this report emphasize the central concepts needed to understand cash and accrual method of accounting .

a detailed discussion of the many complex technical accounting details that would need to be carefully considered if current requirements were to be changed is beyond the scope of this report .

a brief presentation of some of the most useful technical concepts appears in the appendix .

to illustrate how the choice of accounting method determines the timing of when revenue and expenses are recognized ( and ultimately tax liability and cash flow ) , two different scenarios are presented .

in each scenario , a subscriber purchases a two - year subscription for online new content .

in the first scenario , the subscriber pays in the first year .

in the second scenario , the subscriber pays in the second year .

under both scenarios , information communicated and conclusions drawn about the financial condition of the company differ depending on whether the cash or accrual basis of accounting is used .

first , a narrative discussion that only focuses on the income statement is provided for each scenario .

a more detailed explanation is then provided that incorporates two financial statements , an income statement , and a balance sheet .

the first set of financial statements , figure 1 - figure 3 , report transactions if the payment was received in the first year , and the second set of financial statements , figure 4 - figure 6 , report transactions if the payment was received in the second year .

figure 1 - figure 3 provide a better illustration of why accrual accounting provides a more complete picture of a company's financial performance as compared with cash basis of accounting , when the payment is received before the service is provided .

figure 4 - figure 6 illustrate the impact on cash flow for a small business based on whether the business uses cash or accrual basis of accounting , when the service is provided but the payment has not yet been received .

in the examples below , a fictitious small company provides online subscription - only news service .

the company is called onss and has a single subscriber during the two - year business cycle .

a subscription requires a two - year commitment and costs $2,400 ( total ) , which must be paid in full at either the beginning of the first or second year .

the $2,400 cost of the subscription for the client is revenue for onss .

assume that onss incurs service expenses ( costs ) of $600 each year , or $1,200 total and the company is subject to a 10% tax rate .

on january 1 , 2015 , onss had $600 cash on hand , same as the owners' interest ( or ownership equity ) .

the previous discussions highlighted the key differences between cash and accrual basis of accounting .

cash basis is simpler for record keeping but arguably , the process of matching revenue and expenses under accrual basis accounting leads to a better understanding of the financial condition of a business compared to the results under cash accounting .

the consistency of matching revenue with expenses under the accrual method provides a more consistent treatment of economic events and helps principals to make informed financial and operational decisions .

chairman camp's tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

1 ) proposes changes in accounting rules for tax purposes ; under the legislation certain partnerships , s corporations , and pscs with average gross receipts in excess of $10 million would be required to use the accrual method .

the accrual method more accurately reflects the revenue and expense items used to generate income in the taxable year , not merely the cash flows occurring within the period .

according to the legislation businesses with average gross receipts of less than $10 million could use the cash method as it is easier for record keeping and requires less effort .

changing from the cash method to accrual method could cause taxpayers to recognize income as a result of the change in accounting methods .

taxes paid on this income would increase federal revenues .

changing the timing of when income is recognized could also accelerate or defer tax liability .

a deferral decreases the real value of tax payments over time , due to the time value of money .

as the examples above illustrated , over the long run , if tax policy does not change , the amount of taxes collected will remain the same , but the timing of collection will be different .

arguably , in some circumstances , paying taxes on revenue and income earned without having received the payment for the services provided or product shipped involves risk and can jeopardize a business's financial health .

although the accrual basis of accounting captures a more complete financial picture of the u.s. government's future liabilities and revenues , the focus of governmental reporting is different than that of a profit - oriented business .

a business relies on its assets to help generate future income and cash , whereas the government relies on tax revenue ( or cash receipts ) to provide services to its citizens .

arguably , a government's effectiveness can be assessed based on the quality of services provided to its citizens rather than by the revenue it generates from using its existing assets .

reporting in both the cash basis and accrual basis of accounting might provide the executive branch , congress , and u.s. citizens with a more informative picture of the government's performance and future obligations than relying only on the cash or modified cash basis of accounting .

different stakeholders of an organization rely on financial statements to make informed decisions ; they expect the financial statements to have certain characteristics for the information to be useful .

although the accounting principles , concepts , and terminology listed below can be applicable for accrual and other bases of accounting , they are the foundational building blocks of accrual accounting .

this is not a comprehensive list of principles , concepts , and terminologies in the field of accounting .

concepts and terminology realization .

the recognition of revenue when the product is delivered or a service is completed , without considering if the payment ( cash ) has been received .

matching .

the recording of revenue and related expenses in the same period .

this assumption is based on a cause - and - effect relationship: expenses are incurred in generating the revenue , thus they should be recorded in the same period .

relevance .

the capacity for information to make a difference in a decision .

the information should have both confirming and predictive values .

confirming value should help the users of the financial information confirm or correct any past predictions they have made .

predictive value should help users of financial information forecast future trends for a business .

materiality .

the degree to which an omission or a misstatement of financial information will affect the judgment of someone using the information .

conservatism .

the practice of using the lower estimated value when two estimated amounts are likely for an asset .

conversely , for a liability , the practice of clearly stating the amount likely to be paid in the future .

comparability and consistency .

allow users to compare and analyze financial information from one period to the next .

comparability and consistency can be ensured by applying similar accounting principles to like items from one period to the next .

financial statements income statement .

summarizes and communicates all the revenues that a company has earned during a specific period of time less all the expenses incurred in generating that revenue , usually for a quarter or a year .

balance sheet .

communicates the financial position of a company at a specific point in time , such as at the end of a quarter or a year .

it is divided into assets , liabilities , and owners' equity ( stockholders' equity ) .

statement of changes in owners ' equity .

for large businesses with multiple shareholders , this is often called the statement of changes in stockholders' equity .

it shows the changes in owners' equity of the business entity during the same period of time as measured by the income statement .

it is used to communicate the change between the amount of owners' equity of a business at the beginning of the accounting period and the amount of equity at the end of the period .

the statement takes into account such things as increases in equity from issuing stock , repurchase of company stock , net income or net loss , and decrease in equity from dividends .

statement of cash flows .

shows the amount of aggregate cash inflows and outflows for a company during a specific period of time , usually for a quarter or a year .

financial statement categories these are listed in the order they appear in figure 1 - figure 6 .

some of the line items are not listed in all statements because only the relevant line items are normally listed in each set of financial statements .

income statement — line items revenue .

the increase in net assets resulting from selling products or services .

revenue is also identified as sales or sales revenue .

expenses .

the use of resources ( assets ) by a company in the process of providing products or services to a customer , including spending cash .

income ( loss ) .

the excess of revenue over expenses .

loss results from higher expenses than revenue .

operating income .

gross profit less all operating expenses .

operating income is pretax income .

operating income is not a line item listed on the financial statements in figure 1 - figure 6 .

net income ( net loss ) .

the difference after deducting all expenses , including taxes , from revenues .

net loss is the difference between revenue and expenses , including taxes , when expenses exceed revenue .

loss carry forward .

the carrying forward or back of a net operating loss ( nol ) in the current year to determine taxable income in future or previous years .

balance sheet — categories assets .

cash and any economic resources of a company that generate future cash inflows or reduce future cash out - flows .

liabilities .

obligations of a company to outsiders or claims against the company's assets .

owners' equity .

the owners' claims on a company's assets .

owners' equity is the value of assets less liabilities .

balance sheet — line items cash .

the most liquid asset on a balance sheet .

receivables .

the amount owed to a company by customers as a result of the company delivering goods or providing services .

payables .

the liability a company incurs from the purchase of goods or services .

cash loan payable listed in figure 5 is cash that is owed to a creditor .

deferred revenue .

the liability a company incurs owing customers goods and services it has not yet provided .

