the united states is unusual among contemporary presidential republics by providing for the indirect election of its president and vice president .

election of these two officers by a group of electors , known collectively as the electoral college , was established in article ii , section 1 of the u.s. constitution .

the states were given blanket authority to appoint these electors "in such manner as the legislature[s] thereof" may direct .

the original constitutional provisions , under which electors cast two votes for different candidates for president , but none for vice president , proved unworkable after only two contested elections , resulting in a constitutional crisis during the deadlocked election of 1800 .

following this significant event , congress proposed the twelfth amendment , which provides for separate electoral vote ballots in congress for the president and vice president , and which was ratified by the states in time for the 1804 election .

the constitutional presidential election provisions of article ii , section 1 and the twelfth amendment have remained unchanged since that time .

as with other provisions of the constitution , article ii , section 1 and the twelfth amendment established a basic framework for presidential elections but it extended considerable latitude to the states concerning its implementation .

arguably the most important related power reserved to the states was their right to appoint electors "in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct.... " in the years following ratification of the twelfth amendment , this right was exercised in various ways as state laws and political party procedures added a range of now - familiar additional elements to the system .

these include such practices as popular election of electors by the voters ; joint tickets for presidential and vice presidential candidates — the voter casts a single ballot for both candidates ; the predominance of the general ticket , or winner - take - all , system or method , which awards all of a state's electoral votes to the ticket that wins the most popular votes statewide ; a range of differing nomination procedures for elector candidates in the states ; and , an enduring tradition that electors are expected , but not constitutionally required , to vote for the candidates to whom they are pledged .

the electoral college system has proved to be durable: 54 presidential elections have been held under this arrangement since the twelfth amendment was implemented in 1804 .

in 53 of these , it delivered a majority of electoral votes for president and vice president , and in 49 instances it delivered the presidency to "the people's choice," the candidates who won the most popular votes .

when measured by the first factor , it delivered an electoral vote majority to one candidate or ticket 98.2% of the times ; when measured by whether it has delivered the presidency to "the people's choice," the candidate who won the most popular votes , it did so 90.7% of the times .

the electoral college has almost always been the subject of some criticism , however .

proposals to reform its alleged failings , or to replace it with something completely different , have been offered since the earliest days of the republic .

as noted in the introduction to this report , the electoral college and the system built around it have delivered a president and vice president in 53 of 54 elections since the twelfth amendment was ratified in 1804 .

it has elected the candidates who received the most popular votes in 49 of those elections .

while the system's defenders point to this as a considerable achievement , the electoral college has been criticized for a wide range of alleged failings since the earliest days of the republic .

these criticisms fall generally in one of two categories .

the first is essentially philosophical , and centers on the fact that the existing system is indirect , and provides a less - than - fully democratic indirect election of the president and vice president .

the second category addresses perceived constitutional , legislative , and political structural flaws in the system asserted by its critics , focusing on the potential for various dubious procedures and outcomes , and the "biases" it is alleged to confer on certain groups and jurisdictions .

congress may consider three basic options if it addresses the question of electoral college reform .

the first choice , widely advocated for at least 50 years , would repeal the sections of the constitution dealing with the electoral college — clause 2 of article ii , section 1 and the twelfth amendment — and substitute direct popular election .

the second , largely dormant for several decades , would reform the electoral college system by eliminating some of the alleged problem areas cited in the previous section of this report .

a third option would be to leave arrangements as they are at present .

two trends are identifiable within the context of congressional proposals to reform or replace the electoral college introduced since the late 20 th century .

first , proposed amendments introduced in the past decade all embraced the "end it" option , substituting direct popular election for the electoral college ; no proposal to reform the electoral college has been introduced since the 107 th congress ( 2001-2003 ) .

second , the scope of proposed direct popular election amendments has arguably grown in complexity and detail .

given the contemporary context , it may be that the first development reflected a decline in electoral college support , lack of interest in reform proposals , or simply the absence of a sense of urgency .

it is arguable that supporters of the current system would coalesce to defend the electoral college if its existence or integrity were endangered .

actions by the heritage foundation and the state government leadership foundation identified later in this report arguably confirm this thesis .

the second trend is that recent proposed amendments not only provided for direct popular election , but also included provisions to enhance and extend federal authority in such areas as residence standards , definition of citizenship , national voter registration , inclusion of u.s. territories and other associated jurisdictions in the presidential election process , establishment of an election day holiday , and ballot access standards for parties and candidates .

if approved and ratified , provisions such as these would provide congress with enhanced authority to establish broad national election standards , potentially superseding current state and political party practices and requirements , at least with respect to federal elections .

the prospect of increased federal involvement in the administration of presidential elections raises two potential issues .

the first is whether such federal involvement in traditionally state and local practices would impose additional responsibilities and uncompensated costs on state and local governments .

if so , such requirements might be considered to be unfunded mandates , as they could impose additional costs on sub - federal governments , and as such would be subject to points of order on the floor of both the house and senate .

one response by the affected state and local governments might be to call for federal funding to meet the increased expenses imposed by federal requirements .

precedent for this exists in the grant program incorporated in the help american vote act of 2002 ( hava ) .

an additional issue centers on perceptions that such an amendment and resultant legislation might be regarded as federal intrusion in state and local responsibilities .

for instance , a far - reaching scenario could include the gradual assumption of the election administration structure by the federal government .

in this hypothetical case , questions could be raised as to ( 1 ) the costs involved ; ( 2 ) whether a national election administration system could efficiently manage all the varying nuances of state and local conditions ; and ( 3 ) what would be the long - term implications for federalism .

conversely , it could be asserted that ( 1 ) a national or federal election administration structure is appropriate for national elections ; ( 2 ) state or local concerns are counterbalanced by the urgent requirement that every citizen be enabled and encouraged to vote ; and ( 3 ) every vote should be accurately counted .

while congress has not taken significant action on the question of electoral college reform in recent years , there has been considerable activity in the states .

only an amendment can alter the constitutional structure of the electoral college , but the states retain considerable authority concerning various aspects of the system .

for instance , as noted elsewhere in this report , article ii , section 1 , clause 2 gives the state legislature broad authority to "appoint" electors in any way they choose .

in practice , this appointment has been by popular election for 150 years .

states also have authority over the formula by which electors are elected ; as noted , 48 states and the district of columbia use the general ticket system , but maine and nebraska adopted the district system or plan decades ago , an example of the states acting in their classic role as "laboratories of democracy. .

in other words , the states are free to experiment with systems of elector selection and electoral vote allocation , up to a point .

over the past decade , both proportional and congressional district plan proposals have been advanced in the states , as identified in the following section , but none has been successfully adopted to date .

these have included efforts in the following states: california — ballot initiative campaigns in 2008 ( the california presidential reform act ) and 2012 ( the california electoral college reform act ) sought to establish a district system of electoral vote distribution and in 2014 ( the california split electoral college vote distribution initiative ) to establish a proportional system by popular vote , but all three failed to gain ballot access .

colorado — on november 2 , 2004 , colorado voters rejected a state constitutional amendment , amendment 36 , which would have provided a proportional allocation of electoral votes .

after a contentious campaign that gained a degree of national interest , the proposal was ultimately defeated by the voters .

michigan — in 2011 and 2014 , bills were introduced in the legislature to change electoral vote allocation in michigan from the general ticket to the district system .

no action beyond hearings was taken on either proposal .

nebraska — bills to return nebraska from the district system to the general ticket allocation of electoral votes were introduced in the state's unicameral legislature several times after 2011 , most recently in 2016 .

none of these proposals has been successful to date .

pennsylvania — in 2011 and 2012 , two proposals were introduced in the pennsylvania legislature to award the commonwealth's electoral votes according to the district system , but neither bill was enacted .

in 2013 , legislation was introduced to award electoral votes according to the proportional system .

as with earlier proposals , no action was taken beyond committee referral .

virginia — in 2012 , a variant of the district system was introduced in the virginia general assembly .

in contrast to the system as enacted in maine and nebraska , which awards each state's two senatorial electors to the presidential ticket winning the most popular votes statewide , this legislation would have awarded the senatorial electors to the presidential ticket that won the popular vote in the greatest number of congressional districts statewide .

the bill was "bypassed indefinitely" in 2013 .

wisconsin — between 2011 and 2014 , press accounts indicated that wisconsin state legislators would introduce legislation to award the state's electoral votes according to the district system .

the wisconsin legislature's database for this period does not , however , identify any such proposal as having been introduced .

in addition to these specific plans , other states have been reported as considering changes to their current allocation of electoral votes in recent years , particularly ohio and florida .

at the time of this writing , however , no measure has been introduced in the legislature of either state to this effect , and press accounts indicate that such actions are unlikely in the immediate future .

related activity in state legislatures continued following the 2016 presidential election .

according to press reports , bills to change from the general ticket to district systems were introduced in 2017 in the legislatures of minnesota and virginia .

at the time of this writing , neither proposal has progressed beyond committee assignment in the respective legislatures .

another contemporary electoral college reform or replacement effort centers on the national popular vote initiative , ( npv ) , a non - governmental campaign .

npv is a nongovernmental initiative which seeks to establish direct popular election of the president and vice president through an interstate compact , rather than by constitutional amendment .

under the compact's provisions , legislatures of signatory states ( including the district of columbia ) would appoint presidential electors committed to the presidential ticket that gained the most votes nationwide .

assuming all 50 states joined the npv compact , this would deliver a unanimous electoral college decision for the candidates winning the most popular votes .

northwestern university law professor robert w. bennett and constitutional law professors akhil and vikram amar are generally credited as originators of the npv concept .

npv relies on the constitution's broad grant ( in article ii , section 1 , clause 1 ) of power to each state to "appoint , in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct [emphasis added] , a number of electors , equal to the whole number of senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the congress. .

specifically , the plan calls for an interstate compact in which the legislatures in each of the participating states agree to appoint electors pledged to the candidates who won the nationwide popular vote .

state election authorities would count and certify the popular vote in each state , which would be aggregated and certified nationwide as the "nationwide popular vote. .

the participating state legislatures would then choose the slate of electors pledged to the "nationwide popular vote winner," notwithstanding the results within their particular state .

barring unforeseen circumstances , if all 50 states and the district of columbia were to join the npv , it would yield a unanimous electoral college vote of 538 electors for the winning candidates .

the compact , however , would take effect only if states controlling a majority of the electoral college , 270 or more votes , were to approve the plan .

this would guarantee the plan's success by ensuring that at least 270 electoral votes would be cast for the candidates winning the most popular votes .

if the national popular vote were tied , the states would be released from their commitment under the compact , and would choose electors who represented the presidential ticket that gained the most votes in each particular state .

one novel npv provision would enable the presidential candidate who won the national popular vote to fill any vacancies in the electoral college with electors of his or her own choice .

states would retain the right to withdraw from the compact , but if a state chose to withdraw within six months of the end of a presidential term , the withdrawal would not be effective until after the succeeding president and vice president had been elected .

between 2007 and 2014 , 10 states and the district of columbia joined the compact .

they are allocated a total of 165 electoral votes , 61% of the 270 vote majority that would be required for the compact to be implemented .

states that have adopted the npv compact , including their electoral vote allotments , are listed below , in chronological order .

hawaii ( 4 electoral votes ) , 2008 ; illinois ( 20 electoral votes ) , 2008 ; maryland ( 10 electoral votes ) , 2008 ; new jersey ( 14 electoral votes ) , 2008 ; washington ( 12 electoral votes ) , 2009 ; massachusetts ( 11 electoral votes ) , 2010 ; district of columbia ( 3 electoral votes ) , 2010 ; vermont ( 3 electoral votes ) , 2011 ; california ( 55 electoral votes ) , 2011 ; rhode island ( four electoral votes ) , 2013 ; and new york ( 29 electoral votes ) , 2014 .

according to national popular vote , inc. , the national advocacy group for the npv initiative , the compact has been introduced in all 50 states and the district of columbia .

the national conference of state legislatures reports that in 2017 it is "pending" in the legislatures of eight states that jointly dispose of 88 electoral votes .

conversely , proposals to rescind approval of the npv interstate compact have been introduced in the legislatures of hawaii , maryland , massachusetts , new jersey , and washington to date , but none has been approved .

following california's accession to the npv compact in 2011 , various conservative or libertarian groups announced measures to defend the electoral college system .

on december 7 , 2011 , the heritage foundation hosted a forum at which guest speakers , including five state secretaries of state , expressed their concern over the national popular vote campaign .

on december 8 of the same year , roll call reported that the state government leadership foundation , a project of the republican state leadership committee , would begin a campaign to defend the electoral college and counter recent npv gains .

the electoral college system emerged from the philadelphia convention of 1787 as one of the many compromises incorporated in the united states constitution .

it did not satisfy everyone , but it incorporated many of the goals sought for the presidential election process , including independence from control or influence by congress , a substantial role for the states , and an effort to temper popular enthusiasms and partisan and sectional attachments by giving the actual vote to the electors , who , it was hoped , would be prominent citizens of their states and communities who would exercise restraint and balance in their choice of the president .

since that time , it has been modified directly by the twelfth and twentieth amendments to the constitution and indirectly through the fifteenth , nineteenth , and twenty - fifth amendments , the passage of various federal and state laws , and changing political party practices and traditions .

the electoral college functions today in a way that is far more democratic and political - party oriented than the founders might have anticipated or desired , but the three essential features of the system cited above remain intact: the process is largely free of structural interference by congress ; it is based strongly on federal principles ; and the electors , although now all popularly elected , still make the final choice of the president an indirect one .

despite the convention's satisfaction with its work , the electoral college has been criticized on various grounds from the earliest days under the republic ; reform proposals were introduced in congress as early as 1797 .

since that time , amendments have been introduced to reform or replace the electoral college with direct popular election in almost every session of congress .

estimates vary , but they number at least 752 through the 115 th congress .

for more than two decades in the mid - 20 th century , electoral college reform was actively considered in congress .

relevant amendments were debated in the senate on five occasions , and in the house , twice , but despite public support and the efforts of congressional leadership , none of these proposals met the stringent qualifications required by article v of the constitution: a two - thirds vote in both houses of congress .

congressional support and public interest in the question waned in the 21 st century , notwithstanding an electoral college "misfire" in the presidential election of 2000 , when , for the first time since 1888 , a president was elected with a majority of electoral votes but fewer popular votes than his major - party opponent .

during this period , the arena of electoral college reform was dominated for more than a decade by efforts at the state level , and by a non - governmental initiative , as noted earlier in this report .

the states may continue to consider legislative action providing for changes in their procedures for allocating electoral votes by either the district or proportional systems .

to date , however , such proposals have generated intense controversy and opposition in the states where they have been introduced , being regularly characterized by opponents as efforts to rig presidential elections and deprive minorities of their voting rights .

to date , none has been successful .

barring unforeseen circumstances , such experiments do not appear to enjoy widespread support , and even if enacted , they might be subject to legal challenges on various grounds , including dilution of minority voter influence .

with respect to the national popular vote initiative , despite its successful adoption by california in 2011 and new york in 2014 , and the results of the 2016 election , the npv interstate compact has yet to develop sustained momentum .

while it has generated interest in various direct popular vote advocacy communities , it does not appear to have gained widespread awareness or support among the public at large .

following the presidential election of 2016 , congressional interest in reform , specifically direct popular election of the president and vice president , revived ; as noted previously , two measures are pending in the 115 th congress .

to date , however , they have received no action beyond committee referral .

these proposals face the exacting standards required by article v of the constitution , which establishes procedures for constitutional amendments .

the founders intentionally made it difficult to revise the constitution , establishing requirements for three separate super - majority votes: by two - thirds in both the senate and house of representatives congress and ratification by three - quarters of the states .

congress exercises still further influence on the amendment process because it can choose ratification by state legislatures , or by ad hoc state ratification conventions , at its discretion .

in practice , the standard for ratification is even higher , since it is customary to attach a seven - year deadline for ratification to all proposed amendments .

notwithstanding sometimes vigorous advocacy in congress , no electoral college reform amendment has been able to meet even the first step of this exacting requirement since the twelfth amendment in 1804 .

that measure , which responded to a fundamental constitutional crisis resulting from the deadlocked presidential election of 1800 , led to an overwhelming consensus for reform .

the twelfth amendment was debated and approved in congress and ratified by the states within a span of six months , a remarkable achievement for the time .

it is arguable that a contemporary electoral college reform amendment might require a comparable stimulus in order to succeed .

