over the course of 2014 , the u.s. government rolled out targeted economic sanctions on russian individuals and entities in critical commercial sectors in response to that country's annexing of the crimean region of neighboring ukraine and its support of separatist militants in ukraine's east .

designed to change behavior of the russian government by putting pressure on the russian economy , sanctions include asset freezes for specific russian individuals and entities ; restrictions on financial transactions with russian firms operating in key sectors ; restrictions on u.s. exports , services , and technology for specific russian oil exploration or production projects ; and tighter restrictions on u.s. exports of dual - use and military items to russia .

the united states coordinated its sanctions with other countries , particularly with the european union ( eu ) .

russia retaliated against sanctions by banning imports of certain agricultural products from countries imposing sanctions , including the united states .

u.s. policymakers are debating the use of economic sanctions in u.s. foreign policy toward russia , including whether sanctions should be kept in place or further tightened .

for example , in the senate , legislation has been introduced to impose additional sanctions in response to russia's alleged hacking of u.s. persons and institutions , including u.s. political organizations , and other aggressive actions , including in ukraine ( s. 94 ) , and to provide congressional oversight of actions that would limit russia sanctions ( s. 341 , h.r .

1059 ) .

legislation has also been introduced in the house to tighten sanctions , for example by prohibiting certain transactions in areas controlled by russia ( h.r .

830 ) , and to prohibit u.s. recognition of russian sovereignty over crimea ( h.r .

463 ) .

some members of congress have proposed codifying existing sanctions , which could make them more difficult to ease or remove .

most of the current restrictions were put in place by president barak obama issuing executive orders under emergency authorities .

on february 2 , 2017 , u.n .

ambassador nikki haley opened her first public remarks by referring to a recent flare - up of violence in ukraine , noting that "the dire situation in eastern ukraine is one that demands clear and strong condemnation of russian actions. .

she stated that "the united states continues to condemn and call for an immediate end to the russian occupation of crimea" and that "crimea - related sanctions will remain in place until russia returns control of the peninsula to ukraine. .

a key question in this debate is the impact of the ukraine - related sanctions on russia's economy and u.s. economic interests in russia .

the subsequent discussion on recent economic trends in russia and u.s. economic ties with russia may provide insight .

the obama administration first imposed sanctions relating to the events in ukraine in march 2014 , and announced additional sanctions over subsequent months , working in coordination with the eu .

the obama administration explained that the targeted sanctions on specific individuals , firms , and sectors "aim to increase russia's political isolation as well as the economic costs to russia , especially in areas of importance to president putin and those close to him. .

in 2014 , congress also passed , and president obama signed into law , the support for the sovereignty , integrity , democracy , and economic stability of ukraine act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-95 ; 22 u.s.c .

8901 et seq . ) .

and the ukraine freedom support act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-272 ; 22 u.s.c .

8921 et seq . ) .

these acts contain provisions on u.s. sanctions in response to the conflict in ukraine .

u.s. sanctions on russia in response to the ukraine conflict include the following: asset freezes and prohibitions against transactions with specific russian individuals .

the u.s. government has frozen assets under u.s. jurisdiction and prohibited u.s. persons from engaging in transactions with a number of russian individuals , including russian officials , deputies , businesspeople , and associates with ties to the kremlin .

asset freezes and prohibitions against transactions with specific entities .

some russian companies are subject to u.s. asset freezes and are prohibited from engaging in economic transactions with u.s. individuals and entities .

examples include bank rossiya , which has been called the "personal bank of putin" ; the volga group , a holding company owned by a close ally of putin ; and almaz - antey , a state - owned defense company .

restrictions on financial transactions with russian firms operating in key sectors .

sanctions target sectors in russia's financial services , energy , and defense sectors .

u.s. individuals and entities face restrictions on select financial transactions , such as prohibitions on extending new debt with maturities longer than 30 or 90 days ( depending on the sector ) .

examples of russian firms subject to these sanctions include rosoboronexport , a state - owned arms exporter ; rosneft , a state - owned oil company and the world's largest publicly traded oil producer ; rostec , a major russian hi - tech and defense conglomerate ; and sberbank , the largest bank in russia .

restrictions on specific o il - related exports , services , and technology to russia .

the united states restricts u.s. individuals and entities from exporting goods , services , or technology in support of exploration or production for deepwater , artic offshore , or shale projects that have the potential to produce oil in russia or in the maritime area claimed by russia .

restrictions on specific exports .

the united states has tightened restrictions on u.s. exports of dual - use and military items to russia .

the united states urged other countries to impose sanctions on russia , and coordinated sanctions with a number of other countries , particularly in the eu .

in august 2014 , russia announced a retaliatory ban on the import of certain foods from the united states , the eu , and other countries imposing sanctions .

in 2014 , the united states and other countries also began opposing new projects in russia at the world bank and european bank for reconstruction and development ( ebrd ) , to put additional pressure on the russian government in response to russia's actions in ukraine .

canada , france , germany , italy , japan , the united kingdom , and the united states suspended the g - 8 and instead resumed convening as the g - 7 , of which russia is not a member , for the first time since the late 1990s .

russian officials still attend g - 20 meetings , which include a broader group of advanced and emerging - market economies .

u.s. and eu sanctions on russian individuals , firms , and sectors in 2014 came at a time when russia's economy was still struggling to recover from the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 .

in the early 2000s , russia's economy benefited from rising oil prices .

its economy was hit hard by the global financial crisis and ensuing global economic downturn , as demand for its exports fell , particularly in europe .

russia's economy contracted sharply , by 7.8% , in 2009 .

the economy rebounded the following year , growing by 4.5% , before slowing between 2010 and 2013 .

economists argue that the financial crisis and weak economic performance highlighted fundamental problems in russia's economy , including the economy's dependence on the production and export of oil and gas , as well as the need for reform in a number of areas , including governance ( including the need to address corruption ) , regulation , privatization , competition , the banking sector , and utility pricing .

there is debate about the economic impact of the ukraine - related sanctions for the united states .

when the sanctions were announced , u.s. business groups , including the chamber of commerce and the national association of manufacturers , raised concerns that u.s. sanctions on russia could disrupt the operations of u.s. firms in russia , thereby harming american manufacturers , jeopardizing american jobs , and ceding business opportunities to firms from other countries .

other analysts argued that the targeted sanctions were designed to minimize the impact on the u.s. economy while meeting foreign policy obligations to europe and ukraine and advancing u.s. national security interests .

they note that russia is a relatively minor trading and investment partner for the united states as a whole .

additionally , sanctions do not prohibit all economic transactions between the united states and russia .

they target a small portion of russian individuals and entities and , in some cases , only restrict specific types of economic transactions .

the united states , in coordination with the eu , implemented targeted sanctions on key russian individuals , entities , and sectors in response to russia's actions in ukraine .

u.s. sanctions include , for example , targeting officials in putin's inner circle and placing restrictions on new debt to specific financial institutions .

as congress evaluates u.s. foreign policy toward russia and the role that sanctions may or may not play in advancing u.s. national security interests , it may consider the impact of current economic sanctions on russia's economy and foreign policy , in addition to their impact on u.s. foreign policy and economic interests .

russia's economy faced a number of challenges in 2014 and 2015 , including capital flight , depreciation of the ruble , rising inflation , weaker growth prospects , and budgetary pressures .

many experts believe that sanctions are contributing to russia's economic challenges .

however , it is difficult to assess the impact of sanctions separate from other domestic and international factors , particularly low oil prices .

the effectiveness of the sanctions in inducing a change in the behavior of the russian government remains to be seen .

although the russian government continues to face a number of economic challenges , many of which are unrelated to sanctions , economic forecasts suggest that the russian economy is stabilizing and there is some evidence that investor sentiment toward russia may be improving .

some u.s. business groups have raised concerns about the economic costs of sanctions on russia to the united states .

news reports indicate that some u.s. firms and industries have been adversely affected .

longer - term , the impact of the sanctions , if they are kept in place , may depend on a number of factors , such as the ability of u.s. firms to find alternative markets , potential spillover effects from a slowdown in russia , and whether russia implements additional retaliatory measures against the united states .

