ebola virus disease ( evd ) , also known as ebola hemorrhagic fever , is a deadly communicable disease typically found only in parts of africa .

once contracted by a human , the virus can be transmitted to others through direct contact with the bodily fluids of an infected individual .

an individual who has contracted ebola virus is not thought to be contagious before symptoms of evd ( such as fever , diarrhea , or vomiting ) are observed .

several west african countries are currently grappling with an unprecedented outbreak of evd .

here in the united states , where ebola is not endemic , two undiagnosed evd cases have been imported from the west african outbreak .

in one of these cases , two nurses were infected by the virus while caring for the patient , representing the first instances of ebola transmission within the united states .

state and federal governments have significant experience dealing with communicable diseases generally , and both levels of government have taken measures to respond to the domestic evd cases and minimize the further spread of the virus .

the federal government has also taken measures to prevent further entry of persons who may have contracted ebola virus .

however , the high fatality rate of evd may raise questions regarding the sufficiency of state and federal governments' responses to protect against this particular public health threat .

further , the responses to the current ebola outbreak raise a classic civil rights issue: to what extent can an individual's liberty be curtailed to advance the common good ? .

in order to help policy makers evaluate these questions , this report provides a brief overview of the scope of state and federal authorities that have been employed , or may be employed in the future , to prevent transmission of ebola virus , as well as potential limits on these authorities under current law .

efforts to prevent further spread of ebola have focused on restricting the movement of persons who have been exposed to the virus or who are known to have contracted the virus .

actual and proposed measures to accomplish this include using quarantine or isolation orders under federal or state authority , imposing entry restrictions at the u.s. border , and limiting international air travel to the united states .

governmental responses to infectious diseases , such as the current ebola outbreak , may raise a classic civil rights issue: to what extent can an individual's liberty be curtailed to advance the common good ? .

as discussed above in the context of quarantine and isolation , the united states constitution provides for individual due process and equal protection rights , though these rights are not absolute and may shrink as the needs of the community grow .

aside from these constitutional issues , to what extent do federal nondiscrimination statutes protect individuals that may have been exposed to or diagnosed with ebola in places of public accommodation and the workplace ? .

separate from the rights of sick individuals , may employers assert their right to dismiss individuals who are unable to report for work due to illness under an "employment at will" contract ? .

do certain employers , such as hospitals , have unique obligations under the occupational safety and health act to ensure that employees treating ebola patients have a safe workplace ? .

these questions are discussed in the sections below .

discrimination against individuals with an infectious disease may be covered by section 504 of the rehabilitation act , the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) , or the air carrier access act ( acaa ) .

the following sections discuss the status of individuals in three classes: individuals who may have been exposed to ebola virus but are not sick ; individuals who are sick with evd ; and individuals who have recovered from the disease .

section 504 of the rehabilitation act prohibits entities receiving federal funds from discriminating on the basis of disability .

the ada prohibits discrimination against individuals with disabilities in employment , state and local programs , public accommodations , and other areas .

both acts use the same definition of an individual with a disability .

an individual with a disability is "[any] person who ( i ) has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life's activities , ( ii ) has a record of such an impairment , or ( iii ) is regarded as having such an impairment. .

it appears that the rehabilitation act and the ada would most likely afford protection to two classes of individuals: ones sick from ebola virus and those who have recovered from evd .

it is unclear whether the acts would protect individuals who may have been exposed to the virus but are not sick .

a symptomatic individual suffering from evd would most likely qualify as an individual with a disability because evd is limiting the major life activity of normal bodily functions .

an individual who has recovered from ebola would appear to qualify as an individual with a disability because he or she would be an individual with a history of evd .

it is not clear whether an individual who may have been exposed to ebola virus , but is asymptomatic , would be covered by section 504 or the ada .

it could be argued that such an individual qualifies because he or she is perceived as having ebola .

on the other hand it could be argued that he or she does not qualify because he or she is not perceived as having ebola but is perceived to be a vector for the virus .

because there are no reported court decisions on whether an individual who is contagious but has no impairment qualifies as an individual with a disability , it is not possible to know whether an individual who is regarded as being contagious , but is not , would qualify as an "individual with a disability" or as an individual "regarded as" having a disability .

neither the rehabilitation act nor the ada specifically discusses contagious diseases .

the supreme court dealt with the issue in the context of section 504 in school board of nassau county v. arline .

the court considered the case of an elementary school teacher with recurrent tuberculosis who was terminated from her employment .

she claimed she was dismissed because of a disability in violation of section 504 .

the school district claimed she was terminated not because of her disability , but because she was contagious and posed a risk to others .

the court first held that a contagious disease can qualify as a disability under the rehabilitation act , but noted that in most cases , a court must undertake an individualized inquiry into whether the plaintiff was otherwise qualified for her job to protect individuals with disabilities from "deprivation based on prejudice , stereotypes , or unfounded fear , while giving appropriate weight to such legitimate concerns … as avoiding exposing others to significant health and safety risks. .

the court adopted the test proposed by the american medical association to determine whether an employee presents a significant risk to others .

the court held that the factors which must be considered include findings of facts , based on reasonable medical judgments given the state of medical knowledge about ( a ) the nature of the risk ( how the disease is transmitted ) , ( b ) the duration of the risk ( how long is the carrier infectious ) , ( c ) the severity of the risk ( what is the potential harm to third parties ) and ( d ) the probabilities the disease will be transmitted and will cause varying degrees of harm .

the court emphasized that courts "normally should defer to the reasonable medical judgments of public health officials. .

the ada does not specifically address individuals with contagious diseases , but it addresses individuals with disabilities who pose a "direct threat" to others .

under title i , an employer may take otherwise prohibited actions against an individual with a disability if the individual poses a "direct threat. .

the term direct threat means "a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by reasonable accommodation. .

equal employment opportunity commission regulations determine "direct threat" considering the following factors , based on reasonable medical judgment that relies on the most current medical knowledge and / or the best available objective evidence: the duration of the risk ; the nature and severity of the potential harm ; the likelihood that the potential harm will occur ; and the imminence of the potential harm .

under title iii , which prohibits discrimination in public accommodations and services operated by private entities , a business may deny accommodations or services to an individual with a disability who presents a "direct threat to the health or safety of others. .

direct threat is defined here to mean "a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by a modification of policies , practices , or procedures or by the provision of auxiliary aids or services. .

although title ii , governing state and local programs , contains no "direct threat" language , the department of justice has interpreted language in title ii to provide the same "direct threat" allowances and requirements as title iii .

an individual sick with evd who is symptomatic and contagious would probably be found to represent a direct threat to others in close proximity .

therefore , under the ada , an employer , a business , or a state or local program could take steps to protect others from the contagious individual .

however , individuals who are not contagious would probably not represent a direct threat to others .

accordingly , it appears that employers could not act adversely against such individuals , and businesses and state and local programs would need to give such individuals full access under the ada .

the air carrier access act ( acaa ) prohibits discrimination by air carriers against "otherwise qualified individual[s]" on the basis of disability .

enacted in 1986 , prior to the ada , the law currently applies to foreign carriers , with respect to flights that begin or end at a u.s. airport , and u.s. carriers , with some exceptions .

generally , the law prohibits the exclusion of qualified individuals with a disability from air transportation or related services , except when specifically permitted under the regulations .

the regulations specifically address when it is permissible to exclude a passenger with a communicable disease .

under the regulations , carriers are prohibited from taking the following actions on the basis that a passenger has a communicable disease , unless the passenger's condition poses a direct threat: refusing to provide transportation ; delaying the passenger's transportation , for example , by requiring the passenger to take a later flight ; imposing any condition , restriction , or requirement not imposed on other passengers ; or requiring the passenger to provide a medical certificate .

the passenger's condition is a direct threat if it poses a "significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by a modification of policies , practices , or procedures , or by the provision of auxiliary aids or services. .

in determining whether a direct threat exists , the carrier is required to make an individualized assessment , "based on reasonable judgment that relies on current medical knowledge or on the best available objective evidence. .

in making this individualized assessment , the carrier may rely on "directives issued by public health authorities," including the cdc .

if a carrier determines that a passenger poses a direct threat , the carrier must select the "least restrictive response from the point of view of the passenger , consistent with protecting the health and safety of others. .

carriers that violate the acaa may be subject to civil penalty , levied by the department of transportation after notice and an opportunity for a hearing .

as discussed above , the use of various infection control measures , such as quarantine and isolation , is a critical component of government efforts to minimize the possible spread of ebola .

in 2006 , in response to the threat of pandemic influenza , the homeland security council prepared an implementation plan that described more than 300 critical actions , including quarantine and isolation , that could be used to respond to a potential outbreak of contagious disease .

while quarantine and isolation could prove to be effective for minimizing ebola exposure , they may also raise various employment concerns , particularly for those workers who fear losing their jobs or wages if they are forced to comply with a quarantine or isolation order .

tort law may provide some relief for workers who are terminated while they are quarantined or isolated .

infected workers may also be protected under the family and medical leave act if it can be established that they have a serious health condition .

finally , some jurisdictions have established employment protections for workers if a quarantine or isolation is ordered .

the following sections review these topics in greater detail .

the employment - at - will doctrine governs the employment relationship between an employer and employee for most workers in the private sector .

an employee who does not work pursuant to an employment contract , including a collective bargaining agreement that may permit termination only for cause or identify a procedure for dismissals , may be terminated for any reason at any time .

although the employment - at - will doctrine provides the default rule for most employees , it has been eroded to some degree by the recognition of certain wrongful discharge claims brought against employers .

in general , these wrongful discharge claims assert tort theories against the employer .

a cause of action for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy is one such claim .

if isolation or quarantine were used to attempt to limit the spread of ebola and an employee were terminated because of absence from the workplace , a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy might arise .

a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy is grounded in the belief that the law should not allow an employee to be dismissed for engaging in an activity that is beneficial to the public welfare .

in general , the claims encompass four categories of conduct: refusing to commit unlawful acts ( eg , refusing to commit perjury when the government is investigating the employer for wrongdoing ) ; exercising a statutory right ( eg , filing a claim for workers' compensation , reporting unfair labor practices ) ; fulfilling a public obligation ( eg , serving on jury duty ) ; and whistleblowing .

although most states appear to recognize a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy , it is possible that a state may allow a claim only under certain circumstances .

for example , texas recognizes such a claim only if an employee is terminated for refusing to perform an illegal act or inquiring into the legality of an instruction from the employer .

while the four categories of conduct identified above represent the classic fact patterns for a claim of wrongful discharge in violation of public policy , other actions could be deemed beneficial to the public welfare and result in a wrongful discharge claim if an employee is terminated for engaging in such actions .

some courts have broadly defined what constitutes "public policy. .

for example , in palmateer v. international harvester co. , the illinois supreme court indicated that [t]here is no precise definition of the term .

in general , it can be said that public policy concerns what is right and just and what affects the citizens of the state collectively .

it is to be found in the state's constitution and statutes and , when they are silent , in its judicial decisions .

similarly , in boyle v. vista eyewear , inc. , the missouri court of appeals stated that public policy "is that principle of law which holds that no one can lawfully do that which tends to be injurious to the public or against the public good. .

these broad definitions suggest that an employee's isolation or quarantine during a pandemic in some states could possibly provide a public policy exception to the at - will rule of employment .

it would seem possible for a court to conclude that the isolation or quarantine of individuals during a pandemic serves the public good and that the termination of individuals who are isolated or quarantined violates public policy .

some observers insist , however , that no court has ever held that it violates public policy to discharge an individual because he or she missed work because of a quarantine .

if the government were to mandate individuals to isolate or quarantine themselves either because they were infected or because of the risk of infection , it would seem possible that such an action might constitute a strong argument for the public policy exception to the at - will rule of employment .

in such case , the government would appear to be identifying a significant policy that would benefit the public good .

even if the government merely recommended isolation or quarantine rather than mandated such actions , an argument for a public policy exception to the at - will rule would still seem possible .

the family and medical leave act ( fmla ) guarantees an eligible employee 12 workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period for one or more of the following reasons: the birth of a son or daughter of the employee and to care for such son or daughter ; the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for adoption or foster care ; to care for a spouse or a son , daughter , or parent of the employee , if such spouse , son , daughter , or parent has a serious health condition ; a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of the position of such employee ; and any qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that the spouse or a son , daughter , or parent of the employee is on covered active duty in the armed forces or has been notified of an impending call or order to covered active duty in the armed forces .

the fmla applies to any employer in the private sector that engages in commerce , or in any industry or activity affecting commerce , and that has at least 50 employees who are employed for each working day during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the current or preceding calendar year .

to be eligible for family and medical leave benefits , an individual must have been employed for at least 12 months by the employer from whom leave is requested , and must have been employed for at least 1,250 hours of service with such employer during the previous 12-month period .

the fmla also covers public agencies , including federal , state , and local governments .

unlike employers in the private sector , public employers do not have to employ at least 50 employees to be subject to the fmla .

employees of public agencies , however , must have worked , generally for a specified number of weeks , to be eligible for benefits .

it seems possible that the fmla might provide infected employees and employees who care for certain infected relatives with the opportunity to be absent from the workplace .

the fmla defines a serious health condition to mean "an illness , injury , impairment , or physical or mental condition" that involves either "inpatient care in a hospital , hospice , or residential medical care facility ; or ... continuing treatment by a health care provider. .

an employee who been exposed to ebola may be found to have a serious health condition .

if the fmla's eligibility requirements were met , such an employee would likely be granted leave under the statute .

in addition , because the fmla grants leave to an employee to care for a spouse , child , or parent with a serious health condition , an employee could be granted leave to care for a relative affected by ebola if the employee met the statute's eligibility requirements .

while on leave , the employee with the serious health condition or the employee caring for a spouse , child , or parent with a serious health condition could comply with a quarantine or isolation order without the fear of termination for at least 12 workweeks .

an employee who was not exposed or who was not responsible for the care of an exposed spouse , child , or parent would not be protected by the fmla .

if such an employee sought isolation or quarantine to avoid exposure and was absent from the workplace , the fmla would not prohibit the employer from terminating the employee .

at least seven states , recognizing the lack of statutory protection for employees in a situation where isolation or quarantine may be necessary , have enacted legislation that explicitly prohibits the termination of an employee who is subject to isolation or quarantine .

in delaware , iowa , kansas , maryland , minnesota , new mexico , and south carolina , an employer is prohibited from terminating an employee who is under an order of isolation or quarantine , or has been directed to enter isolation or quarantine .

under minnesota law , an employee who has been terminated or otherwise penalized for being in isolation or quarantine may bring a civil action for reinstatement or for the recovery of lost wages or benefits .

two additional states have enacted legislation that addresses the treatment of employees who are subject to quarantine or isolation .

under new jersey law , an affected employee must be reinstated following the quarantine or isolation .

under maine law , an employer is required to grant leave to an employee who is subject to quarantine or isolation .

the leave granted by the employer may be paid or unpaid .

although federal law does not protect from termination employees who may be absent from the workplace because of isolation or quarantine , there are examples of employee protections that are arguably analogous .

the fmla , for example , does grant leave to an eligible employee who has a serious health condition or who provides care to a spouse , child , or parent with a serious health condition .

moreover , an expansion of the fmla to allow paid leave because of a serious health condition or to care for a spouse , child , or parent with such a condition has been proposed .

the availability of paid leave would likely minimize concerns about lost wages if an ebola pandemic were to occur .

the uniformed services employment and reemployment rights act ( userra ) provides another example of employee protection .

userra requires the reemployment of an employee who has been absent from a position of employment because of service in the uniformed services .

userra and the fmla illustrate congress's awareness of events that may necessitate an employee's absence from the workplace .

employers whose employees could face workplace exposure to ebola virus may be obligated to comply with applicable occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) requirements .

osha , through enforcement of the occupational safety and health act ( osh act ) , is generally responsible for protecting workplace safety .

to this end , the act authorizes osha to promulgate workplace safety standards .

employers that fall within the scope of the osh act's — and , thus , osha's — jurisdiction must comply with these standards .

it appears as though the three primary osha - created standards that could apply to employee exposure to ebola in the workplace are ( 1 ) the bloodborne pathogens standard , ( 2 ) the personal protective equipment standard , and ( 3 ) the respiratory protection standard .

when no osha standard applies to a workplace hazard , employers must comply with the osh act's catchall provision , known as the "general duty clause. .

the general duty clause generally requires employers to provide workplaces that are free of recognized hazards .

thus , employers must comply with osha standards for minimizing a workplace hazard that could expose employees to ebola virus .

however , when such a hazard has no applicable osha standard , the general duty clause seemingly requires employers to minimize the chance that the hazard will cause employees to contract ebola virus .

noncompliance with osha - created standards and the general duty clause can generally lead to penalties against employers .

however , the osh act does not provide monetary relief to employees who are harmed by employer violations of osha standards or the general duty clause .

the bloodborne pathogens standard appears aimed at preventing disease - causing microorganisms that are present in the blood — which , according to osha , includes ebola virus — from spreading to employees .

the standard generally applies to employers with employees who could reasonably anticipate coming into contact with "blood or other infectious materials" during the performance of their workplace duties ( eg , hospitals ) .

among other things , employers that are subject to the bloodborne pathogens standard must have written plans for minimizing employee exposure to blood or other infectious materials , and such plans must be made accessible to employees .

employers must review and update these plans at least once per year .

the bloodborne pathogens standard also contains "universal precautions," which seemingly require covered employers to manage employee behavior to help minimize the odds of employees coming into contact with infectious diseases .

for example , these universal precautions include having employees wash their hands with soap and water in certain circumstances ; properly dispose of used needles and other sharp medical equipment that has come into contact with human blood ; and refrain from eating , drinking , smoking , applying cosmetics , or handling contact lenses in areas where they can reasonably expect to come into contact with human blood .

the bloodborne pathogens standard further requires that employers provide "appropriate" protective equipment to employees that can be reasonably expected to come into contact with blood or other infectious materials .

appropriate protective equipment is equipment that does not permit blood or other infectious materials to reach an employee's person or clothing .

employers must provide such equipment at no cost to employees .

osha's personal protective equipment standard applies whenever personal protective equipment ( ppe ) is needed because of "hazards of … environment … capable of causing injury or impairment [to employees] in the function of any part of the body through absorption , inhalation , or physical contact. .

this seemingly would encompass potential exposure to ebola in the workplace as contact with bodily fluids that are infected with ebola virus could cause employees to contract the virus .

the protective equipment standard requires employers to assess their workplaces to determine whether hazards necessitating ppe are , or are likely to be , present .

employers are then required to have affected employees use ppe that will protect against hazards identified during the assessment .

if ppe is required , the employer must generally provide such equipment at no cost to its employees .

however , there are exceptions wherein employees can be required to purchase their own protective equipment .

osha has stated that when employees could be exposed to bioaerosols that contain ebola virus ( for example , when cleaning an infected surface with pressurized water could cause infected droplets to become airborne ) , employers must comply with osha's respiratory protection standard .

the respiratory protection standard requires , among other things , that employers provide affected employees with respirators when appropriate ; that covered employers develop and implement a written respiratory protection program containing worksite - specific procedures and requirements for employee respirator use ; and the selection , fitting , usage , and maintenance of appropriate respirators .

under the general duty clause , employers must provide employees with "employment and a place of employment which are free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm. .

when no osha - created standard applies to a recognized workplace hazard but the hazard can cause employees to contract ebola , the general duty clause may require employees to take precautions to reduce the likelihood that the hazard will cause employees to become infected with ebola .

