methane is the world's simplest hydrocarbon , with a chemical formula ch 4 ( one atom of carbon and four atoms of hydrogen ) .

it is gaseous under normal atmospheric conditions and is commonly produced through the decomposition of organic materials in the absence of oxygen .

it is released into the atmosphere by natural sources such as wetlands , oceans , sediments , termites , volcanoes , and wildfires , as well as human activities such as oil and natural gas systems , coal mines , landfills , wastewater treatment facilities , and the raising of livestock .

methane , when captured , can be used as either a fuel or a chemical feedstock .

when used as a fuel — for example , methane is the primary component of natural gas — it has many advantages over other hydrocarbons ( eg , coal and oil ) .

methane is more versatile: it can heat homes , fuel stoves , run vehicles , fire power plants , and , when liquefied , be exported to support the energy needs of u.s. allies and trading partners .

methane is cleaner - burning: it emits , on average , about half as much carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) as coal and one - quarter less than oil when consumed in a typical electric utility plant .

further , its combustion emits no mercury ( a persistent , bioaccumulative neurotoxin ) , virtually no particulate matter or sulfur dioxide , and less nitrogen oxides , per unit of energy , than either coal or oil .

recent expansion in natural gas production , primarily as a result of improved technologies ( eg , hydraulic fracturing and directional drilling ) used on unconventional resources ( eg , shale , tight sands , and coalbed methane ) , has made methane an increasingly significant component in the energy supply and security of the united states .

when used as a chemical feedstock , methane is a manufacturing component for a variety of household and industrial products including plastic , fertilizer , antifreeze , and fabrics .

abundant and economical supplies of methane may serve arguably to reinvigorate the u.s. petrochemical sector , bringing manufacturing industries back on shore and aiding in the creation of domestic jobs and economic development .

for these reasons , many in both the public and private sectors have advocated for the increased production and use of methane ( via natural gas extraction or other capture technologies ) and have hailed it as a potential "cost - effective bridge" to a less polluting and lower greenhouse - gas - intensive economy .

this position has been supported by many members of congress as well as the obama administration .

methane , however , when released or allowed to escape into the atmosphere ( commonly referred to as "vented" and "fugitive" emissions , respectively ) , has adverse impacts on human health , safety , and the environment .

the u.s. occupational safety and health administration lists methane as both an asphyxiant and an explosive , as increased concentrations in local settings can jeopardize worker safety .

further , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) classifies methane as both a precursor to ground - level ozone formation ( commonly referred to as "smog" ) and a potent greenhouse gas ( ghg ) , albeit with a shorter atmospheric life than co 2 .

methane's effect on climate change is up to 34 times greater than that of co 2 when averaged over a 100-year time period and even greater when considered over the first 20 years after it is emitted .

an increase in emissions may counteract some of the environmental benefits that the u.s. economy has to gain by switching from coal or oil to natural gas and other sources of methane .

for these reasons , some stakeholders , including some members of congress , have called for increased controls on methane emissions in several sectors of the economy , including oil and natural gas production and transportation , coal mining , industrial processes , and agriculture .

in many cases , efforts to control air pollution can compete against the economic considerations of the affected industries .

however , in methane's case , its dual nature as both a commodity and a pollutant provides a unique set of incentives .

under certain conditions , the value of fugitive methane and other byproducts that can be recovered and sold at market may be able to offset the cost of their capture .

further , the value of these recovered products during oil and gas extraction could contribute to increased royalty payments to state and federal governments .

the difficulty , however , is that methane emissions are not always easy to capture .

methane , unlike some other pollutants ( eg , sulfur dioxide or co 2 ) , is not commonly emitted in a concentrated stream from industrial processes .

rather , it is released into the atmosphere through dispersion , leaks , vents , accidents , and ruptures .

in this way , methane emissions are most similar to those of other volatile organic compounds ( vocs ) , both in manner and control .

efforts to capture or abate these emissions are generally more difficult and costly than for other pollutants .

whether recovery of methane is profitable for producers may depend upon a number of factors , including the nature and extent of the release , the technology available for capture , and the market price for the recovered products .

in this way , the cost - benefit consideration of methane capture becomes very similar to that of energy efficiency efforts , wherein high up - front investments and other market barriers , if confronted by producers , may have the potential to be offset over time .

this report examines the many facets of methane: from commodity to coproduct to byproduct to waste .

it begins with a survey of past and present attempts by congress and the executive branch to address methane emissions for the purposes of energy policy and pollution control .

it then provides a general overview of methane before focusing on specific sectors of the economy in order to ( 1 ) characterize different sources of methane and the data available on their emissions ; ( 2 ) discuss current practices , opportunities , and challenges for emission controls ; and ( 3 ) outline recent initiatives proposed by congress and the administration .

through the years , the federal government has sought policies to control methane emissions for a variety of economic , environmental , and public health and safety reasons .

some justifications for federal involvement have included the following: 1 .

promoting domestic energy production and energy security , 2 .

protecting the property rights of mineral owners ( including federal resources and associated royalties to the american taxpayer ) , 3 .

assuring the operational safety of employees who work with or near significant emission sources , and 4 .

safeguarding the general population from air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

initially , policies to capture methane emissions were motivated in part by the organization of arab petroleum exporting countries oil embargo of 1973 and the subsequent calls for u.s. energy independence .

during this time , the united states saw natural gas and other sources of methane as a potential alternative to imported crude oil .

efforts to incentivize the capture of methane and use it as an alternative fuel were proposed by both congress and the administration across the full range of commercial sectors .

they included a variety of funding programs for research and technology development , voluntary guidelines and tax incentives for industry , and / or rules for mineral rights lessees on federal lands .

as an understanding of methane's role in ozone formation and climate change grew during the 1990s , some state and federal authorities turned their attention to reducing methane emissions as a form of pollution control .

once again , the key policy tools used for pollution abatement took the form of voluntary guidelines and tax incentives .

however , in a few instances , where reductions in other pollutants could serve the co - benefit of aiding in the reduction of methane , regulatory emission standards were proposed and / or promulgated .

in the 2000s , as congress considered comprehensive market - based strategies to reduce ghg emissions across the entire u.s. economy , more innovative proposals for methane reduction became prevalent .

methane capture was commonly suggested as an "offset" credit for higher ghg - emitting industries , as the net costs of reducing methane emissions , in some instances , could be more favorable than directly controlling for co 2 emissions .

recent events in the united states ( eg , the rise in domestic oil and natural gas production , its encroachment on new or more populated areas , and the revitalization of the petrochemical manufacturing sector ) have led some stakeholders to suggest the need for more enforceable standards .

at the state level , colorado , wyoming , ohio , california , and pennsylvania have recently promulgated or proposed rules to control for methane emissions from their oil and gas sectors .

further , many states have standards to control for methane emissions from coal mining and landfill operations .

some have regulations that focus on methane's potential as an energy source , and a few classify methane as a renewable energy source .

under the clean air act ( caa ) , epa has the authority to regulate methane emissions as both an ozone precursor and a ghg .

currently , epa has no standards in place to regulate methane as an ozone precursor , and it has shown a disinclination for doing so in the past .

conversely , epa has regulated methane as a ghg since 1996 under its standards for municipal landfills .

the agency's authority to regulate methane as a ghg was upheld by the supreme court's 2007 decision in massachusetts v. epa , which determined that ghgs fall under the definition of "air pollutant" as used in the caa .

following this decision , epa determined that six ghgs , including methane , endangered public health and welfare and issued several rules focused primarily on co 2 .

recently , under the directive of the obama administration's 2014 "strategy to reduce methane emissions" ( discussed in further detail in the remainder of this report ) , epa has proposed and promulgated a suite of voluntary and regulatory programs to address methane emissions across a range of industrial sectors .

additionally , the departments of agriculture , energy , the interior , labor , and transportation have some authorities to monitor , give guidance for , and make rules to control for methane emissions ( eg , see the bureau of land management's [blm's] 1980 notice on venting and flaring for oil and gas leases on federal lands and its 2016 revision ) .

as with epa , some of these agencies have also proposed initiatives under the directive of the administration's strategy .

some stakeholders , including many in the affected sectors ( i.e. , agriculture , fossil energy , and waste management ) , have raised concerns over federal proposals requiring more stringent controls .

they argue that further regulation of methane emissions would not provide cost - effective health and environmental benefits .

some industries contend that they are already doing everything feasible to capture and reuse methane emissions ( for requisite safety and economic reasons ) and that state and local authorities — who share a closer understanding of the industries' specific circumstances — are best equipped to oversee and enforce emission reduction efforts within their jurisdictions .

efforts by the federal government to incentivize the reduction , capture , and reuse of methane — including the obama administration's strategy — are summarized in the following two sections: " legislative initiatives " and " administrative initiatives . .

further , table a - 1 of appendix a provides a detailed list of recent congressional proposals both in support of and in opposition to increased methane emission controls .

finally , appendix b provides a selected chronology of recent executive branch initiatives .

methane is both a precursor to ground - level ozone formation and a potent ghg .

as a precursor to ground - level ozone formation , methane reacts with nitrogen oxides in the presence of sunlight to form what is commonly referred to as smog .

methane , however , is generally less reactive than other hydrocarbons .

for this reason — and at this time — epa has excluded it from the definition of regulated hydrocarbons called volatile organic compounds ( vocs ) .

as a ghg , methane emitted into the atmosphere absorbs terrestrial infrared radiation , which contributes to increased global warming and continuing climate change .

according to the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) fifth assessment report 2013 ( ar5 ) , in 2011 , methane concentrations in the atmosphere exceeded preindustrial levels by 150% .

further , they contributed about 16% to global warming due to anthropogenic ghg sources , making methane the second - leading climate forcer after co 2 globally .

while the perturbation lifetime for methane is only 12 years ( compared to co 2 's , which is considerably longer and does not undergo a simple decline over a single predictable timescale ) , its immediate impacts are significantly greater ( see text box ) .

for this reason , methane is commonly characterized as a "short - lived climate forcer," along with black carbon and various hydrofluorocarbons ( hfcs ) .

for a variety of economic , environmental , and public health and safety reasons , various stakeholders have sought policies to reduce , capture , and reuse methane emissions for the past several decades .

but emissions of methane have proven difficult to measure and hard to control .

their naturally occurring presence in the environment , their wide and varied sources of emissions , and the fugitive nature of their release have contributed to these difficulties .

nevertheless , methane is a valuable resource .

its dual nature as both pollutant and commodity has offered a unique opportunity for control , and many strategies have attempted to capitalize on the economics of recovery .

whether a given control strategy is effective and cost - efficient for a given industry depends upon a number of factors , including ( 1 ) the nature and extent of the emissions , ( 2 ) the technology available for capture , and ( 3 ) the market price for the recovered products .

 ( for example , with declining natural gas prices , the economics of capture technology are less favorable. ) .

some significant efforts have been made by industry and some state regulators to address methane emissions in their particular localities .

for its part , the federal government has contributed funding for research and technology development , voluntary guidelines and tax incentives for industry , rules for mineral rights lessees on federal lands , and , on occasion , air pollution standards .

while the most current data on domestic methane emissions show a 5% decrease over the past two decades , the source categories that have contributed to these reductions are few ( i.e. , landfills , coal mines , and natural gas systems ) .

while these industries have made noteworthy strides in emission reductions through a combination of best management practices and the co - benefits provided by other air pollution standards , they may represent only the "low - hanging fruit. .

other sources of methane emissions have confronted greater challenges .

they may lack adequately demonstrated control technologies or cost - effective opportunities .

they may not co - emit methane with other air pollutants and thus may lack the "co - benefits" accrued through other air quality standards .

some of these sources have seen recent or sustained increases in emissions ( eg , petroleum systems and manure management , respectively ) .

other sources ( eg , enteric fermentation and wastewater treatment ) have gone unaddressed for decades , as no economically viable technology solution has been offered .

the obama administration's recent strategy — as well as a variety of recent proposals in congress — attests to the continued interest in better emission assessments and appropriate policy responses .

in considering strategies moving forward , it may be useful to ask the following questions: 1 .

is the current set of methodologies used for measurement adequate to rationalize and / or prioritize the appropriate controls ? .

2 .

is the projected rise in domestic fossil fuel production and petrochemical manufacturing significant enough to rationalize and / or prioritize additional controls ? .

3 .

is the recent rate of increase in observed emissions expected to continue ; or , if not , are the long - run decreases sufficient enough to discharge the public health , safety , and environmental concerns ? .

4 .

to what extent might fluctuations in the market price of crude oil and natural gas affect industry and regulatory efforts to mitigate and / or recover methane emissions ? .

will changes in the natural gas industry result in fewer small companies and a greater market share for large companies , which may already have control practices in place ? .

5 .

to what extent may recently promulgated and proposed rulemaking for air pollutants commonly co - emitted with methane also serve the co - benefit of reducing methane emissions ( eg , the nsps for vocs on the oil and gas production sector and the petroleum refinery sector , and the revised national ambient air quality standard for ozone ) ? .

6 .

to what extent may the recently promulgated and proposed rulemakings for methane emissions in the oil and natural gas sector and the landfill sector serve to ( 1 ) curb emissions from both new and existing sources in each sector and ( 2 ) curb the aggregate of all domestic emissions ? .

7 .

if further reductions are under consideration for a given source category , should the response come from the federal government , state governments , the industries , or the market ? .

8 .

if further reductions are under consideration for a given source category , which policy tool ( s ) would be most appropriate: ( 1 ) increased funding for technology research , ( 2 ) expanded public - private demonstration projects with industry , ( 3 ) regionally targeted or state - sponsored guidance or rulemaking , ( 4 ) methane - specific state or federal command - and - control air pollution standards , or ( 5 ) economy - wide market - based mechanisms for either ozone or ghg controls ? .

9 .

how should the burden of ghg reductions be distributed among the various ghg emissions sources ? .

10 .

how should methane's other environmental benefits ( in comparison to oil and coal combustion ) be weighed in the context of its ghg control ? .

appendix a .

recent legislative proposals appendix b .

recent executive branch initiative .

