the distribution of income in the united states features heavily in congressional discussions about the middle class , program funding and effectiveness , new and existing target groups , government tax revenue , and social mobility , among other topics .

recently , the level and distribution of u.s. income have also been raised in the context of broader macroeconomic issues , such as economic growth .

recent congressional activity — committee hearings and reports , communication with major media outlets , and policy research discussions about income — reveals a heightened interest among some members in the distribution of u.s. income .

this report responds to that interest by providing a guide to various measures , indicators , and graphics commonly used to describe the u.s. income distribution .

this report provides descriptive analysis of the u.s. income distribution to illustrate various concepts .

this analysis reveals broad trends , but does not provide an exhaustive study of the distribution of income in the united states .

importantly , the report does not explore potential drivers and impacts of changes to the shape and span of the distribution .

this report is organized as follows: first , it examines the complexities of income measurement and important definitional and data considerations to bear in mind when using and interpreting income statistics .

next , it describes two popular data sources used to study the u.s. income distribution , followed by sections on statistics commonly used to provide point - in - time analysis and to compare u.s. income across groups , time , and location .

the report concludes with an explanation of the gini index .

an appendix presents information on the set of summary indicators of income dispersion reported annually by the u.s. census bureau .

on the surface , measuring income is a simple concept .

in practice , however , empirical analysis of the income distribution involves several choices about how income is defined and the level at which income data are examined .

income can be constructed narrowly ( eg , earnings only ) or broadly ( eg , as the sum of earnings , capital gains , government transfers , and other sources ) .

it can be presented in pre - tax status or reflect the taxes paid and tax credits received .

income can be measured at the individual level or represent pooled resources among households , families , or tax units .

these choices about how to define and organize income are consequential , because the same data can present different pictures of the income distribution depending on how income is constructed .

among commonly used income definitions , movement from one income measure to another is unlikely to shift household rankings dramatically — that is , the poor are not likely to be characterized as rich , or vice versa — but poor households might not look quite as poor when the value of government transfers are included , and the level and movement in incomes at the top of the distribution will depend importantly on whether and how capital gains and personal income taxes are included .

the level of income analysis — that is , whether income is measured at the individual , household , or family level — will also impact indicators used to characterize the income distribution .

for example , average individual income will lie below average household income , simply because households can have multiple earners .

for these reasons , disagreement over the interpretation of income levels and trends frequently centers on how income is defined .

the potential for meaningful income distribution analysis rests on the quality and coverage of the underlying data .

government sources often offer the best option , given the scale of effort , cost , and sensitive nature of collecting income information .

census bureau household survey data and irs tax return administrative data are two main sources of annual data used to characterize and study the u.s. income distribution .

both agencies publish official statistics on an annual basis and offer some public access — with restrictions — to the individual records .

census and irs data have relative strengths and important individual limitations that affect their potential to fully characterize the u.s. income distribution .

analyses in subsequent sections of this report employ u.s. census bureau statistics on household money income , collected through the cps - asec and published annually in the census bureau report income and poverty in the united states .

the exception is appendix figure a - 1 , which shows data compiled by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) .

the census definition of money income describes regular , pre - tax cash income from market and nonmarket sources .

it excludes capital gains and in - kind forms of income ( eg , noncash government benefits , goods produced and consumed at home or farm , employer contributions ) .

income is observed and described at the household level .

data for 2013 are used to illustrate point - in - time measures .

when indicators are considered over time , the report uses the time period 1993-2013 .

the base year for time series comparisons is set to 1993 because significant methodological changes affect the comparability of census income measures before and after 1993 .

all data are reported in 2013 dollars .

income levels from 1993 to 2012 are adjusted ( by census ) using the consumer price index research series using current methods ( cpi - u - rs ) ,which applies various methodological improvement s to the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) .

even in their simplest forms , descriptive statistics can provide insight to the income of the "typical" household and characterize the full spread of incomes , offering a meaningful starting point to policy discussions about household income .

all of the indicators presented so far can be used to examine how income varies across income groups , time , or location .

this type of analysis can inform discussions around changing program participation patterns , differential access to resources across groups and locations , trends in the absolute and relative experience of u.s. households , and efforts to foster social mobility .

the gini index is a popular summary measure of income dispersion that describes the relationship between the cumulative distribution of income and the cumulative distribution of the population , a relationship depicted by the lorenz curve .

it is used to assess changes in income dispersion for a given population over time and make comparisons across groups , especially international comparisons .

the lorenz curve ( figure 13 ) plots the cumulative percentage of the population in ascending order of income ( i.e. , from poor to rich ) on the horizontal axis against the cumulative percentage of total income on the vertical axis .

points along the lorenz curve indicate the portion of total income held by a particular segment of the population .

the straight grey line in figure 13 shows what the lorenz curve would look like if total income was equally distributed .

under that scenario , for example , 50% of total income would be held by the ( poorest ) 50% of the population ( point a ) , 75% of total income would be held by the ( poorest ) 75% of the population ( point b ) , and so forth .

this line is alternately referred to as the line of equality or the equidistribution line .

the curved line illustrates the lorenz curve under a more realistic scenario , in which income is dispersed unevenly across the population .

as more income is concentrated at the top of the distribution , the curve pulls farther away from the equidistribution line .

the gini coefficient is the ratio of the area between the lorenz curve and the equidistribution line ( area a ) to the total area underneath the equidistribution line ( area a + area b ) .

as the lorenz curve approaches the equidistribution line , area a falls and the gini index value declines .

perfect equality occurs when the lorenz curve overlaps the equidistribution line and there is no area between the two curves , reducing the gini to zero .

when a single household holds all income — the perfect inequality scenario — the lorenz curve runs along the horizontal axis up until the final percentile where it jumps to 100% .

under this scenario , the area between the equidistribution line and the lorenz curve and the area underneath the equidistribution line are the same ( area a + area b ) , producing a gini index value of one .

as demonstrated above , gini index values range from zero to one , with zero indicating perfect equality ( i.e. , all individuals hold the same income ) and one indicating perfect inequality ( i.e. , all income is held by one household ) .

it provides a convenient way to compare the distribution of income over time or the income distributions for different groups , with higher values indicating greater dispersion .

however , the index has drawbacks as well .

for example , the gini index does not convey information about the shape of the income distribution ; several different shapes can yield the same gini index value .

figure 14 provides an example of two lorenz curves that both produce a gini value of 0.20 .

the gini is also not perfectly decomposable , which means it is not well - suited for comparing the dispersion of income within groups to the dispersion between groups .

figure 15 plots the gini index between 1993 and 2013 and shows an upward trend .

over this time period , the gini index for the united states ranged from 0.450 ( in 1995 ) to 0.477 ( in 2011 ) .

it was 0.476 in 2013 .

appendix a .

describing incomes at the top of the distribution survey data , like the cps - asec used by the census bureau to describe the distribution of household money income cannot be used to identify with certainty the highest and lowest earners in the population ( see "census data" ) .

irs data are superior for studying incomes at the top , but privacy rules limit the information the irs can share publicly about filers , though it does provide some information .

for example , irs is required by law to report ( in aggregate ) on the number of filers with adjusted gross incomes above $200,000 , and it produces occasional reports on the top 400 filers , considered in aggregate and with identifying information removed .

through data agreements with both agencies , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) is able to combine cps and irs data to create a more comprehensive picture of the income distribution than could be obtained from either data set used alone .

as part of their analysis , cbo describes the distribution of incomes within the top 20% of households .

figure a - 1 shows average after - tax income within the top quintile for 2011 as reported by cbo .

cbo data indicate a wide range of incomes at the top of the income spectrum .

the top 20% of households received $188,200 on average in after - tax income in 2011 .

average income among the top 1% was $1,031,900 .

while mean income among the top 1% is high relative to the overall quintile mean , it is likely to lie far below incomes of the highest earners .

for reference , irs analysis of the top 400 filers in 2009 revealed that average adjusted - gross income among them was $202 million .

appendix b .

summary indicators reported by census the u.s. census bureau publishes several summary measures of income dispersion in its annual income and poverty in the united states report: the gini index , mean log deviation of income ( mld ) , theil index , and atkinson index .

these indicators differ from the measures described in the main body of this report in that they do not convey descriptive details on the experience of the typical household , the range of incomes , or the shape of the distribution , but instead use information on the full distribution to characterize overall income dispersion ( i.e. , they are relative measures used to assess departure from a perfectly equal distribution of income ) .

while the gini is familiar to many ( and discussed in this report — see " gini index " ) , the other three measures are less so .

this appendix provides an overview of the mld , theil , and atkinson indices , explaining their basic properties and interpretation , and the value they bring to analysis of the income distribution .

generalized entropy indices: mld and theil index general entropy ( ge ) indices are a family of relative inequality measures that are based on ratios of incomes to the mean .

a sensitivity parameter — typically identified using the greek letter alpha — adjusts the weight the index gives to various portions of the distribution and distinguishes members of the broader class of ge measures .

two of the most popular ge measures are the mld and theil index , which are defined when the sensitivity parameter is set to zero and one , respectively .

they are bounded from below by zero , the value that communicates perfect income equality .

both indices rise in value as the dispersion of income increases ; higher values indicate a wider dispersion ( i.e. , more unequal distribution ) .

unlike the gini , general entropy indices are not capped at one .

the mld and theil index share several attractive features .

they are scale invariant , meaning that the value does not change when all incomes are multiplied by a constant .

this is helpful because it means , for example , that the measure is not sensitive to currency conversion .

they also respond in an intuitive way to transfers of income within a distribution .

namely , they will register more dispersion when income is transferred from households at the bottom to those at the top .

finally , they are perfectly decomposable by subgroups .

both measures permit within and between components to be identified separately ( eg , they can be used to assess the extent to which a change in income dispersion is due to changes within u.s. states and how much can be explained by changes between states ) .

the mld and theil differ , however , in their sensitivity to changes at various parts of the income distribution .

mld is sensitive to changes at the bottom of the distribution , and will be more responsive than the theil index to increased dispersion among low to middle incomes .

the theil index , on the other hand , will rise faster than the mld as incomes at the top of the distribution grow disproportionately .

as such , it is possible to compare changes in income dispersion across portions of the distribution ( lower tail , middle , or upper tail ) by observing how the mld and theil index change over time for a given income distribution .

the atkinson index the atkinson index is a welfare - based measure .

it uses a specific mathematical function to quantify the "social welfare" of a given income distribution and compares it to the value the same social welfare function would have if total income was distributed with perfect mathematical equality .

the interpretation given to the numerical value of the index is the proportion of total income a society would be willing to forfeit to achieve a perfectly equal distribution .

for example , consider a society with 100 individuals and a total ( societal ) income of $1 million .

an atkinson index of 0.10 indicates that this society would be equally content with 90% of total income ( i.e. , $900,000 ) if it were distributed equally among all 100 members ( i.e. , all members earn $9,000 ) , as they are with the actual distribution of ( actual ) total income .

the atkinson index values range from 0 to 1 , with 0 indicating that total income is distributed with perfectly mathematical equality ( i.e. , society would be willing to give up none of its total income to achieve an equal distribution , because they are already there ) .

like general entropy indices , the atkinson index is a parameterized measure .

the atkinson sensitivity parameter — denoted by the greek letter epsilon and often called the inequality aversion parameter — varies the priority applied to incomes at the lower end of the distribution in the social welfare function .

as epsilon increases , so does the weight given to lower - income households and the value of the atkinson index for a given income distribution .

like the mld and theil index , the atkinson index is scale invariant , meaning that the index value does not change when all incomes are multiplied by a constant .

it also registers more inequality , for a given inequality aversion parameter , as income is transferred from the bottom to the top of the income distribution .

unlike the mld and theil index , however , the atkinson index is not easily decomposable into within and between components .

