same - sex marriage has engendered heated debate throughout the country .

many states have passed statutes or constitutional amendments that prohibit same - sex couples from marrying , and that deny recognition of same - sex marriages that were legally formed in other states .

these same - sex marriage bans may impact gay individuals' rights and claims to state and federal benefits .

for example , they may affect tax liabilities and entitlements to social security benefits .

until recently , state same - sex marriage bans were seemingly insulated from fourteenth amendment equal protection and due process challenges to their validity because of a 1972 supreme court case , baker v. nelson .

there , the supreme court dismissed equal protection and due process challenges to a state statute that defined marriage in terms of a man and a woman , finding that the issues involved in the case did not present a substantial federal question .

after baker , state same - sex marriage bans went largely uncontested in federal courts until the supreme court relied , in part , on equal protection and due process principles to invalidate a portion of the federal defense of marriage act ( doma ) in united states v. windsor .

windsor cast doubt upon whether the supreme court finds that equal protection and due process challenges to state same - sex marriage bans still pose no substantial federal questions in accordance with baker .

additionally , though a federal statute was at issue in windsor , that case raised questions regarding the validity of state same - sex marriage bans under the constitution's equal protection and due process guarantees .

lower courts were left to grapple with these questions , resulting in a circuit split that the supreme court appears poised to resolve this term .

this report provides background on , and analysis of , significant legal issues surrounding the same - sex marriage debate .

it begins by providing background on the constitutional principles that are often invoked in attempting to invalidate same - sex marriage bans — namely , equal protection and due process guarantees .

then , it discusses key cases that led to the existing circuit split on the constitutionality of state same - sex marriage bans .

finally , this report explains the central issues in the circuit split and analyzes how the supreme court might resolve them on appeal .

until recently , state same - sex marriage bans were seemingly insulated from fourteenth amendment equal protection and due process challenges by the supreme court's decision in baker v. nelson .

in baker , a same - sex couple challenged a minnesota statute before the minnesota supreme court , arguing that the statute , which referred to marriage as between a "husband and wife," violated the constitution's due process and equal protection principles .

more specifically , the plaintiffs argued that substantive due process's protection of the fundamental right to marry applied equally to opposite - sex and same - sex couples , and that prohibiting same - sex marriages denies those in same - sex relationships equal protection of the law .

the minnesota supreme court rejected both of these arguments .

according to the court , the fundamental right to marry did not include the right of same - sex couples to marry , and minnesota's classification of persons who are authorized to marry did not offend the constitution's equal protection principles .

the court seemingly utilized rational basis review , and rested its conclusion on the fact that minnesota did not classify those authorized to marry with any "irrational or invidious discrimination. .

the plaintiffs in baker then appealed to the u.s. supreme court , which was required to grant review under a now - defunct statute mandating that the court accept appeals of state supreme court cases wherein state statutes face constitutional challenges .

the plaintiffs' appeal asked the supreme court to consider whether minnesota's refusal to recognize their marriage: ( 1 ) deprived them of due process of the law under the fourteenth amendment ; ( 2 ) violated their rights under the fourteenth amendment's equal protection clause ; or ( 3 ) deprived them of their right to privacy under the ninth and fourteenth amendments .

the supreme court summarily dismissed the appeal , that is , dismissed it without an opinion "for want of [a] substantial federal question. .

a summary dismissal is considered a decision on a case's merits , and is thus binding on lower courts .

that is , a summary dismissal rejects the specific issues challenging an appealed decision , and this dismissal creates precedent that lower federal courts must then follow when considering the same issues .

therefore , in the immediate wake of the supreme court's summary dismissal in baker , it appeared as though lower federal courts had to dismiss challenges to state same - sex marriage bans that were based on the constitution's equal protection and due process principles .

however , the supreme court has also held that summary dismissals are no longer binding precedent when doctrinal developments show that the court now views the issues summarily decided as raising "substantial federal question[s]. .

the circuit courts that have considered equal protection and due process challenges to state same - sex marriage bans are split regarding whether baker requires them to dismiss such claims .

the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit ( sixth circuit ) has held that baker precludes it from evaluating equal protection and due process challenges to state same - sex marriages .

conversely , the u.s. courts of appeals for the fourth , seventh , ninth , and tenth circuits have all held that doctrinal developments since baker — more specifically , the supreme court's decisions in romer v. evans , lawrence v. texas , and united states v. windsor — indicate that the court now views the issues summarily decided in baker as raising substantial federal questions .

accordingly , these circuit courts have held that baker does not preclude their review of equal protection and due process challenges to state same - sex marriage bans .

in the wake of windsor , a number of challenges to state same - sex marriage bans made their way into federal courts .

these courts have generally been tasked with determining whether , as an initial matter , baker precludes their review of state same - sex marriage bans , or whether doctrinal developments after that case — namely , romer , lawrence , and windsor — render it non - binding .

these courts have also considered the appropriate level of scrutiny for classifications based on sexual orientation required under the constitution's equal protection principles , and whether the fundamental right to marry under the constitution's due process principles incorporates same - sex marriage .

in resolving these questions , a circuit split developed .

the supreme court appears poised to resolve the question of the constitutionality of state same - sex marriage bans .

on the one hand , if the court were to uphold state same - sex marriage bans , then same - sex couples could not get married in states with such bans enacted .

such a decision could also invalidate the marriages of same - sex couples who were married in response to lower courts striking down their states' same - sex marriage bans .

on the other hand , if the court were to find that state same - sex marriage bans are unconstitutional , it would seemingly broaden the rights of gay individuals by permitting same - sex marriages in all states .

such a result could extend certain state and federal benefits that accompany marriage to same - sex couples that currently lack access to them .

