on february 2 , 2019 , the united states suspended its participation in the intermediate - range nuclear forces ( inf ) treaty and notified russia of its intent to withdraw from the treaty .

under article xv of the treaty , the withdrawal will take effect in six months .

russian president vladimir putin also announced , on february 2 , 2019 , that russia would suspend its participation in the treaty .

u.s. and russian officials had met in geneva on january 15 , 2019 , in one last attempt to reach an agreement .

according to press reports , russian diplomats proposed that russia display the 9m729 missile and demonstrate that it could not fly to inf range , while the united states , in exchange , could demonstrate that the mk - 41 launchers in romania could not be converted to launch inf - range cruise missiles .

the united states rejected this proposal and indicated that the only acceptable solution would be for russia to destroy the missile , its launchers , and its supporting infrastructure .

nevertheless , on january 23 , 2019 , russia displayed the canister for the 9m729 cruise missile for an audience of foreign military attachés and the press .

russia noted that , although the missile was a little longer than the similar 9m728 cruise missile , the added length did not increase the range of the missile .

it was needed to house a larger warhead and guidance system .

no officials from the united states or nato nations attended the display , arguing that it was a public relations event .

u.s. officials also argued that a static display of the missile's canister would not address questions about the missile's range in flight .

over the past few years , nato , as a whole , has echoed u.s. concerns about russia's new missile , but some members have expressed doubt about whether the united states had enough evidence to conclude that the missile violated the inf treaty .

this doubt has ebbed recently , as the allies have offered strong support for the u.s. decision to withdraw from the treaty .

in the joint statement released after their december 4 meeting , nato foreign ministers stated that they "strongly support the finding … that russia is in material breach of its obligations under the inf treaty. .

in a statement released on february 1 , 2019 , the north atlantic council noted that russia had "taken no demonstrable steps toward returning to full and verifiable compliance" and that "russia will bear sole responsibility for the end of the treaty. .

at the same time , the statement noted that the "allies are firmly committed to the preservation of effective international arms control , disarmament and non - proliferation" and "will continue to uphold , support , and further strengthen arms control , disarmament and non - proliferation , as a key element of euro - atlantic security. .

the inf treaty contained several features that were new to the u.s. - soviet arms control process .

although it was not the first treaty to ban an entire category of weapons ( a treaty signed in 1975 had banned biological weapons and earlier treaties had banned the emplacement of nuclear weapons on a seabed or stationing them on celestial bodies ) , it was the first to ban a category that each nation had already deployed and considered vital for its national security needs .

moreover , where prior treaties imposed equal burdens on each side , the inf treaty called for asymmetrical reductions .

the soviet union destroyed 1,846 missiles , including 654 ss - 20s , whereas the united states destroyed 846 missiles .

moreover , each of the soviet ss - 20 missiles carried three warheads , while all the u.s. missiles carried only a single warhead .

the inf treaty was also the first u.s. - soviet treaty to employ intrusive monitoring mechanisms in its verification regime .

under prior treaties , the united states and soviet union had relied almost exclusively on their own satellites and remote sensing capabilities — known as national technical means ( ntm ) of verification — to monitor forces and verify compliance with the treaty .

these systems served as the foundation of the monitoring regime under inf , but the treaty also permitted on - site inspections of selected missile assembly facilities and all storage centers , deployment zones , and repair , test , and elimination facilities .

although it did not permit the parties to conduct inspections at any location within the other's territory , it did allow up to 20 short - notice inspections at sites designated in the treaty .

the two sides also agreed to participate in an extensive data exchange , which allowed them to account for all systems covered by the agreement .

further , it allowed each side to operate a continuous portal monitoring system outside one assembly facility in the other country , to confirm the absence of new inf missile production .

these inspections continued for 10 years after the eliminations were complete , ending in may 2001 .

the inf treaty also established the special verification commission ( svc ) "to promote the objectives and implementation of the provisions of this treaty. .

the united states and soviet union agreed that , if either party requested , they would meet in the svc to "resolve questions relating to compliance" with their treaty obligations and to agree on any new measures needed "to improve the viability and effectiveness" of the treaty .

the united states officially charged russia with violating the inf treaty in late july 2014 , when the state department released the 2014 edition of its report adherence to and compliance with arms control , nonproliferation , and disarmament agreements and commitments ( the compliance report ) .

at the same time , president obama sent a letter to president putin notifying him of the finding in the compliance report and suggesting that the two countries meet to discuss steps that russia could take to come back into compliance with the treaty .

according to press reports , administration officials had first raised u.s. concerns with russia during discussions held in may 2013 , and had addressed the issue in subsequent meetings .

the two sides met again , in september 2014 , after the release of the compliance report .

the state department reported that the two sides had a "useful exchange of views" during that meeting , but that russia had failed to "assuage" u.s. concerns .

russia , for its part , complained that the united states did not offer any details to back up its accusations and , as it had in previous meetings , denied that it had violated the inf treaty .

the obama administration repeated its accusation of russian noncompliance in the 2015 edition of the state department compliance report .

this report added a little detail to the 2014 version , noting the "united states determined the cruise missile developed by the russian federation meets the inf treaty definition of a ground - launched cruise missile with a range capability of 500 km to 5,500 km , and as such , all missiles of that type , and all launchers of the type used to launch such a missile , are prohibited under the provisions of the inf treaty. .

while administration officials continue to withhold details about either the missile or the data used to determine that it is a violation , they have said specifically that the united states is "talking about a missile that has been flight - tested as a ground - launched cruise - missile system to these ranges that are banned under this treaty. .

the administration repeated its accusation of testing of a ground - launched cruise missile in the 2016 and 2017 versions of the state department compliance report .

both reports , again , declined to provide details about the offending missile .

however , the 2017 report , in response to russian assertions that the united states lacked proof of such a violation , states that the united states has provided "more than enough information for the russian side to identify the missile in question. .

this includes "information pertaining to the missile and the launcher , including russia's internal designator for the mobile launcher chassis and the names of the companies involved in developing and producing the missile and launcher and ; information on the violating glcm's test history , including coordinates of the tests and russia's attempts to obfuscate the nature of the program. .

the united states has also provided russia with information showing that the "violating glcm has a range capability between 500 and 5,500 kilometers" and that , contrary to much public speculation , it is "distinct from the r - 500 / ssc - 7 glcm or the rs - 26 icbm. .

in october 2016 , press reports for october 2016 indicated that the obama administration believed russia was moving toward deployment of the new missile , because it had begun to produce the missile in numbers greater than what is needed for a test program .

this was followed , in february 2017 , by reports in the new york times stating that russia had begun to deploy a new ground - launched cruise missile , in violation of the 1987 intermediate range nuclear forces treaty .

general paul selva , the vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , confirmed this deployment during testimony before the house armed services committee on march 8 , 2017 .

general selva noted that russia had violated the "spirit and intent" of the treaty , that it had deliberately deployed the missile to pose a threat to nato facilities , and that it showed no inclination to return to compliance with the treaty .

russian officials claim that three current and planned u.s. military programs violate the inf treaty .

they have raised at least one of these issues in diplomatic exchanges for the past several years , but have become more insistent on addressing these issues in recent months , following the state department's publication of the 2014 compliance report .

the three programs identified by russia include ( 1 ) the use of intermediate - range missiles as targets during tests of u.s. missile defense systems ; ( 2 ) the use of drones as weapons delivery vehicles ; and ( 3 ) the planned deployment of missile defense interceptors on land in the navy's mk - 41 missile launchers .

dod reviews u.s. weapons programs to ensure that they are consistent with all u.s. arms control , nonproliferation , and disarmament commitments .

these reviews have found that none of these programs constitute a violation and that the united states is in full compliance with its inf obligations .

the united states addressed russia's concerns during the meeting on inf compliance in september 2014 , providing russia with treaty - based explanations to demonstrate how the programs are compliant with u.s. obligations under the inf treaty .

however , russian officials continue to insist that the united states has violated the inf treaty .

the inf treaty is of unlimited duration , but it contains a withdrawal clause that states that each party shall "have the right to withdraw from this treaty if it decides that extraordinary events related to the subject matter of this treaty have jeopardized its supreme interests. .

russia could have withdrawn from the inf treaty to address emerging threats from intermediate - range missiles deployed in china or in other nations on its periphery , or if it believed it needed intermediate - range missiles to address perceived threats from nato .

yet , russia has remained a party to the treaty while , according to u.s. allegations , developing new intermediate - range missile capabilities .

it is possible that it has done so in the hope of delaying a u.s. response while reserving the option to withdraw later , after completing the development and testing of its new systems .

the united states , for its part , has considered a number of options to address its compliance concerns , to encourage russia to remain a party to the treaty , and to respond to security concerns emerging as a result of russia's development and deployment of new intermediate - range ballistic or cruise missiles .

it has now decided to withdraw from the treaty , both to demonstrate that russia's violation will not go unanswered and to free itself to pursue the development of new intermediate - range missiles .

as a result , russia may now be able to continue its current course free from the limits in the inf treaty .

according to press reports , the united states began to raise concerns about inf compliance with russia during diplomatic meetings in 2013 .

although not specified in the reports , it seems likely that the inf treaty was only one of several issues discussed in these fora .

the press reports note that russia dismissed the u.s. concerns , stating that russia had "investigated the matter and consider[s] the case to be closed. .

u.s. officials stated that russia's answer "was not satisfactory to us" and indicated that it would continue to press the case in future meetings .

with russia unwilling to even acknowledge that it has conducted tests that could raise inf concerns , it seems unlikely that this level of engagement will succeed in resolving the issue .

the united states raised the profile of the issue in july 2014 when the state department released the 2014 compliance report .

according to press reports , president obama sent a letter to president putin that "underscored his interest in a high - level dialogue with moscow with the aim of preserving the 1987 treaty and discussing steps the kremlin might take to come back into compliance. .

at the same time , secretary of state john kerry called the russian foreign minister , sergey lavrov , to emphasize the same point .

the two nations then held a meeting on september 11 , 2014 , focused exclusively on the two nations' concerns with inf compliance .

as noted above , the state department reported that russia had failed to "assuage" u.s. concerns during the september 2014 meeting .

the russian participants denied that russia had violated the treaty , complained about the lack of evidence provided by the united states , and accused the united states itself of violating the treaty .

the state department indicated , in its 2016 annual report on compliance with arms control agreements , that "the united states again raised concerns with russia on repeated occasions" in 2015 and it will "continue to pursue resolution of u.s. concerns with russia" in the future .

but russia continued to refuse to address the issue and continued to deny that it has violated the treaty .

in testimony before the senate foreign relations committee , under secretary of state rose gotemoeller stated that it has been "extraordinarily difficult" to address this issue "because the russians simply have not wanted to engage in a way that would resolve this problem. .

she repeated that the united states is "committed to bringing them back into compliance with the inf treaty and essentially recommitting to that treaty for the future. .

at the same time , under secretary gotemoeller indicated that the diplomatic engagement had some value .

in testimony before the house armed services committee in december 2015 , she noted that russia realizes that its "program has been exposed" and that it "is not free to pursue this effort unconstrained , as this would confirm for the world that russia has been violating an agreement that has been a key instrument of stability and security for nearly three decades. .

as a result russia still has not begun to deploy the new missile .

the trump administration initially continued to pursue a diplomatic solution to the inf problem .

in the state department's 2018 compliance report , the administration noted that "the united states remains open to discussing any and all ways to facilitate the russian federation's return to full and verifiable compliance. .

it also highlighted , in a fact sheet released in december 2017 , that "the united states continues to seek a diplomatic resolution through all viable channels. .

while russia continued to deny that it violated the inf treaty , some hoped the ongoing diplomatic exchanges could help move the process forward by emphasizing the magnitude of the u.s. concerns and opening channels for future discussions that focus exclusively on the inf treaty .

public discussions of compliance concerns — in the state department compliance report , press reports , and congressional hearings — could reinforce the u.s. position and complicate russia's efforts to simply dismiss the u.s. accusations .

with more attention focused on its programs , russia could decide that it needed to explain why it seemed to be testing inf - range missiles and whether it planned to deploy the cruise missile in question on land or at sea .

however , even as russia began to discuss the status of its missile programs , it did not acknowledge that it had violated the treaty .

instead , it disputed u.s. assertions and denied that it had tested a missile to inf range .

on the other hand , because russia has at acknowledged u.s. concerns and offered its own version of events , there might be some room for further discussions during the 60-day period , announced by secretary of state pompeo in early december 2018 , before the u.s. formally announces its withdrawal .

analysts outside government also suggested that the united states might provide russia with a greater incentive to acknowledge , address , and possibly resolve this issue by bringing its allies into the discussion so that they could understand the implications of russia's actions and raise their concerns with russia directly .

this would allow the violation to become "an issue between the russian government and its neighbors" and not just an issue between russia and the united states .

the united states has pursued this process with its nato allies by providing briefings and holding discussions during nato meetings .

for example , in the statement released after the summit in wales in september 2014 , the allies called on russia "to preserve the viability of the inf treaty through ensuring full and verifiable compliance. .

the united states has taken additional steps to brief its nato allies on the russian violation and to encourage the allies to address this issue with russia .

the state department's 2018 compliance report notes that nato issued a public statement in december 2017 "affirming u.s. compliance with the treaty" and urging russia to address the serious concerns raised by its missile system "in a substantial and transparent way , and actively engage in a technical dialogue with the united states. .

the issue has also been on the agenda during meetings of the nato defense ministers .

nato's secretary general jens stoltenberg highlighted this during his press conference prior to the meeting in october 2018 .

he stated that the nato allies "remain concerned about russia's lack of respect for its international commitments , including the intermediate - range nuclear forces treaty. .

he stated that the inf treaty is a "crucial element" of nato security and is "in danger because of russia's actions. .

he also noted that , although russia has "acknowledged the existence of a new missile system , called 9m729," it has not "provided any credible answers on this new missile. .

he concluded by noting that the "allies agree that the most plausible assessment would be that russia is in violation of the treaty. .

this last statement indicated that , in spite of ongoing u.s. efforts to provide the allies with information about russia's noncompliant missile , the allies' assessment of russian activities still lacked some of the certainty evident in the u.s. determination that russia is in violation of the inf treaty .

this difference seemed to disappear after the nato foreign ministers meeting on december 4 , 2018 , when the foreign ministers released a statement accepting the u.s. claim of russian noncompliance .

they noted that the "allies have concluded that russia has developed and fielded a missile system , the 9m729 , which violates the inf treaty" and that they "strongly support the finding of the united states that russia is in material breach of its obligations under the inf treaty. .

at the same time , they noted that the "allies are firmly committed to the preservation of effective international arms control , disarmament and non - proliferation" and therefore , "will continue to uphold , support , and further strengthen arms control , disarmament and non - proliferation , as a key element of euro - atlantic security , taking into account the prevailing security environment. .

they also called on russia "to return urgently to full and verifiable compliance" with the inf treaty .

the german foreign minister , heiko maas , reiterated his nation's support for the inf treaty following a meeting with russia's foreign minister , sergei lavrov , in january 2019 .

he noted that the treaty remained important for germany's security , but also stated that germany believes "that there is a missile violating this treaty and it should be destroyed in a verifiable manner to get back to the implementation of this agreement. .

the ongoing consultations among and statements by nato allies likely signal to russia that nato remains united in its concerns about russia's activities and would likely remain united in its response if russia attempts to use its new missiles to divide the alliance .

on the other hand , this coordinated nato response could backfire if russia reacted by claiming that the nato cohesion on this issue provided further evidence of the threat that nato poses to russia and further evidence that russia needs a full scope of military capabilities in response .

article xiii of the inf treaty established the special verification commission ( svc ) as a forum where the parties could meet to discuss and resolve implementation and compliance issues .

this body had not met since 2000 , but according to the terms of the treaty , the parties agreed that a meeting could occur "if either party so requests" ; there is no mandate for consensus or mutual agreement on the need for a meeting .

press reports from october 2016 indicated that united states "has summoned moscow to a mandatory meeting" of the svc "to answer accusations that moscow has violated the inf treaty. .

this meeting occurred on november 15-16 , 2016 .

the state department released a statement that noted the meeting had occurred in geneva , switzerland , and that the united states , belarusian , kazakh , russian , and ukrainian delegations "met to discuss questions relating to compliance with the obligations assumed under the treaty. .

the statement did not provide any information about the substance of the discussions or about the possibility of future meetings .

while some public press outlets reported that the meeting had occurred , the reports also did not provide any details about the substance of the meeting .

both the united states and russia probably outlined all their compliance concerns , as that was the reason for calling the meeting , but , absent any reporting to the contrary , it is possible that they did not resolve their concerns or reach any new understandings .

the united states called a second meeting of the svc in late 2017 .

this meeting occurred in geneva from december 12 to 14 , 2017 .

because the united states identified the noncompliant glcm as the 9m729 , russia could no longer deny the existence of the missile .

however , according to some reports , russia continued to deny that this missile had been tested to inf range or that telemetry from the tests supported a conclusion that it violated the inf treaty .

the united states has not disputed , publicly , russia's assertion that it did not test the missile to inf range , but it did note , in the state department's annual report , that russia has attempted to "obfuscate the nature of the program. .

analysts outside government have suggested that , by meeting in the svc , the parties could return to the more routine compliance process established by the treaty and remove the issue from the public debate .

they expected this step to ease efforts to initiate a substantive discussion free of political posturing , while clearing the agenda of unrelated issues .

meetings in this forum would also provide russia with the opportunity to raise its concerns about u.s. programs and u.s. compliance with the inf treaty .

others questioned whether russia would be willing to participate in an svc meeting if it was required to at least acknowledge that it had conducted tests of a questionable missile .

however , once the united states called for the meetings , russia was obligated to attend under the terms of the treaty .

while it is not clear what transpired , the meetings should have provided the two nations with an opportunity to share data and information outside the public spotlight .

if the meetings had been successful , and russia had been willing to acknowledge that it had conducted tests that appear inconsistent with the inf treaty , then the united states and russia could have used the svc as a forum to discuss steps they might take to resolve and , if possible , reverse the violation .

for example , the united states could provide russia with a list of missile tests that raised concerns about compliance , and russia could share data generated during those flight tests so that they could review the data together and try to reach an agreed conclusion on the parameters of the tests .

moreover , even if they could not reach agreed conclusions about past tests , they could seek to negotiate new definitions or procedures that might reduce the chances of future ambiguities or uncertainties .

and if they did agree that past tests had violated the terms of the inf treaty , they might seek to work out procedures to eliminate the offending missiles and restore the parties to compliance with the treaty .

even if russia acknowledged that its missile violated the inf treaty , the svc meetings might not lead to a prompt resolution of the inf debate .

the process could still take years to reach a conclusion .

for example , in 1983 , the united states detected soviet construction of an early - warning radar that appeared to violate the 1972 anti - ballistic missile ( abm ) treaty .

that treaty permitted the construction of early - warning radars on the periphery of a country facing out ; the soviet union had constructed the radar in the country's interior , with the radar facing northeast over soviet territory .

the united states first declared this radar to be a violation of the abm treaty in january 1984 , and it raised its concerns about the radar in numerous compliance meetings and reviews of the abm treaty .

the soviet union dismissed the u.s. accusations and claimed that the facility was a space - track radar , not an early - warning radar , in spite of the fact that it looked exactly like other soviet early - warning radars .

finally , in 1987 , the soviet union suspended construction of the radar and , in 1989 , agreed that the radar was a technical violation of the treaty .

in 1990 , seven years after the united states identified the violation , the soviet union began to dismantle the radar .

some analysts have suggested that the united states initiate studies that would explore whether the united states should eventually deploy new intermediate - range ballistic or cruise missiles to meet emerging military requirements .

these studies would allow the united states to "negotiate from a position of strength" when addressing questions of russian compliance and might provide the united states with "military breakout options" if the negotiations failed .

according to brian mckeon , the principal deputy under secretary of defense for policy , the pentagon has already pursued this approach .

in congressional testimony in december 2014 , he noted that the joint staff had conducted a military assessment of the threat that new russian inf - range missiles might create for u.s. allies in europe and asia and that "this assessment has led us to review a broad range of military response options. .

according to under secretary mckeon , these options could include the deployment of new defenses against cruise missiles , the development and possible deployment of new u.s. intermediate - range missiles , and the deployment of other military capabilities that could counter the new russian capabilities .

reports indicate that dod forwarded its results to the white house in early 2015 .

the administration has not , however , released this report to either congress or the public , noting that its contents remain classified .

under secretary mckeon provided congress with an update on the pentagon's pursuit of options to respond to russia's inf violation in testimony before the house armed services committee in december 2015 .

at that time , he noted that the pentagon remained "focused on ensuring that russia gains no significant military advantage from its violation. .

but he also noted that the united states should "consider russian actions with regard to the inf treaty in the context of its overall aggressive and bellicose behavior that flouts international legal norms and destabilizes the european security order. .

as a result , instead of seeking a military response that specifically offset the threat introduced by the new ground - launched cruise missile , the pentagon is "factoring russia's increased cruise missile capabilities , including its inf violation into our planning. .

according to under secretary mckeon , the pentagon is focusing on "developing a comprehensive response to russian military actions" and is "committing to investments now that we will make irrespective of russia's decisions to return to compliance with the inf treaty. .

congress first offered support for the development of a military response to russia's inf violation in legislation proposed in both the house and the senate in july 2014 ( h.r .

5293 and s. 2725 ) .

these bills called on the president to "carry out a program to research and develop ground - launched cruise missile and ground - launched ballistic missile capabilities , including by modification of existing united states military capabilities , with a range between 500 and 5,500 kilometers. .

the legislation also called on the president to study potential sites for the deployment of these new systems and to "consider selecting sites on united states overseas military bases and sites offered by united states allies. .

the fy2015 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

3979 , §1651 ) also called on the pentagon to submit a report to congress that described steps that it plans to take in response to russia's violation of the inf treaty .

these plans could include research , development , and testing or deployment of future military capabilities or plans to modify and deploy existing military systems , to deter or defend against the threat posed by new russian inf systems .

the fy2016 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

1735 , §1243 ) expanded on this provision , calling not only for a study on possible options , but also for a plan for the development of the counterforce capabilities to prevent intermediate - range ground - launched ballistic missile and cruise missile attacks , countervailing strike capabilities to enhance the forces of the united states or allies of the united states , and active defenses to defend against intermediate - range ground - launched cruise missile attacks .

as noted above , the national defense authorization act for 2018 ( h.r .

2810 ) has taken this approach further , both by providing funding for research into defenses , counterforce capabilities , and countervailing capabilities , and by mandating that dod begin a program of record to develop a new u.s. ground - launched cruise missile .

press reports indicate that the pentagon has already begun research into a new ground - launched cruise missile .

they note that the united states has told russia about the new research program and has said it would "abandon the research program if russia returns to compliance with the inf treaty. .

studies exploring possible u.s. military responses would not necessarily lead to the design of new land - based inf - range systems ; the studies might conclude that the united states could meet its security challenges with sea - based or air - delivered weapons .

however , if the studies did find that u.s. security could benefit from such systems , the united states could initiate research , development , and design work without violating the inf treaty's ban on the testing or deployment of intermediate - range land - based missiles .

then , if russia persisted in developing and deploying inf - range missiles , the united states would be able to move more quickly to respond and offset new threats to its security and the security of its allies .

at the same time , these studies might boost the diplomatic dialogue by creating incentives for russia to address u.s. concerns and preserve the inf treaty .

during the early 1980s , the soviet union was unwilling to ban inf - range systems , and was willing to limit its deployment only if the united states did not introduce any new missiles into europe .

it was only after the united states began to deploy its missiles in europe that the soviet union became willing to reduce , and then eliminate , its systems .

some contend that this occurred because soviet leaders recognized that u.s. inf systems could have struck targets in moscow in minutes , and might have "decapitated" soviet command and control systems early in a conflict .

the only way to mitigate this threat was to agree to a ban on inf missiles .

new u.s. research into inf systems might lead to similar , new russian worries about its vulnerability to missile strikes from europe , and therefore , new interests in limiting or banning intermediate - range missiles .

there is some evidence that the potential for new u.s. inf deployments may have a similar effect on russia .

in june 2015 , press reports focused on u.s. statements about the potential development of new military capabilities in response to russia's inf violation .

these articles , which highlighted the possibility that the united states might deploy new land - based missiles to europe , caught the attention of russian officials .

an official speaking for the kremlin noted that moscow "placed much attention" on this report .

a member of the defense committee of russia's federal assembly stated that if the united states pursued such a deployment , russia "would face the necessity of retaliating. .

while it is not yet clear whether russia will conclude that its security is better served by pressing forward with its own deployments or by returning to compliance with the inf treaty and forestalling a new u.s. cruise missile , it seems likely that russia now knows that the united states might pursue a military response that affects russia's security .

on the other hand , if , as secretary mckeon testified in december 2015 , the united states is considering the challenge posed by russia's inf violation to be a part of the broader challenge of russian activities in europe , these programs may do little to encourage russia to return to inf compliance .

part of the incentive for that return would rest with the promise that the united states would refrain from deploying new capabilities in europe if russia returned to compliance .

but , if the united states responds with investments "that we will make irrespective of russia's decisions to return to compliance with the inf treaty," the incentive could be lost .

some analysts have suggested that the united states suspend its participation in arms control agreements with russia , both to demonstrate the magnitude of its concerns with russia's missile developments and to preserve u.s. options for responding to military threats that might emerge if russia deploys new inf missiles .

moreover , by suspending its participation in these agreements , the united states could make it clear that russia would benefit from treaty - mandated limits on u.s. military capabilities only if its military capabilities were similarly limited .

as with the studies on new u.s. military capabilities , this might boost the diplomatic process by providing russia with an incentive to acknowledge and suspend its noncompliant missile tests .

even before president trump announced that the united states would withdraw from the inf treaty , analysts and observers outside government suggested that the united states withdraw both to protest russia's noncompliance and to allow the united states to pursue the development and deployment of its own land - based inf - range missiles .

some also note that the united states has sought to convince russia to return to compliance for several years , and that it no longer makes sense for the united states to be bound by inf if russia is violating it .

many have also noted that , by withdrawing from the treaty , the united states will be free to deploy intermediate - range land - based missiles , not only as a response to emerging challenges from russia , but also in response to china's growing missile capabilities in asia .

they note that land - based missiles would likely provide the united states with added flexibility in countering chinese efforts to restrict u.s. operations in the region .

while they acknowledge that the united states could deploy air - delivered and sea - based missiles without violating the inf treaty , they argue that air bases in the region are vulnerable to attack and sea - based assets are already stretched thin with weapons deployed for other missions .

consequently , by deploying missiles on the territory of allies , like japan , the philippines , and possibly northern australia , the united states could expand its reach and grow its capabilities without further stretching its naval forces .

however , some argue that u.s. withdrawal could do more harm than good to u.s. and allied security interests because the united states has not yet determined whether it would want to deploy land - based inf missiles itself , and has not yet funded a program to develop such missiles .

as a result , u.s. withdrawal would leave russia as the only party able to benefit from the elimination of the treaty limits and might allow russia to move quickly from testing to deployment .

moreover , as stephen rademaker noted during testimony before the house armed services committee , russia might "welcome a u.s. decision to terminate the treaty," and it would "be a mistake to react in ways that will be seen by them as a reward rather than as a punishment. .

he added that "since russia so clearly wants out , we should make sure that they alone pay the political and diplomatic price of terminating the treaty. .

others have argued that u.s. withdrawal from inf could also damage nato cohesion .

although nato foreign ministers have accepted the u.s. assessment of a russian violation , many of the individual nations in nato continue to support the treaty and believe it continues to serve europe's security interests .

moreover , even if the united states develops a new land - based missile , u.s. allies in europe might be unwilling to host the missile on their soil ; disputes over deployment of inf - range missiles disrupted nato in the 1980s and could undermine alliance cohesion again .

consequently , some have suggested that the united states remain in the inf treaty , continue to seek a resolution with russia , and deploy air - delivered or sea - based systems around russia to apply pressure that might bring russia back into compliance , essentially implementing the strategy outlined by the trump administration in late 2017 .

some have also questioned whether the united states needs a land - based missile to respond to challenges from china ; they note that the united states can cover targets in asia with sea - based and air - delivered missiles without violating inf .

they note that there are far greater ocean areas than land areas within inf range of critical targets in china .

moreover , they question whether u.s. allies in asia would be any more willing than those in europe to host new u.s. missiles , particularly if the presence of the missiles might raise concerns among the civilian populations or increase the likelihood of attack early in a conflict .

regardless , some note that even if the united states and its allies could benefit from the deployment of land - based missiles in asia , those benefits should be weighed against the risks of upsetting u.s. allies and undermining the current security structure in europe , and possibly returning to the cold war instabilities that gave rise to the inf treaty in the first place .

as one analyst noted , the united states "will only stoke anxiety if it looks as though it's willing to increase risk to allies in europe in order to reduce risk to allies in asia. .

several analysts have called on the united states to suspend its participation in the 2010 new strategic arms reduction treaty ( new start ) .

this treaty , which entered into force in february 2011 , limits the united states and russia to 1,550 deployed warheads on 700 deployed delivery vehicles for long - range , strategic nuclear warheads .

both parties have reduced their forces , meeting the mandated limits in february 2018 .

during implementation , some analysts argued that the united states could suspend its participation , without withdrawing from the treaty , then resume reductions prior to the deadline if russia returned to compliance with the inf treaty .

this step would "underscore to moscow that the advantageous deal they achieved in the new start treaty ... is being put in jeopardy. .

others argued that this approach could have undermined u.s. national security interests , noting that russia could have also suspended its reductions and , possibly , increased its nuclear forces above the limits .

russia could also have responded by suspending the data exchanges and on - site inspections mandated by new start , denying the united states access to data and information that is important not only to the treaty verification process , but also to the u.s. intelligence community .

this option is no longer viable , as the united states and russia have completed their new start reductions .

however , the linkage between new start and inf compliance remains an issue , as the united states has begun to assess whether it should support the extension of new start for five years , as permitted by the treaty , when it expires in 2021 .

reports indicate that the trump administration is currently conducting a review that will inform the u.s. approach to the treaty's extension .

administration officials addressed this review during testimony before the senate foreign relations committee on september 18 , 2018 .

both under secretary of state andrea thompson and deputy under secretary of defense david trachtenberg emphasized how russia's violation of the inf treaty and its more general approach to arms control undermined u.s. confidence in the arms control process .

under secretary thompson noted that russia's noncompliance "has created a trust deficit that leads the united states to question russia's commitment to arms control as a way to manage and stabilize our strategic relationship and promote greater transparency and predictability. .

deputy under secretary trachtenberg also emphasized that "arms control with russia is troubled because the russian federation apparently believes it need only abide by the agreements that suit it .

as a result , the credibility of all international agreements with russia is at risk. .

nevertheless , before deciding whether to extend new start , the administration is likely to weigh its concerns about russia's compliance with inf against assessments of whether the limits in the treaty continue to serve u.s. national security interests , and whether the insights and data that the monitoring regime provides about russian nuclear forces remain of value for u.s. national security .

in an interview published in november 2014 , under secretary of state rose gottemoeller , who led the u.s. discussions with russia on the inf treaty , stated that she believed there was a debate in moscow about whether the inf treaty continued to serve russia's national security interests .

she believed the issue was not settled and that "recent comments by russian officials and by the russian government overall about the viability and importance of the treaty for the time being give us time and space to negotiate. .

it is also possible , however , that the debate in russia is less about whether to stay within the treaty and more about when and how to move beyond its limits .

some would argue that russia's willingness to participate in discussions with the united states provided russia with time and space to pursue its missile programs , before openly withdrawing from the treaty and prompting a u.s. response .

others have argued that russia may be unwilling to withdraw from the treaty now , with the hope that the united states might eventually agree to a joint withdrawal or that the united states might withdraw itself and free russia from its obligations .

with the future of the treaty uncertain , the united states could consider a range of options for how it might address u.s. and allied security concerns now that russia has begun to deploy the new inf - range cruise missile .

these options include military responses — such as the development and deployment of new nuclear - armed cruise missiles or new conventional military capabilities — along with diplomatic and consultative steps taken with u.s. allies .

as noted above , legislation proposed in july 2014 called on the president to conduct a study both on the need for new missiles and on locations overseas where the united states might deploy such systems .

others have been more direct in their support of new u.s. inf - range systems .

former under secretary of state john bolton has argued that the inf treaty interferes with the united states' ability "to preserve global security" and that other countries , like china , north korea , and iran , face no limits on their intermediate - range missiles .

he believes the united states "should see moscow's breach as an opportunity to withdraw" from the treaty so that it can "have access to the full spectrum of conventional and nuclear options. .

as noted above , congress has mandated that the pentagon begin a program of record on a new ground - launched intermediate - range cruise missile , and the pentagon has begun to conduct research into such a system .

those who support programs to develop and deploy new u.s. inf - range missiles do not say , specifically , that these missiles should carry nuclear warheads or be based in europe , although they also do not rule this out .

other analysts , however , argue that such an approach is unnecessary and would possibly do more to disrupt than support u.s. alliances overseas .

they note that the united states should not need to deploy new nuclear weapons because u.s. conventional weapons are more than capable of responding to emerging threats and ensuring u.s. and allied security .

they note that russia also views u.s. conventional capabilities as a threat to russian security , pointing out that russian officials have repeatedly raised concerns about u.s. advanced conventional weapons and have suggested that russia would be unwilling to reduce its nuclear forces any further unless the united states were willing to limit these capabilities in an arms control treaty .

moreover , even if the united states decided that it needed to counter russia's new capabilities with nuclear - armed missiles , it could be very difficult to find an allied country in europe or asia that was willing to house those missiles .

as noted above , even after nato reached consensus on the need to deploy inf missiles in 1979 , several allied governments nearly refused to accept the missiles on their territories and many faced widespread public protests against the deployment of new nuclear weapons .

there would likely be even less support for new nuclear weapons among many of the u.s. allies in europe now , with several recently calling for the removal of the nearly 200 u.s. nuclear weapons that remain in europe .

as a result , it is possible that u.s. efforts to deploy new nuclear - armed inf - range missiles in europe could "exacerbate political divisions in europe" and undermine the unity nato would need to respond to russian attempts at coercion .

there is also likely to be little support for new u.s. land - based nuclear weapons in asia , as the united states removed these weapons in the early 1990s and maintains long - range bombers with the capability to support extended deterrence in asia .

if russia deploys new intermediate - range ballistic missiles and cruise missiles and seeks to use those capabilities to coerce or intimidate the united states or its allies , then the united states might deploy other military capabilities in response .

these could include new air - delivered or sea - based cruise missiles that would be consistent with the terms of the inf treaty and would not require basing on allied territories .

the united states could also seek to expand the range of existing shorter - range systems , so that it could meet potential new military requirements without bearing the cost of developing new intermediate - range missile systems .

for example , in testimony before the house armed services committee , jim thomas , the vice president of the center for strategic and budgetary assessments , suggested that the department of defense ( dod ) assess the feasibility and cost to extend the range of the army's tactical missile system ( mgm - 164 atacms ) , which currently has a range of about 80 miles .

he also suggested that dod consider developing a "road - mobile , land - based variant" of the navy's mk - 41 vertical launch system so that it could launch offensive missiles from land , if needed .

frank rose and robert scher , former officials from the obama administration , made similar suggestions in a joint hasc / hfac hearing in late march 2017 .

they both identified air - delivered and sea - based military capabilities as a means to not only offset threats to nato nations but also remind russia of the threats it could face if the inf treaty were to collapse .

the united states could also expand its missile defense capabilities in europe and asia in response to the deployment of new russian missiles .

at the present time , the united states and nato are pursuing the european phased adaptive approach , with missile defense interceptors deployed at sea and , eventually , on land in poland and romania .

the interceptors and radars in this system are designed to defend against shorter - and intermediate - range missiles launched from iran , with , eventually , some capability against longer - range iranian missiles .

the united states is deploying similar sea - based capabilities in asia , in cooperation with allies there , in response to north korea's missile program .

the united states has insisted , repeatedly , that this system will have no capability against the larger numbers of far more capable russian long - range missiles .

however , several analysts in both the united states and europe have suggested that nato might reorient this system to defend against russian intermediate - range missiles , if necessary .

others have argued that the united states and nato should focus specifically on the development and deployment of cruise missile defenses "to protect key alliance assets in the event of a conflict with russia. .

new intermediate - range missiles deployed in or near russia would not have the range needed to reach targets in the continental united states .

they would , however , be able to threaten u.s. allies in europe , asia , and the middle east .

as a result , the united states would likely engage with its allies when determining how to respond if russia deploys new inf - range missiles .

u.s. allies' views on the nature of the threat from the missiles could inform the u.s. approach to responding to that threat .

some may favor continuing efforts to engage russia through diplomatic channels , while others may prefer that the united states develop and deploy new capabilities to defend against any emerging russian threat .

however , there is little evidence that the united states consulted with its allies in europe before deciding to withdraw from the treaty .

moreover , press reports indicate that the u.s. decision to delay its formal withdrawal from the treaty by 60 days occurred after "german chancellor angela merkel and other european leaders persuaded trump to delay the move to allow for additional consultations. .

the united states could also consider several steps to reassure its allies of its commitment to their defense .

some analysts believe that this has become increasingly important in recent months , following russia's annexation of crimea and aggression against ukraine .

for example , nato could develop new plans and procedures for engaging with russia in a crisis in which these missiles might come into play .

nato might also expand its ongoing joint training missions and exercises , both to reassure the allies of the u.s. commitment and to strengthen its ability to provide reinforcements if a conflict were to occur .

beyond nato , the united states could also meet with allies in asia and the middle east to discuss possible military or diplomatic responses if they felt threatened by russia's missiles , either generally or in response to specific scenarios .

although some analysts have suggested that the united states focus its response to russia's noncompliance with the inf treaty on military measures , and the development of new missile capabilities , others have argued for a more nuanced approach .

they note that the united states may be able to defend its allies and respond to russian aggression with conventional weapons and existing capabilities .

but they also note that the full range of u.s. capabilities will do little to assuage the concerns of u.s. allies unless they are confident that the united states will come to their defense if they are threatened .

in the absence of that confidence , some allies may feel more exposed than others and may be more vulnerable to russian efforts at coercion .

as a result , although the current crisis over the inf treaty began with concerns about the development of new russian missiles , the united states may need to respond with measures directed more at the political concerns of its allies than at the military capabilities of russia .

for example , some european allies , particularly in central and eastern europe , have expressed concern about the united states' reduced conventional force posture in europe , and particularly the withdrawal over the past two years of two of the army's four brigade combat teams in europe .

although the united states has augmented its military presence in central and eastern europe in the wake of russia's annexation of crimea , many allies have asked for a more robust u.s. response .

nato addressed these concerns during the september 2014 summit in wales and announced a number of collective defense measures that were designed to deter further russian aggression .

although not directly connected to russia's noncompliance with the inf treaty , these measures may also serve to assuage security concerns that arise if russia continues to develop new intermediate - range ballistic and cruise missiles .

both the house and senate pressed the obama administration for information about russia's arms control compliance record and options for the u.s. response during the 114 th congress .

the house armed services and foreign affairs committees have held three hearings on this issue , to date , and both the house and senate armed services committees have raised the issues during other , related hearings .

the national defense authorization act for fy2015 ( h.r .

3979 ) mandates that the president submit a report to congress that includes an assessment of the effect of russian noncompliance on the national security interests of the united states and its allies , and a description of the president's plan to resolve the compliance issues .

the legislation also calls for periodic briefings to congress on the status of efforts to resolve the u.s. compliance concerns .

the fy2016 ndaa ( h.r .

1735 , §1243 ) also addressed russia's compliance with the inf treaty and possible u.s. military responses .

this legislation stated the sense of congress that the development and deployment of a nuclear ground - launched cruise missile by russia is a violation of the inf treaty , that russia should return to compliance with the inf treaty , that efforts to compel russia to return to compliance "cannot be open - ended," and that there are several u.s. military requirements that would be addressed by the development and deployment of systems currently prohibited by the inf treaty .

the legislation went on to require that the president notify congress both about the status of russia's compliance with the inf treaty and the status and content of updates that the united states provides to its allies in nato and east asia about russia's testing , operating capability , and deployment of inf - range ground - launched ballistic missiles or ground - launched cruise missiles .

as was noted above , the legislation also mandated that the secretary of defense submit a plan to congress for the development of counterforce capabilities to prevent intermediate - range ground - launched ballistic missile and cruise missile attacks , countervailing strike capabilities to enhance the forces of the united states or allies of the united states , and active defenses to defend against intermediate - range ground - launched cruise missile attacks .

the fy2017 ndaa ( p.l .

114-328 §1231 and §1238 ) also addressed congressional concerns with russia's compliance with the inf treaty .

in section 1231 , congress withheld $10 million in funding for the executive office of the president until the secretary of defense completed "meaningful development" of military capabilities that would allow the united states to respond to risks created by russia's deployment of a new ground - based cruise missile .

section 1238 mandated that the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff submit a report containing , among other things , an assessment "of whether and why the treaty remains in the national security interest of the united states , including how any ongoing violations bear on the assessment if such a violation is not resolved in the near - term. .

as is noted above , both the house and senate versions of the fy2018 ndaa ( h.r .

2810 ) also mandate that the united states take steps to develop a military response to russia's inf - range missile .

the conference report ( h.rept .

115-404 ) mandates that the secretary of defense "establish a program of record to develop a conventional road - mobile ground - launched cruise missile system with a range of between 500 to 5,500 kilometers" and authorizes $58 million in funding for the development of active defenses to counter inf - range ground - launched missile systems ; counterforce capabilities to prevent attacks from these missiles ; and countervailing strike capabilities to enhance the capabilities of the united states .

the legislation also mandates that the president impose additional sanctions on russia if it remains in noncompliance with the inf treaty .

congress also addressed the inf treaty in the national defense authorization act for fy2019 ( p.l .

115-232 , §1243 ) .

the conference report legislation states that the president must submit a determination to congress stating whether russia "is in material breach of its obligations under the inf treaty" and whether "the prohibitions set forth in article vi of the inf treaty remain binding on the united states as a matter of united states law. .

these are the prohibitions on the testing and deployment of land - based ballistic and cruise missiles with a range between 500 and 5,500 kilometers .

the legislation also stated that the united states should "take actions to encourage the russian federation to return to compliance" by providing additional funds for the development of military capabilities needed to counter russia's new cruise missile and by "seeking additional missile defense assets … to protect united states and nato forces" from russia's noncompliant ground - launched missile systems .

the fy2015 ndaa had stated that it was in the national security interest of the united states and its allies for the inf treaty to remain in effect and for russia to return to full compliance with the treaty .

however , this assessment could change now that russia appears to have deployed its new inf - range land - based cruise missile .

both congress and the trump administration could now conclude that the united states may need to move beyond the diplomatic process to address emerging security concerns .

while a decision to withdraw from the inf treaty would have to come from the executive branch , congress can express its views on that outcome both during hearings and through legislation .

it cannot , however , mandate that outcome .

