in march 2015 , the supreme court heard oral arguments in king v. burwell , a case addressing an important issue of implementation of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) .

the lawsuit involves the provision of premium tax credits , which became available in 2014 and are intended to help certain individuals pay their premiums for private health insurance plans offered through insurance "exchanges" established under aca .

at issue in king and other similar legal challenges is whether the statutory language of aca allows the irs to provide these credits to residents of states that declined to establish health insurance exchanges , where the state's exchange is instead facilitated by the federal government .

the issue is considered a significant one , given that the majority of states have a federally facilitated exchange , and millions of individuals receive these credits in order to assist with the purchase of health insurance .

this report provides background on relevant provisions of aca .

it then answers questions concerning the litigation and potential implications of the court's decision in king .

as part of aca's intended goal of improving accessibility to health coverage , the act provides for the establishment of "exchanges," structured marketplaces for the sale and purchase of health insurance .

section 1311 of aca specifies that each state must establish an american health benefit exchange that is either a state governmental agency or a nonprofit entity , in order to provide health coverage to qualified individuals and employers .

however , a separate section of aca , section 1321 , generally provides that if a state does not elect to establish an exchange , or if the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) determines that an electing state will not have an operational exchange , or has not taken certain specified actions , the secretary must establish and operate such exchange within the state .

in order to assist individuals in purchasing health insurance in an exchange , section 36b of the internal revenue code , created by aca , provides that certain lower and moderate - income taxpayers may receive a refundable tax credit that is intended to help pay the cost of the health insurance premium .

a taxpayer may claim the credit at the end of the year when filing an income tax return or claim an estimated credit during the year in the form of advance payments made directly to the insurer and applied towards the premium .

in general , there are two principal factors that affect whether a taxpayer will be eligible for a premium tax credit: ( 1 ) whether the taxpayer meets the income and other requirements for the credit ; and ( 2 ) whether any months during the taxable year qualify as "coverage months" for the taxpayer .

with respect to this second requirement , in order for a taxpayer to receive a health insurance premium credit under aca , at least one month in the year must qualify as a coverage month for the taxpayer .

the term "coverage month" in section 36b means the following: [w]ith respect to an applicable taxpayer , any month if— ( i ) as of the first day of such month the taxpayer , the taxpayer's spouse , or any dependent of the taxpayer is covered by a qualified health plan … enrolled in through an exchange established by the state under section 1311 of the patient protection and affordable care act … in addition , the amount of the premium tax credit is equal to the sum of the "premium assistance credit amount" for each coverage month the taxpayer experiences during the taxable year .

the premium assistance credit amount is defined as the amount equal to the lesser of ( a ) the monthly premiums for such month for 1 or more qualified health plans offered in the individual market within a state which cover the taxpayer , the taxpayer's spouse , or any dependent … of the taxpayer and which were enrolled in through an exchange established by the state under 1311 of the patient protection and affordable care act , or ( b ) the excess ( if any ) of— ( i ) the adjusted monthly premium for such month for the applicable second lowest cost silver plan with respect to the taxpayer , over ( ii ) an amount equal to 1 / 12 of the product of the applicable percentage and the taxpayer's household income for the taxable year .

following passage of aca , it was argued that , based on this language in section 36b ( i.e. , "an exchange established by the state under section 1311 of [aca]," ) premium tax credits are not available to taxpayers in exchanges created by the federal government .

in may 2012 , the internal revenue service ( irs ) issued final regulations related to the premium tax credit that make the credits available to taxpayers who obtain coverage in both state and federally facilitated exchanges .

the preamble to the regulations explains the irs's position that the statutory language of section 36b supports this interpretation , and states that "the relevant legislative history does not demonstrate that congress intended to limit the premium tax credit to state exchanges," and that this reading of the language of section 36b "is consistent with the language , purpose , and structure of section 36b and the affordable care act as a whole. .

after issuance of the regulations , at least four lawsuits were filed against the administration , claiming the irs overstepped its authority when it made these credits available to individuals in states that have the federal government run their exchanges .

assuming the supreme court finds that premium tax credits are unavailable in exchanges that are not established by a state , the question of which exchanges fall into this category may be considered .

in 2015 , there are 27 states in which exchanges are established and run entirely by the federal government .

seven more states maintain "partnership exchanges," which hhs considers to be federally facilitated .

while hhs maintains authority over these partnership exchanges , a state can administer and operate certain exchange activities .

there are also three states that have "federally supported state - based exchanges. .

it appears these three states received ( at least conditional ) approval from hhs to run their own exchange and perform all exchange functions , but the states rely on the federally facilitated exchange it platform ( i.e. , http: / / www.healthcare.gov ) .

in 2014 , there appeared to be some disagreement over how many exchanges were run by the federal government .

while the d.c .

circuit in halbig indicated in dicta that there were 36 federal exchanges , the fourth circuit in king noted there were 34 .

presumably , the discrepancy is based on the two federally supported state - based exchanges operating last year .

nevertheless , it may be noted that the supreme court briefs filed by both petitioners and respondents in the king case seem to agree that there are 34 federally facilitated exchanges .

this number would appear to include the 27 federally facilitated exchanges and the 7 state - partnership exchanges , and exclude states with a federally supported state - based exchange .

the supreme court could address what states must do in order to "establish an exchange" for purposes of the premium tax credits under aca .

alternatively , the court may render a decision without answering this question , and regulations issued by irs and hhs could potentially address this issue .

if the supreme court finds that the irs regulations at issue in king are valid , it may be presumed that the agency would not need to amend the regulations or take any other action , and that premium tax credits would remain available for individuals participating in state and federally run exchanges in every state and the district of columbia .

however , such a holding may not preclude the irs from amending the regulations at a future date .

assuming that the court performs a chevron analysis and finds that the statutory language of aca is ambiguous and subject to multiple interpretations , the agency would remain free to amend the regulations , so long as the amendments are consistent with the statute .

thus , it is possible that if the supreme court in king decides to defer to the irs's interpretation of aca , an administration could potentially later amend the regulations in a manner that affects the provision of premium tax credits in federal and state - run exchanges .

the court's opinion in the king case may address this scenario .

if the supreme court finds that the irs regulation at issue in king is invalid so that individuals participating in federally run exchanges would no longer be eligible for the credit , then several things might happen .

the irs would presumably act to address the problematic aspects of the section 36b regulations .

additionally , the agency ( and hhs ) might determine that additional rulemaking or guidance is appropriate to address possible issues arising from the interaction between the premium tax credit and other parts of the irc and aca ( discussed in the next question ) .

the irs , affected taxpayers , and insurance companies might also confront issues due to the timing of the court's decision .

it is likely the decision will be released late in the court's term , after april 15 , 2015 , but before the end of june .

by that time , taxpayers claiming the credit for tax year 2014 will have generally done so .

additionally , some taxpayers will be receiving the credit for tax year 2015 in the form of advanced payments made directly to their insurance companies .

thus , in addition to raising questions about whether taxpayers who received the credit would be required to pay it back ( see below ) , it seems possible the timing of the court's decision might present issues with respect to the advanced payments being made for 2015 insurance contracts .

during the king oral arguments , justice alito raised the issue of whether the court could stay its decision until the end of the year .

one point to note is that while the court's decision may result in some taxpayers losing their eligibility for the premium tax credit , it would not impact their ability to claim other tax benefits .

thus , for example , affected taxpayers who purchased insurance would be able to deduct their premiums as an itemized deduction to the extent their total medical expenses exceed 10% of adjusted gross income .

if premium tax credits cannot be offered in health insurance exchanges run by the federal government , many believe there could be a profound effect upon the operation and implementation of aca as a whole because certain central provisions of the act depend upon the availability of premium tax credits .

as noted above , aca contains certain interconnected provisions that are designed to increase accessibility to health insurance .

among these provisions , aca contains certain market reforms that , among other things , require health insurers to accept every individual who applies for coverage , prevent them from imposing exclusions from coverage based on preexisting conditions , and restrict insurers from charging higher premiums based on an individual's health status .

based on these requirements , it is argued that in order to prevent an "adverse selection" scenario , where individuals wait to purchase health insurance until they need care , aca compels individuals to purchase insurance through the individual mandate .

in order to make this required coverage affordable , aca provides for premium tax credits and other subsidies .

it has been argued that eliminating premium tax credits would be detrimental to this scheme , as these provisions "work in tandem to achieve the act's fundamental goals of expanding health - insurance coverage and promoting a functioning individual insurance market in each state. .

relatedly , it is also expected that if premium tax credits are unavailable to individuals enrolled in a federally run exchange , fewer individuals will be required to have health insurance under aca's individual mandate .

as discussed in the " i .

background " section , there is an exemption from the individual mandate for individuals whose contribution to health coverage is more than 8% of household income .

aca specifies that this contribution is calculated for certain individuals as the annual premium for the lowest cost plan available on an exchange in the state , minus any allowable premium tax credit .

accordingly , if an individual is not allowed the premium credit , coverage becomes more expensive , and the unaffordability exemption may kick in , meaning that the individual does not have to obtain coverage under the individual mandate .

it has been predicted that eliminating the premium tax credits in states with federally run exchanges would exempt more individuals from the individual mandate , and would make coverage unaffordable for many of these individuals .

commentators have also noted that if the supreme court invalidates the irs rule , this could have a debilitating effect on the federally run exchanges .

the idea is that absent these credits , many healthy people would not purchase health coverage .

however , individuals with more serious health conditions would probably remain in the market .

thus , it is argued that the population in these plans could become skewed toward sicker , more expensive enrollees , and this may lead to a rise in premiums in affected exchanges .

the absence of premium tax credits in states with a federally facilitated exchange could also affect the application of the employer mandate .

as discussed in the " i .

background " section , aca specifies that liability for the excise tax under the employer mandate is generally triggered when one or more of an employer's full - time employees is allowed a premium tax credit through a health insurance exchange .

accordingly , if credits are not available in states with federally run exchanges , large employers may not be subject to penalties if they fail to offer affordable coverage to employees .

if the court finds that premium tax credits are not available in federally run exchanges , the question arises what states would have to do to in order for their exchange to be "established by the state under section 1311" for purposes of the credit .

current law and regulations articulate what steps a state must take in order for the federal government not to set up an exchange within the state .

section 1311 of aca specifies that a state "shall" establish an exchange that meets certain specified requirements .

this section provides that an exchange must be "a governmental agency or nonprofit entity that is established by a state. .

additionally , under this section , among other things , an exchange must implement procedures related to the certification of health plans ; provide for the operation of a telephone hotline ; maintain a website under which current and prospective plan enrollees may obtain plan information ; assign ratings to qualified health plans in the exchange , in accordance with criteria developed by the secretary of hhs ; use a standard format for presenting health benefit plan options in the exchange ; and inform individuals of their eligibility for public programs such as medicaid and assist with this enrollment .

current regulations also set forth numerous requirements that a state must meet in order for its exchange to be approved by hhs .

as described above , if a state does not have this approval ( or conditional approval ) by a certain deadline , hhs will establish and operate the state's exchange .

while the circumstances under which the federal government will assist with establishing an exchange within the state are thus well described in current law and regulations , the question of what it means to have "an exchange established by the state under 1311" could arguably be somewhat different than whether the federal government has chosen to assist with establishing an exchange within the state .

questions have been raised , for example , regarding whether states could qualify as having state - established exchanges while retaining a certain degree of federal marketplace infrastructure ( eg , certain state - based exchanges utilize healthcare.gov ) .

the supreme court may address what states must do in order to "establish an exchange" so that premium credits are available .

alternatively , the court may render a decision without answering this question .

in that case , the answer may ultimately require administrative action by irs and hhs , or further litigation to be resolved .

as mentioned , taxpayers are allowed to claim the credit when they file their taxes at the end of the year or may choose to receive an estimated credit paid in advance to their insurance company .

for both sets of taxpayers , it is not clear that any who claimed the credit might be required to pay it back if the court were to strike down the regulation .

on the one hand , as a general rule , taxpayers who improperly claim tax credits must pay them back and , in the case of taxpayers receiving an estimated premium tax credit in advance , pay back any excess .

further , the irs is generally able to go back to the previous three tax years in order to reclaim erroneously paid refunds , even when the agency was at fault for the overpayment .

and in some situations , courts have recognized that the irs occasionally gets the law wrong and it is the taxpayer's responsibility to get it right .

as such , if the court were to strike the regulation so that taxpayers who purchased insurance in federally facilitated exchanges were not allowed the credit , it might be argued that taxpayers could be required to pay back any claimed credit to the irs .

on the other hand , these taxpayers claimed the credit due to their reliance on an unambiguous irs - promulgated regulation .

as such , it is arguably unfair to require them to pay back any claimed credit , perhaps particularly so if they were not party to the litigation resulting in their denial of the credit .

further , the situations where courts have not reacted sympathetically to taxpayers who relied on erroneous irs information can be distinguished since those taxpayers were relying on guidance less formal than a regulation .

in light of all this , even if there might be a legal basis for concluding that taxpayers might have to pay back the credit , it seems possible the court , congress , or irs would take mitigating actions .

for example , if the court were to strike down the regulation , the court could conceivably limit its holding so that taxpayers who had received the credit ( whether through the advance payment or end - of - year filing ) would not be affected .

similarly , the irs might have the authority to provide that taxpayers who had already claimed the credit would not have to pay it back or to take no action to assess and collect the amounts from them .

it is also possible that congress could address the issue by legislation .

crs is not aware of any example of where a court struck a credit or other tax benefit and the taxpayers who had already received the benefit were required to pay it back ; however , it should be noted that this issue rarely arises because , as discussed above , no one typically has standing to bring this type of suit .

a consideration in assessing whether king may have implications for tax law generally is recognizing that the situation presented is uncommon .

the plaintiffs are challenging an irs regulation that interprets a statute so that they are eligible for a credit .

normally , a taxpayer would not want to sue arguing the irs had impermissibly broadened a statute to benefit them , and in any case , would not have standing to do so .

here , the plaintiffs' concerns and standing are based on the interaction between the premium tax credit and the individual mandate .

this type of interaction between a tax benefit and obligation is rare .

thus , due to the atypical facts present here , it is not clear whether king , regardless of how the court rules , will have broad implications for impact tax law generally .

king and the other cases nonetheless might provide two procedural issues in which congress might be interested—the applicability of the aia and the relationship between the apa and tax refund suits ( note that neither issue has been appealed to the court ) .

this is not to suggest that the lower courts necessarily got these issues wrong .

rather , these cases might be of interest because , as discussed above , it is generally the rule that taxpayers challenging a federal tax law must do so through a tax refund suit , and while the government argued these taxpayers needed to do the same , the courts rejected this .

regardless of which side it agrees with , congress might be interested in looking at these decisions to see if statutory clarification is needed .

first , as discussed above , the aia generally prohibits suits that restrain the collection and assessment of federal taxes .

while the supreme court in nfib found that the individual mandate was not a tax for purposes of the aia because congress labeled it as a penalty , congress's motivation in using the term "penalty" appears open to debate .

in light of the court's holding and its application to the cases here , as well as potential extension to other excise taxes , it might be of interest to congress to look at these cases to ensure their reasoning is consistent with the congressional intent behind the aia and , if so , how other excise taxes might be affected .

similarly , the issue of whether a tax refund suit is an "adequate remedy" under the apa does not frequently arise , and it might be of interest to congress to look at how the courts in these cases interpreted the interaction between the two acts .

