congressional interest in air quality issues has been dominated for the past six years by efforts to prevent the environ mental protection agency ( epa ) from promulgating and implementing new emission control requirements .

often under court order , epa has used authorities congress gave it in the clean air act amendments of 1970 , 1977 , and 1990 to address long - standing issues posed by emissions from various sources .

epa's regulations on greenhouse gas emissions from both mobile and stationary sources and on emissions of all kinds from electric power plants have been of particular interest , as have the agency's efforts to revise ambient air quality standards for ozone and particulate matter .

especially in the house , efforts to restrain agency regulatory actions have occupied a prominent place since the 112 th congress .

until the 114 th congress , however , bills to restrain epa faced a roadblock in the senate , where democratic control largely prevented their consideration .

with republicans in charge in the 114 th congress , the senate posed less of a roadblock .

still , environmental regulations have been a key element of president obama's legacy , so legislation restraining epa — if passed by the house and senate — would generally have faced a presidential veto .

the net result — few environmental bills enacted — thus remained as it had the last six years .

in addition to bills targeting specific clean air act rules , in recent years the house has also considered broader legislation designed to address regulation in general — bills such as the reins act ( h.r .

427 / s. 226 in the 114 th congress ) , which would require congressional approval before regulations classified as major rules could take effect , or the energy consumers relief act ( s. 156 in the 114 th congress ) , which would prohibit epa from promulgating energy - related regulations estimated to cost more than $1 billion if the secretary of energy determines that the regulations would cause significant adverse effects to the economy .

if enacted , such legislation would affect new rules under the clean air act as well as other statutes .

given the broad nature of the bills' purpose , they are not discussed here .

a continuing focus of congressional interest under the clean air act ( caa ) has been epa regulatory actions to limit greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions using existing caa authority .

epa actions have focused on six gases or groups of gases that multiple scientific studies have linked to climate change .

of the six gases , carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , produced by combustion of fossil fuels , is by far the most prevalent , accounting for more than 80% of annual anthropogenic emissions of the combined group when measured as co 2 equivalents .

members from both sides of the aisle , including a majority of the house in the 112 th – 114 th congresses , have expressed concerns about epa proceeding with ghg regulations that could have major economic impacts .

some argue that the case for ghg controls has not been proven .

others maintain that epa should delay taking such action until congress more explicitly authorizes it .

epa finalized ghg standards for power plants on august 3 , 2015 , finalized a second round of ghg standards for trucks in august 2016 , and conducted a mid - term evaluation of the ghg standards for light - duty vehicles in 2016 , providing congress important opportunities to review the agency's actions .

issues related to emissions other than ghgs from electric power plants — principally sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , and mercury — have been another focus of interest in recent years .

two rules affecting these emissions — the cross - state air pollution rule ( csapr , pronounced "casper" ) and the mercury and air toxics standards ( mats ) — have taken effect , in january and april 2015 respectively .

critics of the rules predicted a "train wreck" for the electric utility industry if these and other rules were implemented .

the rules — along with low natural gas prices — have contributed to the retirement of many older coal - fired power plants , but , thus far , appear to have had little effect on the price of electricity or the reliability of the electric grid .

for additional information , see crs insight in10578 , coal use already near epa's 2030 projection .

bush administration regulations addressing these emissions were first promulgated in march 2005 , but were remanded to epa by the d.c .

circuit court of appeals in two 2008 decisions ( north carolina v. epa and new jersey v. epa ) .

as a result , under the obama administration , epa developed new regulations to address the court's concerns: csapr , promulgated on august 8 , 2011 , established a cap - and - trade system for so 2 and nox emissions ; mats , promulgated on february 16 , 2012 , set maximum achievable control technology standards for power plant emissions of mercury and other hazardous air pollutants .

power plants were major sources of these pollutants before the development of the regulations: in 2005 , they accounted for 70% of the u.s. total of so 2 emissions , about half of u.s. mercury emissions , and roughly 20% of u.s. nox emissions .

power plants are also considered major sources of fine particles ( pm 2.5 ) , many of which form in the atmosphere from emissions from a wide range of stationary and mobile sources .

the obama administration's epa has reviewed several national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) , as it is required to do at five - year intervals by section 109 of the clean air act .

naaqs do not directly regulate emissions from sources of pollution ; rather , they represent epa's formal judgment regarding how clean the air must be to protect public health and welfare from the specific pollutants .

the standards set in motion monitoring and planning requirements , which in turn can lead to designation of "nonattainment areas" and the imposition of emission controls .

since 2009 , epa has proposed and promulgated numerous regulations implementing the clean air act ( and other pollution control statutes that it administers ) .

critics of the administration , both within congress and outside of it , have accused the agency of reaching beyond the authority given it by congress and ignoring or underestimating the costs and economic impacts of these rules .

numerous bills that would have overturned specific regulations , delayed their implementation , or limited the agency's authority were introduced , and some passed the house in the last three congresses .

in the 114 th congress , in addition to bills targeting ghg emissions discussed elsewhere in this report , the house passed two bills that would overturn or delay specific epa air regulations: h.r .

4557 , the brick act , which would have delayed implementation of hazardous air pollutant emission standards affecting brick and ceramic manufacturers until all legal challenges to the rules are settled ; and h.r .

3797 , the sense act , which would have eased emission limits under the cross - state air pollution rule and the mercury and air toxics standards for electric generating units powered by coal refuse .

in addition , h.r .

5538 , the interior , environment and related agencies appropriation bill for fy2017 , as passed by the house , contained numerous riders prohibiting epa from using fy2017 funds to implement various authorities under the clean air act .

while epa has been widely criticized by industry groups and many in congress for overreaching , the agency maintains that in promulgating the rules it has promulgated , it has complied with statutory mandates placed on the agency by congress .

the agency has stated that its critics' focus on the cost of controls obscures the benefits of new regulations , which , it estimates , far exceed the costs ; and it maintains that pollution control is an important source of economic activity , exports , and american jobs .

environmental and public health groups generally agree that the agency has not overreached in setting clean air act standards .

these groups often maintain that the agency's standards are not stringent enough , do not meet statutory requirements , or disregard the findings of the agency's science advisors .

the result is that epa clean air act standards generally are challenged in court both by industry and by environmental groups , with various states supporting each side .

the resulting court decisions often set epa's agenda as much as congress or the administration .

the courts will continue to play an important role , and congress may react to court decisions regarding clean air act regulation through legislation .

