the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) provides two types of assistance for winter incidents: ( 1 ) "snow assistance," and ( 2 ) assistance for "severe winter storms. .

both types of assistance are triggered by a presidential disaster declaration .

the criteria used by fema to determine whether to recommend a declaration depend on the type of winter incident .

snow assistance determinations are based on snow accumulations .

determinations for severe winter storms are based on the severity and magnitude of the event and the capabilities of the state and affected local governments to respond to the incident .

requests for snow assistance and assistance for severe winter storms must also include the estimated cost of federal and nonfederal public assistance associated with the incident .

fema divides the estimated cost of federal and nonfederal public assistance by the statewide population to give some measure of the per capita impact the incident has had on the state .

this report describes snow assistance and assistance for severe winter storms , the declaration process , the criteria used to make eligibility determinations , and the types of assistance that are provided after the president has issued a major disaster declaration for the incident .

this report also provides some historical data on winter incidents obligations for the incidents from fema's disaster relief fund ( drf ) .

the drf is the main account used to fund a wide variety of programs , grants , and other forms of emergency and disaster assistance to states , local governments , certain nonprofit entities , and families and individuals affected by disasters .

under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 , hereinafter the stafford act ) there are two principal forms of presidential action to authorize federal assistance to states and localities through fema .

emergency declarations are made to protect property and public health and safety and to lessen or avert the threat of a major disaster or catastrophe .

emergency declarations are often made when a threat is recognized ( such as the emergency declarations issued for hurricane katrina which were made prior to landfall ) and are intended to supplement and coordinate local and state efforts prior to the event ( such as evacuations and protection of public assets ) .

in contrast , a major disaster declaration is made as a result of the disaster or catastrophic event and constitutes a broader authority that helps states and local communities , as well as families and individuals , recover from the damage caused by the event .

it could be argued that fema policy conceptualizes snowstorms and severe winter storms differently .

according to fema , a snowstorm is an event in which the state has record or near record snowfall in one or more counties that overwhelms the capability of the affected state and local governments to respond to the event .

severe winter storms , on the other hand , are events that occur during the winter season that include one or more of the following conditions: snow , ice , high winds , blizzard conditions , and other wintry conditions that cause substantial physical damage or property loss .

prior to 2009 , fema provided federal assistance for snow removal costs for a stipulated period — usually two or three days .

most of these events were defined as a "snow emergency" because of the relatively limited assistance requested and provided .

in november 2009 , fema published new regulations for snowstorms and severe winter storms .

under the new regulations , snow - related events could be defined as major disasters .

as fema explained , the intent of the change was to make fema's snow policy conform more closely to the stafford act: fema's 1999 snow assistance policy evaluated requests for snow assistance under both the criteria for an ''emergency'' declaration under 44 cfr 206.35 , as well as a request for a "major disaster" declaration under 44 cfr 206.36 .

however , the stafford act , 42 u.s.c .

5122 , and fema regulations , 44 cfr 206.2 ( a ) ( 17 ) , expressly include "snowstorm" in the definition of a "major disaster. .

by comparison , fema regulations define "emergencies" as those types of events that do not qualify under the definition of a major disaster .

in this revised policy , snowstorm events will be considered by fema for major disaster declarations under 44 cfr 206.36 , consistent with the stafford act and fema regulations .

as discussed below , in response to comments received on the july 2008 proposed policy , this final snow assistance policy does not include the limitation proposed in 2008 that fema would only make recommendations for major disaster declarations for snow events .

to determine the influence of the new regulations , obligations and declaration data from 2009 through 2014 were analyzed .

from january of 2009 through june of 2014 , 71 major disaster declarations were issued as part of a winter storm incident .

these declarations led to more than $2.7 billion in federal obligations from the drf .

figure 1 demonstrates both the number of declarations per year and the obligations associated with those incidents .

the data suggest that both the number of declarations issued for winter storm incidents and the subsequent funding have increased since the new policy for snowstorms was issued by fema in 2009 .

from 1994 , the first year for which there is available data on winter storms , through 2008 , the average annual number of major disaster declarations associated with winter storms was 7.5 .

this number increased to an annual average of 12.4 for the period 2009-2013 .

federal obligations also increased between these two periods , from an average of $274 million per year to an average of $508 million per year ( data not shown ) .

analysis of drf obligations data also indicated that winter storms involve more obligations from certain fema programs than others when compared to the drf as a whole .

figure 2 displays the proportion of drf obligations that were obligated for different programs in response to winter storms .

nearly 80% of drf obligations for these incidents were for the public assistance program , which assists with debris removal and the repair or replacement of public infrastructure .

public assistance accounts for only 64% of all drf obligations for major disasters during the same time period .

conversely , there were almost no funds provided through the individual assistance program , which provides funds to individuals and households when the incident meets certain criteria .

for all major disaster declarations between 2009 and 2014 , the individual assistance program accounted for 15% of the obligations .

federal assistance may also be provided for severe winter storms .

a severe winter storm is an event that includes one or more of the following: snow , ice , high winds , blizzard conditions , and other wintry conditions that cause substantial physical damage or property loss .

the same procedural actions discussed previously must be taken by a governor or tribal leader when requesting federal disaster assistance for severe winter storms .

as with requests for snow assistance , and in fact , a request for any major disaster declaration , the state or tribal government must demonstrate that the capabilities of the state or tribal government to effectively respond to the winter storm are , or will be , exceeded .

the estimated cost of federal and nonfederal public assistance associated with the incident must also be included in the request .

however , snow accumulations are not used as a criterion to make eligibility determinations and snow removal costs are not used to calculate the per capita impacts of the incident .

the types of eligible assistance for severe winter storms vary according to the nature and severity of the incident .

fema divides disaster - related work into two broad categories: ( 1 ) emergency work , and ( 2 ) permanent work .

these are further subdivided into seven categories ( see table 1 ) .

depending on the nature of the incident , one or more categories of work may be provided for the winter storm .

however , it should be noted that a limited level of snow removal is provided for severe winter storms .

generally , snow removal is a precursor to the performance of otherwise eligible emergency work .

for example , snow removal may be necessary to access downed power lines or gain access to a damaged building .

