much progress has been made in achieving the ambitious goals that congress established more than 40 years ago to restore and maintain the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters .

however , long - standing problems persist , and new problems have emerged .

water quality problems are diverse , ranging from pollution runoff from farms and ranches , city streets , and other diffuse or "nonpoint" sources , to "point" source discharges of metals and organic and inorganic toxic substances from factories and sewage treatment plants .

the principal law that deals with polluting activity in the nation's streams , lakes , estuaries , and coastal waters is the federal water pollution control act ( p.l .

92-500 , enacted in 1972 ) , commonly known as the clean water act , or cwa .

it consists of two major parts: regulatory provisions that impose requirements on industries and cities to abate pollution and meet the statutory goal of zero discharge of pollutants ; and provisions that authorize federal financial assistance for municipal wastewater treatment plant construction .

both parts are supported by research activities , plus permit and enforcement provisions .

programs at the federal level are administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; state governments have primary day - to - day responsibilities to implement cwa programs through standard - setting , permitting , enforcement , and administering financial assistance programs .

local governments also have important roles in implementing water quality protection programs , such as building and operating municipal wastewater treatment plants and regulating local pollution sources .

the water quality restoration objective declared in the 1972 act was accompanied by statutory goals to attain , wherever possible , waters deemed "fishable and swimmable" by 1983 and to eliminate the discharge of pollutants into navigable waters by 1985 .

although those goals have not been fully achieved , considerable progress has been made , especially in controlling conventional pollutants ( suspended solids , bacteria , and oxygen - consuming materials ) discharged by industries and sewage treatment plants .

progress has been mixed in controlling discharges of toxic pollutants ( eg , heavy metals , inorganic and organic chemicals ) , which are more numerous and can harm human health and the environment even when present in very small amounts — at the parts - per - billion level .

moreover , efforts to control pollution from diffuse sources , termed nonpoint source pollution ( rainfall runoff and snowmelt from urban , suburban , and agricultural areas , for example ) , are more recent , given the earlier emphasis on "point source" pollution ( discharges from industrial facilities and municipal wastewater treatment plants ) .

overall , data reported by epa and states indicate that 44% of river and stream miles assessed by states and 64% of assessed lake acres do not meet applicable water quality standards and are impaired for one or more desired uses .

over the last decade , working with states and tribes , epa has conducted a series of national aquatic resource assessments , to gather information on the ecological condition of the nation's waters .

in 2006 epa issued an assessment of streams and small rivers , reporting that 67% of u.s. stream miles are in poor or fair condition and that nutrients and streambed sediments have the largest adverse impact on the aquatic species in these waters .

a similar assessment of the health of the nation's lakes , issued in 2016 , found that 31% have degraded benthic macroinvertebrate communities , which include small aquatic creatures like snails and mayflies .

it found that nutrient pollution is a widespread problem across the county .

about one in three lakes ( 35% ) has excess nitrogen , and two out of five lakes ( 40% ) have excess phosphorus .

approximately 95,000 lakes and 544,000 river miles in the united states are under fish - consumption advisories ( including 100% of the great lakes and their connecting waters ) , due to chemical contaminants , and one - third of shellfishing beds are closed or restricted due to toxic pollutant contamination .

mercury is a contaminant of growing concern — in 2010 , approximately 16.3 million lake acres and 1.14 million river miles were under fish or shellfish consumption advisory because of elevated mercury levels .

mercury concentrations in game fish exceed health - based limits in about half of u.s. lakes .

a 2016 epa report found that the condition of coastal waters is a mix of fair and good health , with about one - third of waters rated as good .

in most coastal waterbodies , the sediment quality and biological condition were judged to be good , but fish tissue samples from species in most coastal waters showed contamination from various pollutants .

a fourth survey assessment , also issued in 2016 , evaluated the ecological condition of tidal and non - tidal wetlands .

plant presence , abundance , and trait information are used to assess biological condition of wetlands , and epa reported that less than half of wetland areas nationally have healthy plant communities .

physical disturbances to wetlands and surrounding habitat , such as surface hardening and vegetation removal or loss , are the most widespread problems , epa said .

the last major amendments to the cwa were the water quality act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

that legislation culminated six years of congressional efforts to extend and revise the act and was the most comprehensive amendments since 1972 .

authorizations of appropriations for some programs provided in p.l .

100-4 , such as funding for research and general epa support , expired in fy1990 and fy1991 .

authorizations for wastewater treatment project funding expired in fy1994 .

none of these programs has lapsed , however , as congress has continued to appropriate funds to implement them .

epa , states , industry , and other citizens continue to implement the 1987 legislation .

the clean water act has been viewed as one of the most successful environmental laws in terms of achieving its statutory goals , which have been widely supported by the public .

lately , however , some have questioned whether additional actions to achieve further benefits are worth the costs .

criticism has come from industry , which has been the long - standing focus of the act's regulatory programs and often opposes imposition of new stringent and costly requirements .

criticism also has come from developers and property rights groups who contend that federal regulations ( particularly the act's wetlands permit program ) are a costly intrusion on private land - use decisions .

states and cities have traditionally supported water quality programs and federal funding to assist them in carrying out the law , but many have opposed cwa measures that they fear might impose new unfunded mandates .

many environmental groups believe that strengthening of the law is needed to maintain progress achieved to date and to address remaining water quality problems .

october 2012 marked the 40 th anniversary of passage of the clean water act and 25 years since the last major amendments to the law were enacted .

while there has been measurable clean water progress as a result of the act , observers and analysts agree that significant water pollution problems remain .

however , there is less agreement about what solutions are needed and whether new legislation is required .

several key water quality issues exist: what additional actions , if any , should be taken to implement existing provisions of the law ; whether additional steps are necessary to achieve overall goals of the act that have not yet been attained ; how to ensure that progress made to date is not lost through diminished attention to water quality needs ; whether existing regulatory authorities should be reduced ; and what is the appropriate federal role in guiding and paying for clean water infrastructure and other activities .

for some time , efforts to comprehensively amend the act have stalled as interests have debated whether and exactly how to change the law .

many issues that might be addressed involve making difficult tradeoffs between impacts on different sectors of the economy ; taking action when there is technical or scientific uncertainty ; and allocating governmental responsibilities among federal , state , local , and tribal entities for implementing the law .

these factors partly explain why congress has recently focused legislative attention on narrow bills to extend or modify selected cwa programs , rather than taking up comprehensive proposals .

other factors also have been at work .

these include a lack of legislative initiatives by the administration on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation , nor has the obama administration ) , and the high economic cost of addressing water infrastructure issues .

in recent years , congressional attention turned significantly to oversight and legislation focused on criticism of epa regulatory activities — particularly in the house , which has passed a number of bills to limit epa's regulatory authority .

the senate did not act on these measures .

the 112 th congress enacted two bills that amend the cwa .

one extended the moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels for an additional year , until december 18 , 2014 ( p.l .

112-213 ) , and the other extended authorization of funds for the lake pontchartrain basin program in section 121 of the act through fy2017 ( p.l .

112-237 ) .

the 113 th congress enacted several bills with cwa provisions: provisions of water resource legislation with some amendments to cwa title vi , plus a pilot program for water infrastructure financing ( see " wifia pilot program and srf amendments in p.l .

113-121 " below ) ; as part of the 2014 farm bill , legislation exempting most silviculture activity from requiring a cwa permit ; legislation providing an additional three - year moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels ; and a bill eliminating a number of statutorily required reports to congress , including one cwa report ( p.l .

113-188 ) .

in the 114 th congress , one cwa bill ( other than appropriations , discussed below ) was enacted .

it is p.l .

114-162 , providing a five - year authorization of appropriations ( through fy2021 ) for the national estuary program in cwa section 320 .

two cwa issues that have been the focus of much of legislators' interest in recent congresses and are likely to be prominent in the 115 th congress , as well — regulatory protection of wetlands , in relation to the scope of the regulatory jurisdiction of the cwa , and water infrastructure financing — are discussed next .

although few cwa amendments have been enacted recently , clean water policy and program issues have been addressed regularly by congress in the context of annual appropriations acts .

epa's appropriations are included in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations acts .

the administration's fy2016 budget sought $8.6 billion for epa , or $452 million more than the fy2015 enacted level of funding .

the epa request included $1.116 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants ( $333 million less than the fy2015 enacted level ; see table 1 ) and $15 million for alaska native village and u.s. - mexico border water infrastructure projects .

the administration sought $238.8 million to protect surface waters ( 19.5% higher than the fy2015 enacted level ) , and $250 million for the great lakes restoration initiative ( 17% below the fy2015 enacted level ) .

the budget sought increases for several water quality grant programs ( section 106 grants , section 319 grants , and wetlands program development grants ) .

although the house and senate appropriations committees reported bills to provide fy2016 appropriations for epa ( h.r .

2822 and s. 1645 ) , final appropriations action for epa and other agencies occurred as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , signed by the president december 18 , 2015 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

the bill provided $1.394 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants ( $55 million less than fy2015 , but $278 million above the president's request ) and $30 million for alaska native village and u.s. - mexico border water infrastructure projects .

it also provides $300 million for the great lakes restoration initiative .

the final bill included the requested increase in funds for section 319 nonpoint pollution management grants , but not for other water quality grant programs ( i.e. , section 106 grants and wetlands program development grants ) .

the administration's fy2017 budget , presented to congress in february 2016 , requested $8.3 billion in total for epa ( $127 million above the fy2016 enacted budget ) .

the request for epa included $979.5 million for clean water srf capitalization grant ( $424 million less than the fy2016 enacted level ) , $228 million for core surface water protection programs ( $28 million increase ) , and $250 million for the great lakes restoration initiative ( $50 million decrease ) .

during congressional hearings on the epa request , many members criticized the requested 30% decrease in funds for clean water srf capitalization grants .

this criticism was reflected to some degree in appropriations bills that the appropriations committees subsequently approved that include epa funding .

in july 2016 , the house passed h.r .

5538 , fy2017 interior and environment appropriations act ; it included $1.0 billion for clean water srf grants .

the senate appropriations committee reported a companion bill , s. 3068 , in june .

it included $1.35 billion for clean water srf grants .

the senate did not take up this bill .

congress did not reach final agreement on an epa funding bill before the start of fy2017 , on october 1 .

however , on september 28 , the house and senate passed a 10-week continuing resolution that extends fy2016 funding levels , minus a 0.496% across - the - board reduction , through december 9 , 2016 ( p.l .

114-223 ) .

a second continuing resolution , passed in december 2014 , extends fy2016 funding levels , minus a 0.1901% across - the - board reduction , from december 10 , 2016 , through april 28 , 2017 ( p.l .

114-254 ) .

the administration's fy2017 budget submission also included a $15 million request to allow epa to begin making wifia loans ( see " wifia pi lot program and srf amendments in p.l .

113-121" ) .

p.l .

114-254 includes the first appropriation , $20 million , for epa to do so .

