the president is responsible for appointing individuals to positions throughout the federal government .

in some instances , the president makes these appointments using authorities granted to the president alone .

other appointments are made with the advice and consent of the senate via the nomination and confirmation of appointees .

presidential appointments with senate confirmation are often referred to with the abbreviation pas .

this report identifies , for the 112 th congress , all nominations to full - time positions requiring senate confirmation in 40 organizations in the executive branch ( 27 independent agencies , 6 agencies in the executive office of the president [eop] , and 7 multilateral organizations ) and 4 agencies in the legislative branch .

it excludes appointments to executive departments and to regulatory and other boards and commissions .

a pair of tables presents information for each agency in this report .

the first table in each pair provides information on full - time positions requiring senate confirmation as of the end of the 112 th congress and the pay levels of those positions .

the second table for each agency tracks appointment activity within the 112 th congress by the senate ( confirmations , rejections , returns to the president , and elapsed time between nomination and confirmation ) as well as further related presidential activity ( including withdrawals and recess appointments ) .

in some instances , no appointment action occurred within an agency during the 112 th congress .

information for this report was compiled using the senate nominations database of the legislative information system ( lis ) at http: / / www.lis.gov / nomis / , the congressional record ( daily edition ) , the weekly compilation of presidential documents , telephone discussions with agency officials , agency websites , the united states code , and the 2012 plum book ( united states government policy and supporting positions ) .

related congressional research service ( crs ) reports regarding the presidential appointments process , nomination activity for other executive branch positions , recess appointments , and other appointments - related matters may be found at http: / / www.crs.gov .

appendix a .

summary of all nominations and appointments to independent and other agencies appendix b .

positions affected by p.l .

112-166 appendix c. agency abbreviation .

