federal criminal civil rights laws impose criminal penalties for the deprivation of certain federal rights , privileges , or immunities .

most of these laws prohibit violent and intimidating acts motivated by animus based on race , ethnicity , national origin , religious beliefs , gender , sexual orientation , or disability .

while some of these laws require a discriminatory motivation , others — such as those regarding human trafficking , conspiracy against rights , and deprivation of rights under "color of law — do not .

although the fbi has authority to investigate criminal civil rights violations , the attorney general , acting through the various u.s .

attorneys' offices and with the assistance of the justice department's civil rights division , has the discretion to initiate a federal prosecution .

such a decision is dependent upon several factors , including resource availability and a sufficiency of evidence to convince a jury of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt .

18 u.s.c .

§241 makes it unlawful for two or more persons to conspire to "injure , oppress , threaten , or intimidate any persons of any state , territory or district in the free exercise or enjoyment of any right or privilege secured to him / her by the constitution or the laws of the united states ( or because of his / her having exercised the same ) . .

punishment for violations includes a fine and / or imprisonment for a maximum of 10 years .

the law provides greater punishment to violators if their acts result in death ( or an attempt to kill ) or include kidnapping ( or an attempt to kidnap ) or aggravated sexual abuse ( or an attempt to commit aggravated sexual abuse ) .

under such heightened circumstances , offenders may face life imprisonment or the death penalty .

federal civil rights prosecutions against state actors ( eg , law enforcement ) are usually conducted pursuant to 18 u.s.c §242 , which makes it a crime for "any person acting under color of any law , statute , ordinance regulation , or custom to willfully deprive or cause to be deprived from any person those rights , privileges , or immunities secured or protected by the constitution and laws of the u.s." there are four elements to establish offenses under this section: ( 1 ) the victim must have been an inhabitant of a u.s. state , district , or territory when the alleged violation occurred ; ( 2 ) defendant acted under color of any law ; ( 3 ) the defendant's conduct deprived the victim of some right secured or protected by the u.s. constitution ; and ( 4 ) the defendant acted willfully , that is , with specific intent to violate the protected constitutional right .

in screws v. u.s. , the u.s. supreme court narrowly interpreted the predecessor of section 242 , 18 u.s.c .

§52 , and upheld its constitutionality against a due process challenge that alleged that the statute was vague and lacked the specificity constitutionally mandated for criminal statutes .

in reaching its decision , the court examined the legislative history and noted the section's origins as an "anti - discrimination measure" that was later extended to prohibit the "deprivation of any rights , privileges , or immunities" guaranteed by federal law .

the court concluded that the legislative history indicated a desire to reduce the section's severity .

to express this reduction in severity , congress created a special requirement of intent to violate federal rights , rather than just a generalized "bad purpose. .

this strict interpretation has been uniformly followed by federal courts .

for example , in u.s. v. shaffer , a case involving the shooting of unarmed students by the ohio national guard , an ohio district court found that there was insufficient evidence that defendants possessed the specific intent to deprive any of the students of their constitutional rights .

analogizing screws , the shaffer court concluded that the evidence presented "would support a finding that the amount of force used by defendants was excessive and unjustified ; that they intended to harm or frighten at least some of the demonstrators ; and that they fired without being ordered to do so. .

the court noted , however , that such a finding failed to meet the stringent test articulated in screws and thus warranted a judgment of acquittal for all defendants .

arguably , the specific intent requirement established in screws makes prosecution more difficult , especially in cases of police conduct that involve the use of force during the performance of an officer's duties .

for a conviction under this provision , not only must the prosecution show an intent to violate federal rights , but also that the action was done under "color of law" and that the force was unreasonable , unnecessary , and unprovoked .

the u.s. supreme court's decisions in graham v. connor and tennessee v. garner set the prevailing standards for determining if law enforcement's use of force impermissibly deprives an individual of a constitutional right .

in graham , the court held that determining the objective reasonableness of a particular seizure under the fourth amendment "requires a careful balancing of the nature and quality of the intrusion on the individual's fourth amendment interests against the countervailing governmental interests at stake. .

as such , the inquiry requires analyzing the totality of the circumstances from the officer's prospective .

specifically , the court stated: the reasonableness of a particular use of force must be judged from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene , rather than with the 20 / 20 vision of hindsight .

the calculus of reasonableness must embody allowance for the fact that police officers are often forced to make split - second judgments — in circumstances that are tense , uncertain and rapidly evolving — about the amount of force that is necessary in a particular situation .

the test of reasonableness is not capable of precise definition or mechanical application .

in garner , the court set forth instances in which an officer's use of deadly force is reasonable: ( 1 ) when threatened with a deadly weapon ; ( 2 ) when the officer has probable cause to believe that the suspect poses an imminent threat of serious harm or death to the officer or to others ; or ( 3 ) when probable cause exists that the suspect has committed a crime involving threatened or actual serious physical harm or death to another .

for example , in plumhoff v. rickard , the supreme court found that the police officers acted reasonably in using deadly force during a high - speed chase .

the officer stopped a vehicle due to an inoperable headlight .

after the officer noticed damage to the vehicle , he asked the driver to exit the car .

instead of getting out of the car , the driver sped off .

officers gave chase and surrounded the driver in a parking lot .

when the driver attempted to flee again , the officers fired shots into the vehicle , killing the driver and passenger .

the event was captured on video .

looking at the totality of the circumstances , the court concluded that the officers acted reasonably as the driver's reckless driving posed a grave public safety risk .

according to the court , "a reasonable officer could have concluded that [the driver] was intent on resuming his flight and that , if he was allowed to do so , he would once again pose a deadly threat to others. .

the court went on to find that the firing of 15 shots was not excessive .

the court noted that if the officers are justified in firing at a suspect to end a severe threat to public safety , then the officers can continue shooting until the threat ends .

relevant to the court's analysis was the fact that even after the 15 shots were fired , the driver continued to flee until he crashed the vehicle .

therefore , the court concluded that the officers acted reasonably .

punishment for violations includes a fine and / or imprisonment for a maximum of one year .

in the case of bodily injury or the use of a dangerous weapon the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years .

the law provides greater punishment to violators if their acts cause death ( or an attempt to kill ) or include kidnapping ( or an attempt to kidnap ) or aggravated sexual abuse ( or an attempt to commit aggravated sexual abuse ) .

under such circumstances , offenders may face life imprisonment or the death penalty .

the fbi has the authority to investigate allegations of 18 u.s.c .

§242 violations .

the attorney general , acting though the various u.s .

attorneys' offices and with the assistance of the justice department's civil rights division , has the discretion to initiate a federal prosecution .

whether a prosecutor elects to do so depends upon a number of factors , not the least of which is whether there is evidence sufficient to convince a jury that the accused is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt .

this statute prohibits certain interferences of federally protected activities regardless of discriminatory intent .

protected activities include voting or qualifying to vote ; participating in or enjoying any benefit , service , privilege , program , facility , or activity provided or administered by the united states ; applying for or enjoying employment by any u.s. agency ; serving as a grand or petit juror in any court of the united states ; or participating in or enjoying the benefits of any program receiving federal financial assistance .

moreover , individuals are prohibited from willfully injuring , intimidating , or interfering with any person because of that person's race , color , religion , or national origin , and because of the individual's activity in one of the following: enrolling or attending a public school or college ; participating in or enjoying any benefit , service , privilege , program , facility , or activity provided or administered by a state or local government ; applying for or enjoying employment , or using a labor organization or employment agency whether privately or publically run ; serving any state court as a juror ; travelling in or using a facility of interstate commerce or common carrier ; or enjoying the goods , services , and / or facilities of any establishment which provides lodging , food , beverages , gasoline , or entertainment to patrons .

this statute also prohibits willful interference , by force or threat of force , with a person because the individual is or was participating in , aiding , or encouraging other persons to participate in any of the aforementioned benefits or activities without discrimination as to race , color , religion , or national origin .

individuals are prohibited from intentionally defacing , damaging , or destroying religious real property based on the religious , ethnic , or racial characteristics of the property .

if the destruction is based on religious animus , there must also be a showing that the property is sufficiently related or connected to interstate or foreign commerce .

if the property destruction is racially motivated , a link to interstate or foreign commerce is not required .

the statute also prohibits individuals from intentionally obstructing or attempting to obstruct , by force or threat of force , a person in the enjoyment of that person's religious beliefs , where the crime is committed in or affects interstate commerce .

punishment for violations includes a fine and / or imprisonment for a maximum of one year .

in the case of bodily injury by fire or explosive the maximum term of imprisonment is 40 years .

the law provides greater punishment to violators if their acts cause death ( or an attempt to kill ) or include kidnapping ( or an attempt to kidnap ) or aggravated sexual abuse ( or an attempt to commit aggravated sexual abuse ) .

under such circumstances , offenders may face life imprisonment or the death penalty .

this statute prohibits certain violent , threatening , obstructive , or destructive actions directed toward individuals obtaining or providing reproductive health services or exercising the right of religious freedom at a place of worship .

section 248 also makes it unlawful for a person to intentionally damage or destroy the property of a facility because it provides reproductive health services , or because it is a place of worship .

section 248 also prohibits anyone from attempting to commit any of the aforementioned .

punishment for violations includes a fine and / or imprisonment for a maximum of one year for a first offense and a maximum of three years for subsequent convictions .

in the case of bodily injury , the maximum term of imprisonment is 10 years .

should death occur , violators may face life imprisonment .

this law makes it unlawful to willfully cause bodily injury ( or attempt to do so ) with the use of "fire , a firearm , a dangerous weapon , or an explosive or incendiary device" under two circumstances: ( 1 ) when the crime was committed "because of the actual or perceived race , color , religion , or national origin of any person" ; or ( 2 ) when the crime was committed based on the "actual or perceived religion , national origin , gender , sexual orientation , gender identity , or disability of any person" and the crime affected interstate or foreign commerce or occurred within a federal special maritime or territorial jurisdiction .

the law broadens the circumstances under which the federal government may assert jurisdiction to prosecute such crimes .

for hate crimes prosecuted under these provisions , the law requires that the attorney general certify that pertinent state or local officials ( 1 ) were unable or unwilling to prosecute ; ( 2 ) favored federal prosecution ; or ( 3 ) prosecuted , but the investigation's or trial's results failed to satisfy the federal interest to combat hate crimes .

punishment for violations includes a fine and / or imprisonment for a maximum of 10 years .

the law provides greater punishment to violators if their acts result in death ( or an attempt to kill ) or include kidnapping ( or an attempt to kidnap ) or aggravated sexual abuse ( or an attempt to commit aggravated sexual abuse ) .

under such circumstances , offenders may face life imprisonment .

this statute makes it unlawful for an individual to use force or threaten to use force to injure , intimidate , or interfere with , or attempt to injure , intimidate , or interfere with , any person's housing rights because of that person's race , color , religion , sex , handicap , familial status , or national origin .

among those housing rights enumerated in the statute are ( 1 ) the sale , purchase , or rental of a dwelling ; ( 2 ) the occupation of a dwelling ; ( 3 ) the financing of a dwelling ; ( 4 ) contracting or negotiating for any of the aforementioned rights ; and ( 5 ) applying for or participating in any service , organization , or facility related to the sale or rental of dwellings .

this statute also makes it unlawful to use force or threaten to use force to injure , intimidate , or interfere with any person who is assisting an individual or class of persons in the exercise of their housing rights .

the offense is punishable by a range of imprisonment up to a life term , depending upon the circumstances of the crime and the resulting injury , if any .

