cyberspace has taken on increased strategic importance as states have begun to think of it as yet another domain — similar to land , sea , and air — that must be secured to protect their national interests .

cyberspace is another dimension , with the potential for both cooperation and conflict .

the obama administration's 2010 national security strategy identifies cybersecurity threats "as one of the most serious national security , public safety , and economic challenges. .

cyberattacks are now a common element of international conflict , both on their own and in conjunction with broader military operations .

targets have included government networks , media outlets , banking services , and critical infrastructure .

the effects and implications of such attacks may be small or large ; cyberattacks have defaced websites , temporarily shut down networks and cut off access to essential information and services , and damaged industrial infrastructure .

despite being relatively common , cyberattacks are difficult to identify at their source and thwart , in particular because politically motivated attacks are often crowd - sourced , and online criminal organizations are easy to join .

suspicions of state - sponsored cyberattacks are often strong but difficult to prove .

the relative anonymity under which actors operate in cyberspace affords a degree of plausible deniability .

this report focuses specifically on cyberattacks as an element of warfare , separate and distinct from diplomatic or industrial espionage , financially motivated cybercrime , or state - based intimidation of domestic political activists .

however , drawing clean lines between cyberwar , cyberterrorism , cyberespionage , and cybercrime is difficult .

state and non - state actors carry out cyberattacks every day .

when and under what conditions cyberattacks rise to the level of cyberwar is an open question .

some experts contend that all warfare , including cyberwarfare , by definition includes the destruction of physical objects .

according to this point of view , to be an act of cyberwarfare , the attack must originate in cyberspace and result in the destruction of critical infrastructure , military command - and - control capabilities , and / or the injury or death of individuals .

on the other hand , some analysts have a more inclusive view of cyberwarfare .

these experts would include , in addition to cyberattacks with kinetic effects , the exfiltration or corruption of data , the disruption of services , and / or manipulation of victims through distraction .

as our military becomes increasingly information dependent , potential vulnerabilities in network - centric operations are crystalized .

a cyberattack on a military asset may be considered an act of war to which the military will respond under the law of armed conflict .

however , there may also be attacks on civilian systems which would warrant a military response .

the department of defense is responsible for securing its own networks , the department of defense information networks ( dodin ) , or .mil domain , formerly known as the global information grid ( gig ) .

the requested cybersecurity budget for dod was approximately $5.1 billion for fy2015.this figure represents a portion of the president's requested overall it budget for dod that same year ( approximately $36 billion ) .

the dod cybersecurity budget grew by $1 billion from 2013 to 2014 , but this increase may reflect changes in how dod programmatic elements have defined "cybersecurity" programs .

in general , the dod cybersecurity budget comprises the following activities: information assurance , cyberspace operations , national cybersecurity initiative / defense industrial base / defense cyber crime center , and u.s. cyber command .

after recognizing that cyberspace is a global operating domain as well as a strategic national asset , dod reorganized its cyber resources and established the u.s. cyber command in 2010 .

this sub - unified command under the u.s. strategic command is co - located at fort meade , maryland with the national security agency ( nsa ) .

it combines offensive and defensive capabilities and is commanded by a four - star general , also the director of the nsa .

the nsa's primary missions are information assurance for national security systems and signals intelligence .

also located within nsa is the central security service , the military's cryptology component .

as an intelligence agency , nsa operates under the authorities of title 50 u.s.c. , war and national defense .

u.s. cyber command operates under u.s.c .

title 10 , armed forces — the authorities through which the military organizes , trains , and equips its forces in defense of the nation .

authorities for u.s. military operations in cyberspace are not currently organized according to the nature of the perceived threat , whether espionage , crime , or war .

instead , authorities are organized according to the domain ( .mil , .gov , .com , etc. ) .

in which the activity is taking place , as opposed to its motivations or effects .

presidential policy directive 20 , discussed in greater detail below , distinguishes between network defense on the one hand and offensive and defensive cyberspace operations on the other .

u.s. policy on network defense is to adopt a risk - management framework published by the department of commerce's national institute of standards and technology .

responsibility for implementing the framework is shared among different government departments and agencies , with u.s. cyber command responsible for the .mil domain and the department of homeland security responsible for the .gov domain .

adoption of the nist framework is voluntary for private companies and their own network defense .

one of the instruments through which offensive cyberspace operations are conducted may be a classified "execute order," defined by dod as an order issued by the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , at the direction of the secretary of defense , to implement a decision by the president to initiate military operations .

according to the federation of american scientists' secrecy news , air force instruction 10-1701 , entitled "command and control ( c2 ) for cyberspace operations," dated march 5 , 2014 , states , "classified processes governing c2 [command and control] of af [air force] offensive and defensive cyberspace operations conducted by af cyber mission forces are addressed in a classified cjcs [chairman , joint chiefs of staff] execute order ( title classified ) issued on 21 jun 13. .

then - vice admiral michael rogers , as a nominee for commander , u.s. cyber command ( and nsa director ) , said before the senate armed services committee that "geographic combatant commanders already have authority to direct and execute certain defensive cyberspace operations ( dco ) within their own networks. .

however , the execute order suggests that there may be standing orders to conduct offensive cyberspace operations as well .

the following section provides a brief overview of evolving norms in cyberspace and the authorities that govern network defense and cyberspace operations .

does the military have the authorities it needs to effectively fight and win wars in cyberspace ? .

some have argued that to fulfill its homeland defense mission , uscybercom should be given increased authority over private sector critical infrastructure protection .

yet business owners , particularly in the it sector , contend that this would represent a "militarization of cyberspace" that would create distrust among consumers and shareholders , and could potentially stifle innovation , leading to decreases in profits .

others argue that the military's role is to fight and win wars , rather than to bolster a private company's cyber defenses .

as discussed , the international community must contend with a certain amount of ambiguity regarding what constitutes an "armed attack" attack in cyberspace and what the thresholds are for cyberattack as an act of war , an incident of national significance , or both .

without clear redlines and specific consequences articulated , deterrence strategies may be incomplete .

on the other hand , a lack of redlines and consequences could constitute a form of strategic ambiguity that gives the u.s. military operational maneuverability .

congress may wish to consider these concerns as new legislation regarding critical infrastructure protection is proposed .

skilled cyber operators are in demand in the military , and the national supply of cyber professionals tends to reside in the private sector .

some of the services are looking at bolstering opportunities for officers who wish to pursue careers in cybersecurity by creating new occupational specialties and career tracks .

yet barriers to hiring skilled civilians for the dod cyber mission may hinder the development of a robust workforce .

congress may choose to consider ways to incentivize and bolster recruitment of talent outside of the military , such as providing special hiring authorities for certain mission critical positions , streamlining or revising the clearance process for national security personnel , and compensation comparable to private sector equivalent jobs .

reports have described the uscybercom cyber force's "national mission teams" as protecting the networks that undergird critical infrastructure .

given that the majority of this critical infrastructure resides in the private sector , for which dhs has coordinating authority , how do uscybercom teams protect these assets during peacetime without violating posse comitatus , the prohibition against using the military for domestic policing ? .

how do these national teams interact and coordinate with dhs ? .

the unified command plan organizes combatant commands into geographic and functional areas .

u.s. cyber command is currently organized under the functional strategic command , and co - directed and located with the national security agency ( nsa ) .

with the complicated lines of authority ( title 10 vs .

title 50 ) associated with this structure , some have suggested separating the two organizations and giving civilian control to the nsa while elevating cyber command to the level of a full unified combatant command .

dod has been tasked by congress to study and report on the possible implications of this realignment .

specifically , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( p.l .

112-239 ) asks in section 940 "how a single individual could serve as a commander of a combatant command that conducts overt , though clandestine , cyber operations under title 10 , united states code , and serve as the head of an element of the intelligence community that conducts covert cyber operations under the national security act of 1947. .

given that the dod views cyberspace as one of five global domains , some proponents in congress contend that a separate cyber force , akin to the army , navy , air force , or marine corps , is necessary to properly address the military aspects of the domain .

however , critics point to the multi - layered aspect of cyberspace in which all services have equities .

as previously discussed , blurred lines between operations undertaken under title 10 and title 50 authorities can complicate efforts to determine the chain of command and jurisdictional review process .

what does this ambiguity mean for congressional oversight committees ? .

have some operations taken place without congressional notification ? .

what has been the department of defense's role in responding to cyberattacks on private networks ? .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 ( p.l .

113-291 ) contains some provisions related to dod cybersecurity and cyber operations .

these provisions: require reporting on cyber incidents with respect to networks and information systems of operationally critical contractors and certain other contractors .

require the principal cyber advisor to identify improvements to ensure sufficient civilian workforce to support uscybercom and components .

direct a program of decryption to inspect content for threats and insider activity within dod networks .

state the sense of congress that as icann turns to global community for leadership , support should be given only if assurances are provided for current legacy ip numbers used by dod and the u.s. government .

direct that a new mission forces , training , manning and equipping plan and associated programmatic elements be submitted to congress .

state a sense of congress for consideration regarding role of reserve components in defense against cyberattacks given their unique experience in private and public sectors and existing relationships with local and civil authorities for emergency response .

february - june 1999: kosovo was the arena for the first large - scale internet war , involving pro - serbian forces cyberattacking the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) .

as nato planes bombed serbia , pro - serbian hacker groups , such as the "black hand," attacked nato , u.s. , and uk internet infrastructure and computers via dos attacks and virus - infected email .

in the united states , the white house website was defaced .

the uk admitted to losing database information .

at nato headquarters in belgium , a public affairs website for the war in kosovo was "virtually inoperable for several days. .

simultaneously , nato's email server was flooded and choked with email .

during the kosovo conflict , a nato jet bombed the chinese embassy in belgrade in may 1999 .

the chinese red hacker alliance retaliated by launching thousands of cyberattacks against u.s. government websites .

october 2000: riots in the palestinian territories sparked rounds of cyberattacks between israelis and palestinians .

pro - israeli attacks targeted the official websites of the palestinian authority , hamas , and the government of iran .

pro - palestinian hackers retaliated against israeli political , military , telecommunications , media , the financial sector , commercial , and university websites .

since 2000 , the middle east cyberwar has kept pace with the ground conflict .

april - may 2007: ddos attacks shutdown websites of estonia's parliament , banks , ministries , newspapers , and broadcasters .

estonian officials accused the russian government of responding to their decision to move a soviet - era war memorial with retaliatory cyberattacks .

september 2007: israel disrupted syrian air defense networks during the bombing of an alleged nuclear facility in syria .

july 2008: government and corporate websites in lithuania were defaced .

the soviet - themed graffiti implicated russian nationalist hackers .

august 2008: georgian government and commercial websites were shut down by dos attacks at the same time that russian ground troops invaded the country .

january 2009: dos attacks originating in russia shut down kyrgyzstan's two main internet servers on the same day that the russian government pressured kyrgyzstan to bar u.s. access to a local airbase .

july 2009: servers in south korea and the united states sustained a series of attacks , reportedly by north korea .

june 2010: "stuxnet" worm damaged an iranian nuclear facility .

the united states and israel were implicated in the attack .

september 2011: "keylogger" malware was found on ground control stations for u.s. air force unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) and reportedly infected both classified and unclassified networks at creech air force base in nevada .

may 2012: an espionage worm called "flame," allegedly 20 times more complex than stuxnet , was discovered on computers in the iranian oil ministry , as well as in israel , syria , and sudan .

august 2012: "gauss" worm infected 2,500 systems worldwide .

the malware appeared to have been aimed at lebanese banks , and contained code whose encryption has not yet been broken .

august 2012: the "cutting sword of justice," a group reportedly linked to the government of iran , used the "shamoon" virus to attack major oil companies including aramco , a major saudi oil supplier , and the qatari company rasgas , a major liquefied natural gass ( lng ) supplier .

the attack on aramco deleted data on 30,000 computers and infected ( without causing damage ) control systems .

september 2012-june 2013: the hacker group izz ad - din al - qassam launched dos attacks against major u.s. financial institutions in "operation ababil. .

izz ad - din al - qassam is believed to have links to iran and hamas .

january 2013: the new york times , wall street journal , washington post , and bloomberg news revealed that they were targeted by persistent cyberattacks .

china was the suspected source .

may 2013: israeli officials reported a failed attempt by the syrian electronic army to compromise water supply to the city of haifa .

august 2013: leaks revealed that the u.s. government purportedly conducted 231 cyber intrusions in 2011 against russia , china , north korea , and iran .

most of the intrusions were related to nuclear proliferation .

april 2014: the disclosure of the heartbleed bug revealed vulnerability in the openssl protocol previously considered the standard for internet security .

canada reported more than 900 compromised social security numbers .

may 2014: the united states indicted five chinese military officers on charges of computer hacking , economic espionage , and other offenses against six targets in the united states' nuclear power , metals , and solar power industries .

china has denied the charges .

according to u.s. attorney general eric holder , "this is a case alleging economic espionage by members of the chinese military and represents the first ever charges against a state actor for this type of hacking. .

july 2014: the united states charged a chinese entrepreneur with breaking into the computer systems of the u.s. defense giant boeing and other firms to steal data on military programs concerning warplanes , including c - 17 cargo aircraft , and the f - 22 and f - 35 fighter jets .

at the same time , the security firm kapersky reported a massive cyber operation dubbed "energetic bear," which targeted more than 2,800 industrial firms around the globe .

although some reports identified a russian hacker group as the source , kapersky refrained from attributing the attack to any one country .

december 2014: u.s. cybersecurity firm cylance reported that an iranian hacker group has breached airlines , energy and defense firms , and the u.s. marine corps intranet in an attack known as "operation cleaver. .

