emergency departments ( eds ) play an important public health role during emergencies and on a regular basis by providing access to emergency care to all patients regardless of their ability to pay ( see text box 1 ) .

although the original intent of eds was to provide emergency care , this role has expanded , as patients often seek care in an ed when services are unavailable or inaccessible in the community .

federal law guarantees access to emergency services under the emergency medical treatment and active labor act ( emtala ) , which requires that hospitals screen all patients who enter their ed and stabilize those with emergent conditions regardless of the patients' insurance status .

hospitals that fail to do so can be excluded from the medicare program .

as a consequence of emtala , hospitals with eds must provide emergency care , which may be un - or under compensated ( i.e. , the hospital may not recover any or all of the cost of treatment ) .

specifically , more than 40% of all ed visits are for individuals who are uninsured or enrolled in medicaid , two types of patients where hospitals provide care that is un - or under compensated .

eds provide a disproportionate amount of health care to the u.s. population .

specifically , the 4% of physicians who staff eds are the treating physician in 28% of all acute care visits , and these visits disproportionately involve patients with more dangerous or worrisome symptoms , such as chest pain , respiratory complaints , and abdominal pain .

from 1992 to 2012 , the number of ed visits grew faster than the u.s. population .

this occurred for a number of reasons , including the immediate access to diagnostic resources that eds provide and community - level declines in access to primary or behavioral health care , which have occurred at the same time as population - level increases in rates of chronic conditions ( see table 1 ) .

eds also provide a significant amount of care to safety net populations .

eds handle two - thirds of acute care visits for the uninsured and one half of the acute care visits of people enrolled in medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

in some cases , eds are the appropriate site for care , but , in other cases , non - emergent patients seek care in an ed because they lack an alternative source of care .

this occurs for a number of reasons , including the patients' insurance status , their relationship to a regular provider , and their ability to secure a timely appointment with that provider .

the use of eds to provide nonemergency care can be costly to payers because services provided in an ed are generally more expensive than those provided in community - based settings .

ed services are more expensive , because , for example , eds have higher fixed costs ( in terms of space and staffing ) , its physicians may order additional tests or laboratory work , and because hospital charges are generally higher than those charged by physician's offices .

as a result of increased ed use and declining financial support for providing this volume of care , the institute of medicine , in a series of three reports published in 2006 , declared that ed care was "at a breaking point. .

subsequent work by the government accountability office ( gao ) confirmed that these challenges persisted and found that eds were crowded , that they diverted ambulances because they were unable to accept new patients , and that patients often experienced long waits for care .

although recent changes to health care delivery and financing ( eg , the growth of retail clinics and increases in the number of people who are insured because of the patient protection and affordable care act ) may improve ed operations for some hospitals , eds — particularly those in urban area — remain crowded .

it is also possible that some policy changes may have unintended consequences increasing ed use or further straining ed finances .

the federal government is interested in the availability of ed services and their appropriate use for several reasons , including its role as a payer of health care services , its role in supporting emergency preparedness , and its role in supporting the health care safety net .

the federal government is the largest health care payer , through the medicare and medicaid programs , and as such , the availability , use , and costs of ed services may be of interest to policy makers .

also , the federal government has made investments in emergency preparedness , programs and efforts that support the health care safety net , and efforts that support health care access in general .

given these investments , congress may be interested in eds because a well - functioning ed system is necessary to provide surge capacity in an emergency .

the function of the ed system , in turn , often reflects its surrounding community's access to health care services ; therefore , understanding the use of eds , evaluating whether such use is appropriate , and examining strategies employed to reduce inappropriate use may all be of policy interest .

this report describes eds , the role they play in the health care delivery system , and current federal involvement in supporting eds .

it then discusses the causes and consequences of three commonly identified and interrelated challenges that eds face: ( 1 ) crowding , ( 2 ) providing repeat care to a subset of patients who are frequent users , and ( 3 ) providing care to a large population who have behavioral health conditions when an ed lacks the appropriate resources to provide such treatment .

the report concludes with policy options that congress may consider to potentially improve ed functioning and reduce payer costs .

eds play a role in the u.s. health care system that has expanded beyond their original purpose of providing emergency care .

eds are increasingly relied upon to fill gaps in available care by providing after - hours care , by providing care to the safety net population , and by providing behavioral health care when such care is not otherwise available .

eds are also increasingly providing types of care that have traditionally been provided by primary care providers ( pcps ) , such as conducting diagnostic testing ( eg , blood testing ) and coordinating chronic care ( eg , care to manage a chronic disease such as diabetes ) .

the role of an ed within a hospital has also changed , as eds , instead of pcps , increasingly drive hospital admissions , an important source of hospital revenue .

this section provides an overview of the expanded role of eds .

all eds provide similar types of care , but they may see different patient populations depending on their location ( eg , rural areas versus urban areas ) , and the services offered , as some eds may offer specialized services such as trauma or burn care .

eds generally provide three types of care: ( 1 ) emergency care , ( 2 ) unscheduled urgent care , and ( 3 ) safety net care ( see text box 2 ) .

emergency care is the primary and original mission of eds .

unscheduled urgent care may be used to treat an acute problem or the acute exacerbation of a chronic health problem .

eds may provide safety net care because patients have financial or other barriers that prevent them from accessing care from other components of the health care system .

primary and behavioral health care are often provided in an ed as a result of either unscheduled urgent care or as part of an ed's safety net function .

in both these cases , it is not optimal to provide these services in an ed .

the federal government both regulates and supports ed services by ( 1 ) requiring hospitals with eds to provide certain emergency services , ( 2 ) reimbursing for emergency services provided to individuals enrolled in federal insurance programs , ( 3 ) requiring certain private insurance plans to include coverage of emergency health services , and ( 4 ) providing funds to hospitals to defray the cost of providing uncompensated care .

the federal government also supports hospital preparedness as part of its emergency preparedness activities , and supports the broader health care delivery system in ways that might reduce inappropriate ed use .

specifically , it supports health care safety net facilities , behavioral health care , and efforts to increase care coordination to reduce ed use for individuals with chronic conditions .

examples of federal involvement in hospital - based emergency care are discussed below .

nationwide , eds have developed different strategies to deliver the care most appropriate to their respective communities .

despite differences , eds generally face three common challenges to their ability to effectively provide care: ( 1 ) they are crowded , ( 2 ) they must provide repeat care to frequent users who could be more effectively treated in other settings , and ( 3 ) they must provide ( or attempt to provide ) care to patients with behavioral health conditions .

not all eds will face these challenges because many of these concerns are related to the population that the ed serves .

hospitals that serve patients who have greater access to health care because they are privately insured or have medicare coverage may not experience these challenges .

some hospitals have also developed strategies that have alleviated these concerns , or have implemented some of the strategies noted below .

still a number of eds face these three challenges , which are defined and discussed below .

to alleviate some of the issues raised regarding emergency care , congress might consider using various policy levers , including ( 1 ) oversight , ( 2 ) reimbursement changes to federal programs , ( 3 ) directed spending , ( 4 ) changes to statutory mandates , and ( 5 ) watchful waiting .

congress may also consider a combination of these levers .

the discussion below is not exhaustive , but it represents options that congress may consider to address some of the emergency care concerns raised in this report .

improving how eds function will require system - wide changes in health care delivery , as ed care is affected by a number of factors in the health care delivery system beyond an ed's control .

doing so may have the corollary benefit of reducing health care costs , because ed care is more costly than providing similar treatment in an outpatient setting .

in addition , the current delivery challenges that eds face increase costs because they delay patients' access to timely services .

a number of health system factors affect ed care , including insurance coverage ; the availability of inpatient hospital care ; and the availability of outpatient providers , in general , after hours , and their willingness to accept particular insurance types .

several of these health system factors are in flux , and how such changes play out may improve or harm ed function .

for example , the growth of urgent care , retail clinics , and efforts to expand access to insurance and better coordinate care may improve ed operations , but these changes may have unintended consequences and may not affect all eds equally .

delivery system changes are also occurring in the midst of population - level changes , which may increase the need for ed services because the population is aging with higher rates of chronic disease .

taken together , the issue of ed use and its functioning may require monitoring because a number of the variables that affect it are evolving .

