regardless of how a country regulates its immigration , some lawfully admitted foreign nationals may violate the conditions proscribed for being in the country , and some foreign nationals may enter the country illegally .

thus , in the united states , as in other countries , the removal of unauthorized aliens and other aliens who violate the conditions under which they were admitted ( eg , overstaying their authorized period of stay , committing a crime while in the country ) is central to immigration enforcement .

the removal and return of aliens to their country of nationality have become important policy issues for congress , and tend to be key issues in debates about immigration reform .

in 2012 , there were an estimated 11.4 million resident unauthorized aliens in the united states ; estimates of other removable aliens , such as lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) who commit crimes , are elusive .

more than 600,000 foreign nationals were repatriated from the united states in fy2013 — including about 440,000 formal removals .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provides broad authority to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and the department of justice ( doj ) to remove certain aliens from the united states , including unauthorized aliens and lawfully present foreign nationals who commit certain crimes .

the different removal processes are spelled out in several sections of the ina , which identifies two overarching reasons aliens may be removed from the united states: on the basis of inadmissibility or on the basis of deportability ( see " reasons for the removal of a foreign national " ) .

the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira , p.l .

104-208 ) , established new mechanisms by which to effectuate the removal of aliens who have violated the nation's immigration laws — including several streamlined processes .

an alien's immigration status and whether the alien has engaged in certain specified activities ( eg , committed a particular criminal offense ) determines which process is used .

lawful permanent residents are generally subject to the standard removal process where foreign nationals have their cases decided by an immigration judge .

however , arriving aliens who have not been admitted into the country , as well as aliens within the united states who have committed specified criminal offenses , may be subject to more streamlined removal processes such as reinstatement of removal or expedited removal of criminal aliens .

this report provides an overview of the statutory framework for removal and briefly describes the standard removal process .

it also describes several streamlined forms of removal , and two alternative forms of removal ( often referred to as returns ) that exempt aliens from certain penalties associated with formal removal: voluntary departure and withdrawal of petition for admission .

in addition , the report discusses recent trends in removals and returns , and concludes with a summary of potential avenues for relief from removal .

this report does not provide any legal analysis on these topics and does not discuss court cases related to removal .

it also does not discuss how removable foreign nationals are identified and located ( eg , the criminal alien program ) , or how the government chooses which removable aliens to initiate removal proceedings against ( i.e. , prosecutorial discretion ) .

the ina identifies two overarching reasons aliens may be removed from the united states: on the basis of inadmissibility or on the basis of deportability .

prior to the implementation of the iirira , the ina included separate provisions governing the "exclusion" of aliens who were ineligible to enter the country ( i.e. , "excludable" persons ) and the "deportation" of certain aliens within the united states ( i.e. , "deportable" persons ) .

the iirira created a single proceeding to cover both types of removable aliens .

nonetheless , the ina retains two separate grounds for removal: ( 1 ) for aliens who have not been admitted to the united states and are inadmissible under ina §212 , and ( 2 ) for aliens who have been admitted to the united states ( i.e. , entered legally ) and are deportable under ina §237 ( a ) .

taken together the grounds of inadmissibility and deportability form the grounds for removal ( i.e. , the statutory reason that an alien may be removed from the united states ) .

the grounds of inadmissibility and deportability are similar but not identical , as outlined below .

whether foreign nationals facing removal are subject to the grounds of inadmissibility or the grounds of deportability depends upon their immigration statuses .

any alien found to be inadmissible under ina §212 or deportable under ina §237 may be ordered removed .

the ina describes procedures for making and reviewing such a determination , and specifies conditions under which some of these provisions may be waived .

dhs officials may exercise certain forms of discretion in pursuing removal orders , and certain removable aliens may be eligible for permanent or temporary relief from removal .

nonetheless , some grounds for removal ( eg , criminal grounds , terrorist grounds ) render aliens ineligible for most forms of relief and may make the alien eligible for a streamlined removal process ( see " streamlined removal processes " ) .

ina §241 describes the general consequences of an order of removal , including what must occur after one has been issued .

aliens under a final order of removal normally are required to depart the united states within 90 days and may be detained until the removal order is executed .

usually , the secretary of dhs must remove an alien within 90 days of the alien receiving a final order of removal ( also see " removal process " ) .

under most circumstances , ina §241 requires that aliens under a final order of removal be detained until the removal order is executed ( i.e. , until the alien is removed from the country ) .

in addition , aliens who are not detained and cannot be removed within 90 days face other supervision requirements .

following an order of removal , an alien is inadmissible to the united states for a minimum of five years after the date of the removal , and therefore is generally ineligible during the period of inadmissibility to return to the united states in the absence of an applicable exception .

the period of inadmissibility is determined by the reason for the removal and the type of removal process used .

for example , an alien who is ordered removed based on removal proceedings initiated upon the alien's arrival is inadmissible for five years , while an alien ordered removed after being apprehended within the united states is inadmissible for 10 years .

the length of inadmissibility increases to 20 years in the case of an alien's second or subsequent removal order , and is indefinite in the case of an alien convicted of an aggravated felony .

absent additional factors , unlawful presence in the united states is a civil violation , not a criminal offense , and removal and its associated administrative processes are civil proceedings .

thus , aliens in removal proceedings generally have no right to appointed counsel ( though they may be represented by counsel at their own expense ) .

in addition , congress may pass legislation that imposes immigration consequences retroactively .

certain dhs personnel may initiate a removal process against an alien by presenting the alien with a notice to appear ( nta ) .

the nta outlines the ina provisions that the alien is charged with violating ( i.e. , one of the grounds of inadmissibility or deportability discussed in " reasons for the removal of a foreign national " ) .

upon the receipt of an nta , foreign nationals may be detained during removal proceedings , and certain foreign nationals are subject to mandatory detention .

foreign nationals who are not subject to mandatory detention may be released on bond or their own recognizance .

an alien who is eligible to be released on bond may request a bond redetermination hearing before an immigration judge to have the bond lowered , or to be given bond if it was denied by dhs .

during the bond hearing , the alien must prove that he or she is not a flight risk or a danger to society .

bond hearings are not considered part of the removal process .

the standard removal process under ina §240 is a trial - like proceeding in which an attorney from dhs presents the government's case for why the alien should be removed and an immigration judge from the department of justice's executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) determines whether the alien should be removed .

the standard removal process is only one of several ways aliens may be removed from the united states .

an alien may concede removability ( i.e. , accept stipulated removal ) rather than undergoing the standard removal proceeding .

in addition , an alien may be subject to one of several types of streamlined removal procedures , which generally include more - limited opportunities for relief and review than the standard removal process ( see " streamlined removal processes " ) .

until fy2013 , the majority of aliens apprehended along the southwest border were not subject to the standard removal procedures or expedited removal ( see " statistics on removals and returns " ) ; instead , the majority of these aliens were allowed to either undergo voluntary departure or withdraw their applications .

voluntary departure and withdraw of application are often referred to as types of returns rather than removals .

in addition , some aliens within the country accept voluntary departure either as an alternative to having a judge render a decision regarding their removability or at the conclusion of their removal proceeding .

there are two sets of statistics regarding removals and returns of aliens from the united states .

the first set is from dhs' office of immigration statistics ( ois ) and include removals and returns by both immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) in the interior of the country and by cbp at the borders .

additionally , ice produces its own statistics on removals that do not include cbp's statistics .

crs presents both sets of data because different information can be obtained from the manner in which each maintains and presents its data .

for example , ice is able to provide data on the grounds ( i.e. , main reason ) for removal , which is not captured in data from ois .

overall , both sets of data present a similar picture of removals .

the data show an increase in the total number of removals , driven mostly by an increase in the use of expedited removal processes and a decrease in the use of returns ( i.e. , voluntary departure and withdraw of application ) .

the decrease in returns is most likely attributable to a policy change that places more aliens in removal processes rather than allowing them to withdraw their applications , and to a decrease in the total number of apprehensions along the southwest border .

there are mechanisms under the ina that allow certain removable aliens to remain in the united states , either permanently or temporarily .

this section provides an overview of the types of relief from removal available under the ina .

it begins with a discussion of the types of relief that confer or can lead to lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status for an alien .

the discussion then shifts to types of relief from removal that allow aliens to remain in the united states but do not confer an immigration status that would allow them to remain in the country permanently .

aliens in removal proceedings may apply for more than one type of relief .

among the proceedings initially decided by an immigration judge in fy2013 , 40% of aliens had applications for some type of relief from removal .

the immigration and nationality act contains several different processes to effectuate the removal of aliens , as well as mechanisms to allow select aliens to remain in the united states either temporarily or permanently .

during the previous two administrations there has been a concerted effort to increase the number of removals by increasing the use of streamlined removal processes and decreasingly allowing voluntary departure and withdraws of application .

if congress considers reforms to the immigration system , the criteria and mechanisms for removing aliens from , and authorizing aliens to remain in , the united states may become central issues .

appendix a. removals by country: top 10 countries appendix b .

types of cancellation of removal cancellation of removal was created in the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira , p.l .

104-208 ) .

it replaced two other forms of relief from removal , and the eligibility requirements are generally tighter for those who do not have lpr status than they were in the forms of relief it replaced .

certain aliens are ineligible for cancellation of removal , including those who are removable on security or terrorism grounds and those who have previously received cancellation of removal .

ina §240a ( a ) gives the attorney general the ability to cancel the removal of an alien who is inadmissible or deportable and adjust the alien's status to lpr if the alien has been an lpr for at least five years , has resided in the united states continuously for seven years after being admitted as an lpr , and has not been convicted of an aggravated felony .

the attorney general may also cancel the removal of an alien who is inadmissible or deportable and adjust the alien's status to lpr if the alien has been physically present in the united states for a continuous period of 10 years prior to the date of application for relief ; has been a person of good moral character ; has not been convicted of a criminal offense that would make the alien inadmissible or deportable , or convicted of an offense related to document fraud or falsely claiming citizenship ; and establishes that removal would result in exceptional and extremely unusual hardship to the alien's spouse , parent , or child who is a u.s. citizen or lpr ( i.e. , the hardship cannot be to the alien ) .

there are special rules for battered alien spouses and children .

specifically , the attorney general may cancel the removal of a battered alien spouse or child who is inadmissible or deportable and adjust the alien's status to lpr if the alien has been physically present in the united states for a continuous period of at least three years immediately preceding the date of such application ; has been a person of good moral character ; is not inadmissible on criminal or security grounds , or deportable for marriage fraud , criminal offenses , false documents , or security grounds ; and has not been convicted of an aggravated felony ; and establishes that the removal would result in extreme hardship to the alien , the alien's child , or the alien's parent .

extreme hardship is evaluated on an individual basis , taking into account the particular facts and circumstances of each case .

to establish extreme hardship , an applicant must demonstrate that deportation would result in a degree of hardship beyond that typically associated with deportation .

under regulation , applicants are encouraged to cite and document all applicable factors in their applications for cancellation of removal , as the presence or absence of any one factor may not be determinative in evaluating extreme hardship .

adjudicators should weigh all relevant factors presented and consider them in light of the totality of the circumstances .

the nicaraguan adjustment and central american relief act ( nacara ) created a special cancelation of removal provision for certain central americans and eastern europeans .

this provision generally mirrors the suspension of deportation relief that was available before the enactment of iirira in 1996 .

reportedly , uscis believes that nearly all qualifying nacara applications have been adjudicated .

