colombia is a key u.s. ally in the region .

with diplomatic relations that began in the 19 th century following colombia's independence from spain , the countries have enjoyed close and strong ties .

because of colombia's prominence in the production of illegal drugs , the united states and colombia forged a close partnership over the past 16 years .

focused initially on counternarcotics , and later counterterrorism , a program called plan colombia laid the foundation for a strategic partnership that has broadened to include sustainable development , human rights , trade , regional security , and many other areas of cooperation .

between fy2000 and fy2016 , the u.s. congress appropriated more than $10 billion in assistance from u.s. state department and department of defense ( dod ) accounts to carry out plan colombia and its follow - on strategies .

during this time , colombia made notable progress combating drug trafficking and terrorist activities and reestablishing government control over much of its territory .

its economic and social policies have reduced the poverty rate and its security policies have lowered the homicide rate .

counternarcotics policy has been the defining issue in u.s. - colombian relations since the 1980s because of colombia's preeminence as a source country for illicit drugs .

peru and bolivia were the main global producers of cocaine in the 1980s and early 1990s .

however , successful efforts there in reducing supply pushed cocaine production from those countries to colombia , which soon surpassed both its andean neighbors .

the farc and other armed groups in the country financed themselves primarily through narcotics trafficking , and that lucrative illicit trade provided the gasoline for the decades - long internal armed conflict at least since the 1990s .

colombia emerged to dominate the cocaine trade by the late 1990s .

national concern about the crack cocaine epidemic and extensive drug use in the united states led to greater concern with colombia as a source .

as colombia became the largest producer of coca leaf and the largest exporter of finished cocaine , heroin produced from colombian - grown poppies was supplying a growing proportion of the u.s. market .

alarm over the volumes of heroin and cocaine being exported to the united states was a driving force behind u.s. support for plan colombia at its inception .

the evolution of plan colombia took place under changing leadership and changing conditions in both the united states and colombia .

plan colombia was followed by successor strategies such as the national consolidation plan , described below , and u.s. - colombia policy has reached a new phase anticipating post - conflict colombia .

congress remains interested in colombia's future because the country has become one of the united states' closest allies .

with 17 years of investment in colombia's security and stability , some maintain that there has already been a strong return on u.s. investment .

plan colombia and its successor strategies broadened from counternarcotics to include humanitarian concerns , efforts to bolster democratic development and human rights protections , and trade and investment to spark growth .

the record expansion of colombia's coca crop and increasing cocaine exports to the united states , however , may significantly hinder the effort to consolidate peace in colombia and could potentially increase corruption and extortion .

a significant portion of the colombian public remains skeptical of the peace process and the farc's role in colombia's democracy .

other colombians maintain that support for peace programs in colombia is important not only to benefit former farc or other demobilized combatants but also to fulfill promises the government made in the peace accords to the country's 8.6 million victims of the five - decade conflict .

as president duque concluded his first 100 days in office , his government faced overlapping challenges: ( 1 ) an upsurge in illicit drug crops , which had set records in 2016 and 2017 ; ( 2 ) implementation of provisions of the peace accord negotiated by former president santos but marred by slow implementation , attacks on land and human rights activists , and projected budgetary shortfalls ; ( 3 ) renewed violent competition among criminal groups in rural areas , some of which reportedly are sheltering in venezuela ; and ( 4 ) venezuela's humanitarian crisis , which resulted in a surge of migrants fleeing to or through colombia .

the annual level of foreign assistance provided by the u.s. congress for colombia began to decline in fy2008 and then gradually increased in fy2017 and fy2018 to support peace and implementation of the farc - government peace accord .

some members of congress may want to build on cooperation with colombian partners to continue to train central americans and other third - country nationals in counternarcotics and security , including programs in citizen security , crime prevention and monitoring , military and police capacity building , and hostage negotiation and cybersecurity .

congress may continue to closely monitor colombia's domestic security situation .

it also may continue to oversee issues such as drug trafficking ; colombia's effort to combat other illegal armed groups such as bacrim ; the status of human rights protections ; and the expansion of health , economic , environmental , energy , and educational cooperation .

congress may seek to foster colombian leadership in the region to counter growing political instability in venezuela .

the u.s. congress has been interested in expanding investment and trade opportunities both bilaterally with colombia and within regional groupings , such as the pacific alliance .

some analysts contend that u.s. - colombian trade improvements rest on the strength of the overall relationship between colombia and the united states .

