three royalty debates may be revived in the 114 th congress: ( 1 ) whether to increase the statutory minimum rate for onshore federal oil and gas leases from 12.5% to 18.75% , ( 2 ) whether to enact revenue sharing laws for outer continental shelf ( ocs ) leases to include all coastal states , and ( 3 ) whether to charge a royalty on hardrock locatable minerals produced on federal public domain lands .

the onshore royalty rate for federal oil and gas leases has remained at 12.5% since the inception of the mineral leasing act of 1920 .

if a lease produces oil or gas , a royalty is paid to the landowner on the value of extracted production .

for federal onshore leases , lessees pay the statutory minimum of 12.5% on the value of production , but for offshore leases , royalty rates currently range from 12.5% to 18.75% .

there is currently no royalty on locatable minerals extracted from public domain lands .

however , there is a 5% gross revenue royalty on minerals extracted from acquired federal lands .

this includes a relatively small amount of minerals produced in national forests in some of the midwestern states .

revenue sharing from ocs leases occurs under the gulf of mexico energy and security act ( gomesa ) enacted in 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) for four gulf coastal states: louisiana , texas , alabama , and mississippi .

the states collect 37.5% of leasing revenues from selected leases off their coasts .

another revenue sharing feature of offshore leases allows the states to collect 27% of leasing revenues from leases within 3 miles beyond the states' offshore boundaries .

a relatively small amount was disbursed to coastal states from offshore leases .

for example , in fy2014 , this share was about $38 million out of nearly $2.2 billion in total state onshore and offshore disbursements .

oil and natural gas produced on federal lands account for 5% and 13% of total u.s. oil and gas production , respectively .

the volume and value of hardrock minerals produced on federal lands is unclear but some estimates have been made by the government accountability office ( gao ) , the house natural resources committee democratic staff , and the department of the interior .

there is a significant amount of leasing revenue collected by the office of natural resources revenue ( onrr ) within the department of the interior and disbursed to various states , the general treasury , and specific funds such as the land and water conservation fund and the reclamation fund .

federal revenues from energy and mineral leases were estimated at $14.4 billion in fy2013 by onrr ( using sales data ) , but have ranged from a low of about $8.1 billion in fy2004 to a high of about $24.1 billion in fy2008 , during the10-year period ( fy2004-fy2013 ) .

changing prices for oil and gas are the most significant factors in the revenue swings .

see the appendix for details on revenues received and disbursed from mineral leasing programs and hardrock mining claims from fy2011 to fy2013 .

house and senate bills in the 113 th congress proposed to raise the minimum royalty rate from 12.5% to 18.75% on oil and gas produced on federal leases , improve the permitting process , provide for revenue sharing of ocs revenues , or establish a "gross proceeds" royalty on federally owned locatable mineral production .

this report serves as a primer on selected royalty issues debated by previous congresses and likely to be faced in the 114 th congress .

new royalty revenue sharing proposals have generally addressed allocating more revenues to the coastal states where offshore leases are held .

this section on the ocs leasing system provides a framework for understanding how the offshore leasing program works .

mining of hardrock minerals on federal lands is governed primarily by the general mining law of 1872 .

the original purposes of the mining law were to promote mineral exploration and development on federal lands in the western united states , offer an opportunity to obtain a clear title to mines already being worked , and help settle the west .

the mining law grants free access to individuals and corporations to prospect for minerals on open public domain lands , and allows them , upon making a discovery , to stake ( or "locate" ) a claim on the deposit .

a valid claim entitles the holder to develop the minerals .

the 1872 mining law originally applied to all valuable mineral deposits except coal ( 17 stat .

91 , 1872 , as amended ) .

the mining law continues to provide the structure for much of the western mineral development on public domain lands .

western mining , although not as extensive as it once was , is still a major economic activity , and a high percentage of hardrock mining is on public lands .

as of september 1 , 2014 , to hold a claim on public land , claimants must pay an annual maintenance fee of $155 per claim .

claimants with 10 claims or fewer may file for a waiver of the annual maintenance fee and perform annual assessment work instead .

there also is a $37 fee for first - time locators to locate and record a claim .

the fees above are to be adjusted every five years based on the consumer price index ( 30 u.s.c .

28 j ( c ) ) .

the next adjustment is projected to be made on september 1 , 2019 .

the annual maintenance fee replaces the requirement that $100 of annual development work be conducted per claim .

once a claimed mineral deposit is determined to be economically recoverable , and at least $500 of development work has been performed , the claim holder had the right to file a patent application to obtain title to surface and mineral rights .

beginning january 3 , 1989 , a fee of $250 per patent application plus $50 per claim within each application had been required .

if the patent application is approved , the claimant had the right to purchase surface and mineral rights at a rate of $2.50 per acre for placer claims and $5 per acre for lode claims .

these per - acre fees were substantial when the mining law was enacted ; claimed land and minerals now far exceed these amounts in value .

the following provisions currently apply to mining claims: there is no limit on the number of claims a person can locate ; there is no requirement that mineral production ever commence ; mineral production can take place without a patent or royalty payments to the federal government ; and claims can be held indefinitely with or without mineral production .

beginning in fy1995 , congress has enacted ( in the interior appropriations laws ) a series of one - year moratoria on the issuance of mineral patents .

however , applications meeting certain requirements that were filed on or before september 30 , 1994 , are allowed to proceed , and third - party contractors are authorized to process the mineral examinations on those applications .

the patent moratorium will not stop the production of valuable mineral resources from the public lands , but will prevent the further transfer of ownership of public lands to the private sector ( with the exception of the 237 patent applications already in the pipeline ) .

the annual one - year moratorium on patenting continues along with the uncertainty over whether efforts will continue to try to reform the 1872 mining law .

the mining industry would like to end the uncertainty to facilitate its long - term business planning .

environmentalists , who were hoping for new environmental protection language in a major mining law reform bill , argue that the patent moratorium does not protect the environment from current mining practices .

the two types of royalties being debated generally include gross proceeds / net smelter return royalty and a net income royalty .

a gross proceeds ( income ) royalty or similarly a net smelter returns royalty is based on the gross revenue minus smelting charges and transportation costs and other allowable costs .

this type of royalty would generally guarantee royalty revenues when production occurs .

collections and administration are relatively simple and inexpensive .

the royalty would apply even when the operation was unprofitable ; if it caused the mine to shut down , all royalties would be lost .

assessing royalties at the smelter stage could also lead to mining only the highest quality ore .

the added costs could cause some mines to be uneconomic .

a net income royalty would be applied after all costs were subtracted from gross income and would be based on profitability of the mine .

this royalty would focus not on gross production but on the operation's economic rent ; that is , any profit in excess of that necessary to maintain the mine in operation .

the net income royalty would be expected to have less impact on marginal mines , and thus be less likely to shut them down .

one disadvantage with this type of royalty is that it would require a much higher percentage royalty to achieve the same level of revenue flow .

in addition , when there are no profits , there are no royalties , unlike the net smelter royalty .

the mining industry argues that this is "socially equitable," because the royalty is applied to what it defines as excess profits or rents .

a net income royalty could be difficult to administer and subject to "creative accounting," meaning that firms could increase deductions to show little or no net profits , thus avoiding payment of the royalty .

the right to enter the public domain lands and prospect for and develop minerals is the feature of the claim - patent system that draws the most vigorous support from the mining industry .

modern hardrock mineral exploration requires a continuous effort using vast tracts of land and sophisticated and expensive technology .

industry officials argue that being able to obtain full and clear title to the land enhances a company's ability to bring an economic deposit into production ; financing the project , for example , may be more feasible .

they contend that restrictions on free access and security of tenure would curtail exploration efforts among large and small mining firms .

in their view , the incentive to develop would be lost , long - run costs would increase , and the industry and the country would suffer .

mining law critics consider the claim - patent system a giveaway of publicly owned resources because of the small charges associated with keeping a claim active and obtaining a patent and the absence of royalties .

they maintain that although such generous terms may have been effective ways to help settle the west and develop minerals , there is no solid evidence that under a different system , minerals would not be developed today .

they also believe the current system , by conveying title and allowing other uses of patented lands , creates difficult land management problems through the creation of private inholdings on public land , and that current law does not provide for adequate protection of the environment .

in the claim - patent system , mineral claims may be held indefinitely without any mineral production .

once lands are patented to convey full title to the claimant , the owner can use the lands for a variety of purposes , including non - mineral ones .

however , using land under an unpatented mining claim for anything but mineral and associated purposes violates the mining law .

critics believe that many claims are held for speculative purposes .

however , industry officials argue that a claim may lie idle until market conditions make it profitable to develop the mineral deposit .

the industry generally opposes placing hardrock minerals under a leasing system because this would give the federal government discretionary control over development , impose royalty payments , and retain government ownership of surface and / or mineral rights .

the policy debate on federal lands used for hardrock mineral development focuses on whether a royalty will be charged at all .

there is currently no royalty payment required to the federal government for minerals extracted from federal public domain lands .

there is ongoing congressional debate over the following: whether to place selected minerals ( eg , gold , copper , and silver ) in a leasing system and charge a royalty , perhaps even a sliding scale royalty based on prices ; alternatively , whether to retain the claim - patent system , adding a royalty to production costs ; whether to establish a gross income royalty or a net income royalty ; the most vigorous debate has centered on this issue ; whether to establish a gross income royalty of 8% on the production of locatable minerals from new mining claims and 4% of gross income on production from certain existing claims .

a legislative proposal in the 113 th congress , h.r .

5060 ( hardrock mining and reclamation act of 2014 ) , included these provisions ; this proposal was not enacted ; and an administration proposal to establish a leasing process ( under the mineral leasing act of 1920 ) for certain hardrock locatable minerals , including a gross proceeds royalty of not less than 5% on the value of production for new leases .

existing mining claims would be exempt from the new leasing process .

onshore leasable minerals receipts receipts from leasing are collected by the doi onrr .

for oil and gas , areas identified as known geological structures are offered for lease competitively ; for areas with bids less than the identified minimum or outside known geological structures , leases may be offered to applicants without competition for a $75 application fee ( in lieu of a bonus bid ) .

bonus bids — competitive bonus bidding is used for lease sales , with leases awarded to the highest bidder .

a minimum acceptable bonus bid is determined by blm ( based on their economic analysis of fair market value ) for each tract offered .

successful bidders make an up - front cash payment , called a bonus bid , to secure the lease .

rents — administratively determined annual payments are charged per acre leased until production commences or the lease is terminated or relinquished .

royalties — payments of a share of production are made , generally set at 12.5% of the value of production .

the secretary of the interior may reduce or eliminate the royalty established by the lease to promote increased recovery .

permit fees — administratively determined fees are charged for filing applications for permits to drill .

the fees are intended to recover administrative costs of permit processing disposition of receipts payments to states , except alaska ( mineral leasing act of 1920 ; 30 u.s.c .

§191 ) — 50% of receipts are permanently appropriated to the states .

reclamation fund — 40% of receipts , except in alaska , are deposited in the reclamation fund ; expenditures require an annual appropriation .

payments to alaska ( mineral leasing act of 1920 ; 30 u.s.c .

§191 , as amended by p.l .

85-505 ) — 90% of receipts from leases in alaska are permanently appropriated to the state .

federal administrative costs — 2% of the states' share ( 1% of receipts , except for 1.8% of receipts in alaska ) is retained and permanently appropriated to the blm to cover administrative costs of the leasing program , under language in the interior appropriation bills since fy2008 .

general treasury — the remaining 10% of receipts is deposited in the treasury .

offshore leasable minerals receipts leasing minerals ( primarily oil and gas ) under the federal outer continental shelf ( ocs , typically from 3 to 200 miles offshore ) is governed by the 1953 outer continental shelf lands act ( ocsla , 43 u.s.c .

§§1301 , et seq. ) .

the doi boem prepares five - year leasing plans and periodically offers leases at auction .

bonus bids — competitive sealed bonus bidding is used for lease sales , with leases awarded to the highest bidder .

successful bidders make an up - front cash payment , called a bonus bid , to secure the lease .

a minimum acceptable bonus bid is determined by boem ( based on their economic analysis of fair market value ) for each tract offered .

in contrast to onshore oil and gas leasing , if no bids match or exceed the minimum , the lease is withheld , to be offered again at a later sale .

rents — administratively determined annual payments are charged per acre leased for nonproducing active leases .

royalties — payment of a share of production is made by the successful bidder .

royalty rates are generally set at 12.5% , 16.7% , or 18.75% of the value of production , with the highest rate used in recent offshore lease sales .

the secretary of the interior may reduce or eliminate the royalty established by the lease to promote increased recovery .

permit fees — administratively determined fees are charged for filing and maintaining permits .

disposition of receipts land and water conservation fund ( lwcf , p.l .

88-578 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§460 l - 4 , et seq. ) .

 — up to $900 million annually is allocated to the lwcf .

it receives deposits from several sources , such as surplus federal property sales and federal motorboat fuel taxes , and then revenues from ocs leasing to fulfill the $900 million annual authorization ; expenditures require an annual appropriation .

national historic preservation fund ( national historic preservation act , p.l .

89-665 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§470 , et seq .

 ) — $150 million annually from ocs lease receipts is allocated to the fund ; expenditures require an annual appropriation .

section 8 ( g ) payments to states ( §8 ( g ) of the ocsla amendments of 1985 , p.l .

99-272 ) — 27% of receipts from §8 ( g ) common pool lands is permanently appropriated to the states ; §8 ( g ) common pool lands are defined as submerged acreage lying outside the 3-nautical mile state - federal demarcation , typically extending to a total of 6 nautical miles offshore but including a pool of oil common to both federal and state jurisdiction .

a 1978 ocsla amendment provides for "fair and equitable" sharing of revenues from §8 ( g ) common pool lands .

section 8 ( p ) payments to states ( gulf of mexico energy security act ( gomesa ) of 2006 , p.l .

109-432 , amending ocsla ) — 37.5% of receipts from specified federal oil and gas leases off the coasts of selected gulf states is permanently appropriated to those states ( alabama , louisiana , mississippi , and texas ; no leasing occurs off the florida coast ) .

lwcf , stateside program ( gomesa ) — 12.5% of receipts from specified federal oil and gas leases off the coasts of selected gulf states is permanently appropriated to the national park service to be used consistent with the stateside program under the lwcf act .

coastal impact assistance program ( ciap , energy policy act of 2005 , p.l .

109-58 , §384 ) — $250 million of annual spending for fy2007-fy2010 was permanently appropriated , 65% to coastal producing states ( alabama , alaska , california , louisiana , mississippi , and texas ) and 35% to eligible political subdivisions , allocated among states by the formula in law ( based on previous qualified ocs revenues ) .

general treasury — any remaining funds are deposited in the treasury .

hardrock / locatable minerals receipts the general mining law of 1872 established a system of free access for individuals and corporations to prospect for hardrock ( or locatable ) minerals ( eg , gold , silver , copper ) on open federal lands and to stake a claim on the deposit ( 30 u.s.c .

chapter 2 ) .

the minerals can then be extracted from sites with valid claims .

the claim can be "patented" to transfer title to the relevant lands to the claimant , although patenting the land is not necessary to extract the minerals .

since fy1995 , congress has included a provision prohibiting land patents under the general mining law in the annual interior appropriations acts .

receipts from hardrock / locatable minerals are generated from fees to locate the claim , an annual fee to maintain the claim , and a per - acre fee to patent the claim .

the location fee is $37 per claim to locate and record the claim .

the annual maintenance fee is $155 per claim .

this fee replaces the previous annual requirement of $100 of development work to maintain each claim .

claimants with 10 claims or fewer may file to waive the annual maintenance fee and perform the annual work assessment instead .

fees are adjusted every five years for inflation , based on the consumer price index .

patenting the claim ( which has been prohibited under a provision in the annual interior appropriations acts since fy1995 ) includes two fees: patent application fee is $250 , plus $50 for each claim in the application .

land patent fee is $2.50 or $5.00 per acre , depending on the type of claim .

disposition of receipts cost of collections ( p.l .

111-8 , fy2009 omnibus appropriations act at 123 stat .

701 ) — the blm is authorized to retain a portion of the receipts based on blm's cost of collections .

general treasury — any remaining receipts are deposited in the treasury .

