the national forest system ( nfs ) is administered by the forest service ( fs ) in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the nfs is comprised of national forests , national grasslands , and various other designations .

although 87% of nfs lands are in the west , the fs administers more federal land in the east than all other federal agencies combined .

nfs lands are administered for sustained yields of multiple uses , including outdoor recreation ( camping , hiking , hunting , sightseeing , etc .

 ) , livestock grazing , timber harvesting , watershed protection , and fish and wildlife habitats .

ownership and use of the national forests — and federal lands more generally — have stirred controversy for decades .

conflicting public values concerning the national forests raise many questions and issues: how managers should balance conflicting uses , whether congress should designate specially protected areas , and when and how the fs should collect and distribute fees for land and resource uses , among others .

congress continues to examine these questions through legislative proposals , program oversight , and annual appropriations .

in 1891 , congress granted the president the authority ( now repealed ) to establish forest reserves from the public domain .

six years later , congress stated that the forest reserves were to improve and protect the forest within the reservation , or for the purpose of securing favorable conditions of water flows , and to furnish a continuous supply of timber for the use and necessities of the citizens of the united states .

initially , the reserves were administered by the division of forestry in the department of the interior's general land office .

in 1905 , this division was combined with the usda bureau of forestry ( renamed the forest service ) , and the administration of the 56 million acres of forest reserves ( renamed national forests in 1907 ) was transferred to the new agency within the department of agriculture .

nfs management is still one of the three principal fs responsibilities .

the other two principal responsibilities are providing assistance programs to nonfederal forest owners and conducting forestry research programs .

in 1906 and 1907 , president theodore roosevelt more than doubled the acreage of the forest reserves .

in response , congress limited the authority of the president to add to the system in certain states in 1907 .

in 1910 , congress continued the limitation , but then in 1911 , congress passed the weeks act to authorize additions to the nfs through the purchase of private lands .

presidential authority to proclaim new national forests was terminated in 1976 .

under the weeks act and other authorities , the system has continued to grow slowly , from 154 million acres in 1919 to 193 million acres in 2014 .

this growth has resulted from purchases and donations of private land and from land transfers , primarily from the blm .

the nfs includes 154 national forests with 188.4 million acres ( 97.6% of the system ) , 20 national grasslands with 3.8 million acres ( 2.0% ) , and 108 other areas — such as land utilization projects , purchase units , and research and experimental areas — with 0.9 million acres ( 0.5% ) .

each national forest unit ( which may consist of one or more national forests ) is administered by a forest supervisor .

the nfs units are arranged into nine administrative regions , each headed by a regional forester .

the nine regional foresters report to the nfs deputy chief , who reports to the chief of the forest service .

the chief has traditionally been a career employee of the agency .

the chief reports to the usda secretary through the under secretary for natural resources and environment .

the nfs regions are often referred to by number rather than by name .

table 1 identifies the number , states encompassed , and acreage for each of the regions .

nfs lands are concentrated in the seven western fs regions ( see figure 1 ) .

inholdings , shown in table 1 , are lands ( primarily private ) within the designated boundaries of the national forests ( and other nfs units ) that are not administered by the fs .

inholdings sometimes pose difficulties for fs land management , because the agency does not regulate their development and use , which may be incompatible with desired uses of the federal lands , and constraints on access across inholdings may limit access to some federal lands .

many private landowners , however , object to the idea of possible federal restrictions on the use of their lands and especially to unfettered public access across their lands .

the fs receives both discretionary and mandatory appropriations .

although it is an agency within the usda , the fs receives its discretionary appropriations through title iii of regular interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bills .

annual mandatory appropriations are provided under existing authorizing statutes .

laws authorizing mandatory appropriations allow the fs to spend money without further action by congress , and the budget authority for several of these mandatory spending accounts is dependent on revenue generated by activities on the national forests .

in fy2016 , the fs received $7.06 billion in total funding , of which $6.36 billion ( 90% ) was discretionary funds and an estimated $691.91 million ( 10% ) was mandatory funds .

management of the nfs is primarily funded as one of the fs's main discretionary accounts .

however , several of the mandatory accounts also fund nfs activities , although this report focuses on discretionary appropriations .

in fy2016 , congress appropriated $1.51 billion to the nfs discretionary account .

on average over the last five fiscal years , the nfs account has received approximately 28% of the fs discretionary appropriations .

fs budget requests and interior appropriations subcommittee documents typically allocate monies in each account among various subaccounts and , in some cases , among specific programs and activities .

the fs further allocates its appropriations — at the account , subaccount , and program activity levels — among the nine fs regions , five research stations , two service centers and laboratories , and the national headquarters office in washington , dc .

once the funds have been allocated to the regions and programs , the money is then further allocated to each national forest .

this can make analyzing appropriations by region or by forest challenging .

the nfs account includes several subaccounts , programs , and activities , many of which reflect the different ways the national forests are used .

the largest subaccount is forest products , which generally receives around one - quarter of the nfs appropriation and funds the timber sale program .

the nfs subaccounts generally include the following ( listed in the order they generally appear in congressional appropriations documents ) : land management planning funds the development , maintenance , and revision of the forest plans ( fy2016: $37.0 million , 2% of nfs ) .

inventory and monitoring funds the acquisition , analysis , and storage of data that support planning and other programs , such as restoration activities , climate change impact evaluations , and watershed condition assessments ( fy2016: $148.0 million , 10% of nfs ) .

recreation , heritage , and wilderness funds activities related to the management of recreation opportunities on the nfs , administering recreation special use authorizations , supporting the protection of heritage resources , and protection of designated wilderness areas and wild and scenic rivers ( fy2016: $261.7 million , 17% of nfs ) .

grazing management funds the administration of livestock grazing use permits on the nfs and implementing environmental reviews of all fs grazing allotments as statutorily mandated ( fy2016: 56.9 million , 4% of nfs ) .

forest products funds activities to analyze , prepare , offer , award , and administer timber sales , stewardship contracts , and special forest products permits on nfs lands ( fy2016: $359.8 million , 24% of nfs ) .

vegetation and watershed management funds restoration - related management activities to improve forest and rangeland conditions , fish and wildlife habitat , water quality , quantity , and timing of stream flows , among others ( fy2016: $184.7 million , 12% of nfs ) .

wildlife and fish habitat management funds activities to restore , recover , and maintain wildlife and fish — particularly rare animal and plant species — and their habitats on nfs lands ( fy2016: $140.5 million , 9% of nfs ) .

collaborative forest landscape restoration program fund ( cflr p ) , authorized in 2009 , funds 23 landscape - scale restoration projects for 10 years in priority landscapes ( fy2016: $40.0 million , 3% of nfs ) .

minerals and geology management funds the administration of mineral operations on nfs lands , management and mitigation of abandoned mine lands , management of geologic resources and hazards , and management of environmental compliance and restoration related to mineral activities ( fy2016: $76.4 million , 5% of nfs ) .

landownership management provides funds for the basic land management or real estate activities necessary to support all nfs programs , such as granting special use authorizations for energy transmission corridors and processing land exchanges ( fy2016: $77.7 million , 5% of nfs ) .

law enforcement operations responds to emergencies , investigates illegal activities ( such as illegal drug activities ) , and conducts crime prevention activities on nfs lands ( fy2016: $126.7 million , 8% of nfs ) .

table 3 provides appropriations data for the nfs subaccounts over the last five fiscal years .

as noted above , in 1891 , the president was authorized to reserve lands from the public domain as forest reserves , but this authority was subsequently limited by congress .

however , many presidential proclamations and executive orders have modified nfs boundaries and changed names , including establishing new national forests from existing nfs lands .

national forests in the east were generally established between 1910 and 1951 .

today , establishing a new national forest or significantly modifying the boundaries of an existing national forest requires an act of congress .

the secretary of agriculture has numerous authorities to add lands to the nfs .

often , though , the acquisitions are restricted to land within or contiguous to the proclaimed exterior boundaries of a national forest .

the first and broadest authority is in the weeks act of 1911 , which allows the secretary to purchase "such forested , cut - over , or denuded lands within the watersheds of navigable streams ... the regulation of the flow of navigable streams or for the production of timber. .

additional authorities are provided by the bankhead - jones farm tenant act of 1937 , which authorized the secretary to acquire submarginal lands and lands not suitable for cultivation .

under this authority , the fs acquired and established the 20 national grasslands and six land utilization projects that account for 2% of the nfs .

other laws authorize land acquisition for the national forests , typically in specific areas or for specific purposes .

for example , the secretary is authorized to acquire access corridors to national forest lands across nonfederal lands .

the secretary also has numerous authorities to dispose or convey national forest land out of federal ownership , all constrained in various ways and seldom used .

often , the authority requires the federal government to dispose of the land at fair market value .

the 1897 organic act and the 1911 weeks act authorize the disposal of land better suited for other uses , such as agriculture or mining .

other authorities include the following: the 1958 townsites act authorizes the secretary to transfer up to 640 acres adjacent to communities in alaska or the 11 western states for townsites if the "indigenous community objectives ... outweigh the public objectives and values which would be served by maintaining such tract in federal ownership. .

the 1983 small tracts act authorizes the secretary to dispose of certain lands by sale or exchange if they are valued at no more than $150,000 and meet certain size specifications .

congress authorized the fs to transfer up to 80 acres of nfs land for a nominal cost upon written application of a public school district .

the lands may revert back to the federal government , however , if not used for the educational purposes for which they were acquired .

congress considers many issues regarding nfs management .

current debates tend to focus more on particular issues that involve land and resource allocation and valuation , such as balancing increasing demands for commodity and non - commodity uses and services from the national forests .

simultaneously , public interest in how these resource allocation decisions are made and the lands are used has increased .

nfs management and administration has thus become more complex and contentious .

however , these controversies often derive from questions about the fundamental management principles of multiple use and sustained yield .

the meaning and application of the dual concepts of multiple use and sustained yield have been debated since congress first authorized the reservation of federal land .

the debates generally revolve around questions such as these: is multiple use achieved through adjacent or sequential allowance of single resource uses or by simultaneous application of several uses ? .

is sustained yield management to provide a regular flow of products for human use or to assure the maintenance of the biological productivity of the forest resources ? .

when these management principles were established , congress conferred considerable discretion on the fs to make those decisions .

as concerns arose and persisted about the agency's interpretation of multiple use and sustained yield , congress began to restrict that discretion by enacting legislation specifying that certain uses occur ( or not occur ) in specified areas .

however , congress has not enacted legislation directly addressing the concepts of multiple use or sustained yield .

therefore , conflicts arise as users and land managers attempt to balance multiple uses and services and produce a sustained yield of resources from the national forests .

congress often considers legislation to prioritize various national forests uses over others or to define or specify levels of production .

for example , congress has considered legislation to prioritize timber production over other uses or to specify a certain annual output of timber production .

in contrast , congress has also considered legislation that would prioritize recreation , hunting , and fishing over other uses .

there are several ongoing concerns regarding wildfire management , including the total federal costs of wildfire management , the strategies and resources used for wildfire management , and the impact of wildfire on both the quality of life and the economy of communities surrounding wildfire activity .

fire control expenditures continue to climb , affecting the implementation of other programs ( and thus affecting national forest uses ) through personnel and funds transferred to fire control .

it is unclear when , whether , and how this cost spiral can be contained .

