cybercrime continues to increase .

the media reports data breaches exposing tens of millions of personal financial records at retailers , such as target , home depot , and tj maxx .

the ponemon institute , an independent research institute , estimates that in 2013 the number of attacks on 59 companies based in the united states increased over that of 2012 and the average cost per attack also increased .

the ponemon study found the average cost of a cybercrime incident in fy2014 was $12.7 million compared with $11.6 million in fy2013 .

the center for strategic and international studies estimates that cybercrime costs the global economy about $445 billion in a typical year .

the risks to critical infrastructure and national security from cyberattacks are harder to quantify , but the bipartisan policy center recently concluded that the united states has a "september 10 th ability to guard against cyberattacks. .

president obama and some members of congress have identified increasing cybersecurity as a priority .

it would seem that companies could increase their cybersecurity at relatively little cost by sharing information about cyberattacks .

the costs of a data breach can include detection , containment , repair , incident response , investigation , fraud losses , and lost sales .

the cost of sharing information , including joining a specialized sharing organization , is likely to be less than $100,000 .

one obstacle to reducing cybercrime is misaligned incentives , which reduce information sharing about cyberattacks .

in the aftermath of a cyberattack , at least four groups could be notified: law enforcement , other companies , customers , and ( for public companies ) stockholders .

in addition , certain regulated companies , such as banks and electrical utilities , could be required to notify their regulators of cyberattacks .

if companies notify law enforcement — typically either the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) or the secret service — they do so in the hope that those responsible will be brought to justice and that some sort of recovery can be made .

they notify other companies in the hope that greater information sharing will improve security .

customers are notified so that they can monitor their financial information to prevent financial fraud .

the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) requires publicly traded companies to announce information that could affect investors' decisions to invest in a company .

this report analyzes information sharing by government with private companies , by private companies with the government , and among private companies .

sharing information with consumers is mentioned but is not the central focus of this report .

understanding the economic incentives involved in cybersecurity and information sharing can improve the analysis of cybersecurity .

companies that suffer a cybersecurity breach such as the theft of credit card information do not pay the full cost of the breach .

retailers honoring stolen credit cards have charges reversed ( so - called chargebacks ) and end up without merchandise or payment .

credit card issuers say that they are not fully compensated for replacing stolen cards .

consumers must monitor their financial accounts and update automated bill payment accounts to guard against cyberattacks .

meanwhile , software companies frequently weigh the benefits of delays to improve security against the costs of late releases .

according to some industry observers , software developers can be under pressure to "ship early , ship often" and fix security and other bugs in a later iteration .

similarly , companies may act in ways that they believe will preserve or increase their market share or profitability even at the expense of cybersecurity .

many in the cybersecurity field have suggested increasing cybersecurity information sharing between individuals , companies , nongovernmental organizations , and governments as a way to increase security .

many kinds of information can be shared to improve cybersecurity .

this can include sharing ways to detect specific attacks and more general information about hardware , software , and procedures .

it can include specific and general information about recovering from a data breach .

the cost of sharing is relatively small , but the benefits can be large .

michael daniel , the white house cybersecurity coordinator , described information sharing as "critical to effective cybersecurity," and legislation was introduced in 112 th and 113 th congresses to promote information sharing .

one kind of information sharing occurs when organizations learn from third parties ( such as law enforcement ) that information has been compromised .

for example , the secret service reportedly notified target and home depot that their data systems had been breached .

information sharing can also flow in the other direction: according to media reports , jpmorgan discovered that it had cybersecurity problems and asked the fbi for assistance .

sharing information has benefits .

if a firm reports a cyberattack , law enforcement can begin searching for those responsible and possibly alert other organizations , which can review their cybersecurity arrangements to prevent similar attacks .

in some cases , broader sharing of information would benefit the attacked firm ; if it does not have the resources for defense or other countermeasures , sharing information might allow another entity , such as a security consultant or the software developer , to develop a countermeasure .

but sharing cybersecurity information with a competitor can give away security lessons that were learned at great expense .

moreover , some may fear that publicly revealing a cyber breach can scare customers away to competitors leading to reduced revenue and possibly stock price declines .

in other words , the hacked company's competitors might benefit from the information or its revenue or stock price might decline .

in 47 states and the district of columbia , guam , puerto rico , and the virgin islands , companies can be required to notify consumers if personally identifiable information ( pii ) is breached .

typically , consumers are notified of the breach , advised to monitor financial accounts closely , and sometimes offered free credit monitoring or other assistance .

some , including the chief information officer of the retailer urban outfitters , have argued that public disclosure can tip off attackers or waste time if information is breached but not stolen .

industry participants and outside observers appear to generally agree that there is less than optimal information sharing about attacks .

although the amount of harm caused by inadequate information sharing is hard to measure , and increasing information sharing can be difficult , it has at times increased security .

by contrast , while the broad outline of the target credit card hack had been widely discussed , home depot was the victim of a similar attack through a vendor whose security had been compromised .

information sharing would appear to be a relatively inexpensive way for a group of companies to improve their cybersecurity , but a review of recent data breaches shows that most of the details about breaches are released by third party experts , not the firms involved .

the next section analyzes some of the reasons for this apparent reticence by firms .

firms and industry groups have expressed reluctance to share information in part because doing so might violate privacy or antitrust laws .

another concern is exposing proprietary business information .

to help assuage these fears , the department of justice ( doj ) has provided guidance that it will not consider generally accepted cybersecurity information sharing to be anticompetitive behavior .

some cybersecurity experts , industry participants , and several members of congress remain concerned that firms are holding back information that could make cyberspace more secure .

this section analyzes how organizations share information and legislation that was introduced in the 113 th congress to encourage information sharing .

sharing more information could reduce the information asymmetries and increase the size and quality of the market for cybersecurity products and make cyberspace more secure , allowing firms to better estimate the probability and costs of data breaches , for example .

sharing more information could also reduce duplication of effort , making dollars spent on cybersecurity more effective .

clear metrics of effectiveness and objective , trusted , third - party evaluation services do not appear to currently exist in the cybersecurity market .

the advantages of information sharing are likely to be greatest when organizations are using similar technologies .

for example , learning about a weakness in an operating system or application software has the most value to an organization using that operating system or application .

it might provide a lesson to those using other software , but it is less likely to be directly applicable .

another concern is that erroneous information could lead to new security holes .

the reputation of those providing information can provide assurance that experts have reviewed and passed on the information .

currently , a main enforcement mechanism for cybersecurity is the federal trade commission's ( ftc's ) authority to sue companies for deceptive practices — for example , claiming that their products are "secure" when they do not employ common security practices .

thus , a de facto standard exists for what constitutes acceptable cybersecurity , but it is based on a series of actions taken by organizations that do not need to publicize their security practices .

greater information sharing could make it easier for companies to implement uniform security practices .

greater information sharing may , in some instances , effectively weaken cybersecurity by creating an overwhelming amount of information , eliminating the capacity to pay attention to truly important alerts .

isacs can help to mitigate this problem by analyzing information and sorting out what information is relevant to subsets of their members .

some have argued that greater information sharing could encourage the growth of the $1.3 billion cyberinsurance market by allowing for more accurate assessment of risk and security products' effectiveness .

a more mature cyberinsurance market would itself make cyberspace more secure: insurers promote practices that make the insured safer , which would decrease insurers' payouts .

insurers verify and inspect the systems they are insuring .

however , some analysts believe that cyberinsurance will have limited utility as many of the losses , such as damage to one's reputation , are intangible and difficult to put a value on .

this section provides brief summaries of two bills that have been introduced in the 114 th congress that might affect the willingness of organizations to share cybersecurity information .

the bills contain many other provisions , such as which agency would have the lead in analyzing information shared , but considerations such as these are outside the scope of this report .

for more details , see crs report r43996 , cybersecurity and information sharing: comparison of h.r .

1560 and h.r .

1731 as passed by the house , by [author name scrubbed] and crs report r43317 , cybersecurity: legislation , hearings , and executive branch documents , by [author name scrubbed] .

h.r .

1560 and s. 754 seek to make cyberspace more secure by increasing the amount and impact of information shared while not significantly increasing costs to businesses or taxpayers .

except for codifying current antitrust exemptions for information sharing , the bills do not address the competitive incentives not to share information .

however , both bills could increase the likelihood of informal information sharing networks developing .

although some informal networks might lack the technical capabilities of an isac , they can arguably discourage free - riding by cutting "takers" out of the network , which would alter incentives in favor of more information sharing .

some sharing is already happening .

many cybersecurity companies currently share information with clients .

some of this is being done in real time .

the "bottom line," is likely to be how nonfederal entities — particularly businesses — value the benefits from sharing information against the cost of sharing .

neither bill would address the cost of full membership in isaos or isacs which , at $10,000 to $100,000 , are too expensive for small - and medium - size businesses .

although most data breaches have not been expensive compared with the revenues and profits earned , recent events may change the attitude of boards of directors and senior management: the chief executive officers at target and sony entertainment were forced to resign .

