there are three general types of accrediting organizations , or agencies , which are discussed in detail below .

both ed and chea scrutinize accrediting agencies and determine whether they are reliable authorities as to the quality of education offered .

ed recognition is viewed as more important because ihes must be accredited by an accrediting agency recognized by ed in order to participate in student financial assistance programs under title iv of the hea or other federal programs .

the accreditation process is voluntary and must be requested by educational institutions or programs .

accreditation of institutions takes place on a cycle that may range from every few years to as many as 10 years .

accreditation is an ongoing process and the initial earning of accreditation does not guarantee indefinite accredited status .

among the issues that could receive consideration during a reauthorization of the hea are several issues related to the role of accreditation in determining institutional eligibility to participate in title iv federal student aid programs .

some issues that may receive attention include the use of accreditation as a measure of quality , potential ways of restructuring or streamlining the accreditation process , accreditation's role in the changing postsecondary education landscape , and transparency and potential conflicts of interest in the accreditation process .

both institutional accreditation and programmatic accreditation are often viewed as measures of the quality of education provided by an ihe .

institutional accreditation may be seen as a measure of institutional quality , signaling that an ihe meets a set of institution - level performance standards , while programmatic accreditation indicates that a specific program meets established standards for a certain field of study .

whether and to what extent the federal government should rely on these two types of accreditation as measures of educational quality are issues that may receive attention during hea reauthorization .

ihes must be accredited by an ed - recognized accrediting agency to participate in title iv federal student aid programs and thus gain access to a source of revenue that is vital for many ihes .

institutional accreditation by an ed - recognized accrediting agency may be considered a measure of institutional quality , because it indicates that an ihe meets performance standards delineated by the accrediting agency and maintains financial stability , as determined by an accrediting agency's review .

issues arise perennially regarding whether accreditation is a true measure of institutional quality and what role the federal government should play in measuring or ensuring institutional quality .

some proponents of accreditation as a measure of institutional quality believe that the accreditation process should be refocused on student achievement or student outcome measures .

they suggest accreditation is currently too reliant on assessing inputs ( eg , the proportion of professors with ph.d.s or the maintenance of facilities and learning resources ) and propose incorporating student outcome metrics into the accreditation process , which could include graduation rates ; retention rates ; job placement rates ; and student performance in skills assessment ( eg , critical thinking and communication ) .

there is disagreement , however , as to how such metrics should be determined .

some believe that they should be determined by individual ihes , based on their own missions , while others advocate for standard metrics to be applied to ihes participating in the title iv programs .

under either scenario , accrediting agencies could be the entity to evaluate whether the metrics were met by an ihe .

if federal standards were set , consideration might be given to what extent the characteristics of students enrolled at an individual ihe would affect its expected performance ( eg , for - profit ihes and community colleges enroll a higher proportion of low - income students who tend to have lower graduation rates ) and how much discretion accrediting agencies could have in evaluating outcomes based on such characteristics .

also , while this information may prove useful to the federal government in determining which ihes are of an acceptable quality to participate in the title iv fsa programs and to consumers choosing which ihe to attend , there are several potential issues relating to the collection of data for determining whether student outcome metrics have been met .

for instance , various federal and state entities , accrediting agencies , and individual ihes already collect data relating to student performance .

an analysis of the types of data currently collected by each of these entities could be performed to avoid duplication of collection efforts and the potential for adding time and costs to the accreditation process .

the creation of a federal unit record system — a longitudinal data collection system that allows for the collection of individual students' education records over time ( i.e. , throughout their education careers and time in the workforce ) — is a tool that could be used by the federal government and accrediting agencies to aid in collecting data relating to student performance and in evaluating institutional performance .

currently , section 134 of the hea specifically prohibits the establishment of a federal unit record system .

if permitted , however , such a system may be an efficient means of tracking student progress , because comprehensive data would be accessible in one location .

yet the collection of student outcome data necessarily involves tracking individual students' performance ; efforts would need to be made to safeguard individual students' privacy during the collection , merging , and reporting of data .

concerns about privacy have figured prominently in the discourse of tracking student outcomes .

opponents of using accreditation as a measure of institutional quality believe that accreditation's dual role as title iv gatekeeper and reviewer of institutional quality is inherently in conflict .

they suggest that it would be desirable to sever the link between accreditation and access to title iv funds and return accreditation to its role as a private , voluntary system of quality assurance .

under this paradigm , the federal government might conduct separate reviews of institutions' financial stability , administrative capabilities , and performance with regard to student outcomes .

there is often a lack of understanding by consumers about the meaning of programmatic accreditation , as compared to other types of accreditation ( i.e. , regional or national ) .

regional and national accreditation attests to the overall quality of institutions and their programs , in general , and allows students at institutions to receive title iv aid , but it does not address the quality of individual programs with regard to specialized programmatic criteria , such as whether the curriculum offered meets professional guidelines .

programmatic accreditation can demonstrate that a specific educational program within an ihe meets established standards for a certain field of study and often serves as a signal of program quality .

while programmatic accreditation is not required for title iv eligibility , access to some employers , acceptance to some advanced educational programs , and eligibility for professional licensure in some states require individuals to complete a program accredited by certain programmatic accrediting agencies .

for example , a student may enroll in a program at a title iv participating institution that is accredited by a regional or national accrediting agency , but the program may lack programmatic recognition from a professional body , which can result in the benefits associated with program completion being diminished ( eg , the student may not be able to become licensed within his or her state ) .

congress might consider whether it is desirable to support attendance , via title iv eligibility , at programs that lack professional recognition from programmatic accrediting agencies , when such accreditation is available .

the american postsecondary education landscape is broad and varied , with institutions providing numerous educational offerings to a diverse body of students .

the approximately 7,300 title iv participating institutions have assorted missions ( eg , research university , liberal arts college , sub - baccalaureate certificate programs ) , offer differing degrees in numerous subject areas , and serve students who range from traditional , full - time college - aged students to part - time , older students .

to participate in the title iv programs , however , most of these varied institutions must , in general , be accredited by one of 18 regional or national accreditation agencies .

as part of hea reauthorization , attention may be devoted to the extent to which the current structure of accreditation meets the needs of such differing institutions and their students and whether the federal accreditation agency recognition process could be restructured or streamlined to help meet those needs .

these issues are explored in greater depth below .

regional accrediting agencies alone accredit over 3,500 of the approximately 7,300 title iv participating institutions , with institutions in each region including two - year , four - year , and less - than - two - year public , private nonprofit , and private for - profit institutions .

additionally , these institutions have diverse missions and student populations .

the wide array of institutions served by regional accrediting agencies has led some to propose a restructuring of the accreditation system , with accreditors focusing more narrowly on types of institutions accredited ( eg , community colleges , research universities ) , rather than on institutions that fall within a particular geographic region .

by doing so , they argue , peer reviewers and professionals familiar with the operations of each type of institution would evaluate institutions within that category , thus ensuring a strong peer - review foundation , and help to establish better measures of outcomes and accountability .

congress might consider whether restructuring the current accreditation system is desirable and , if so , how a new structure could be fashioned .

restructuring options that congress might consider include encouraging or facilitating the transformation of the current regional accreditation system into one organized on the basis of institutional type or mission or allowing other entities , such as a state regulatory body , to serve the accreditation agency role of determining the quality of an institution .

the process of receiving initial accreditation and then periodically having it renewed is often viewed as time - and resource - intensive .

although the federal government does not set specific accreditation requirements , it indirectly influences the criteria accrediting agencies review based on the federal standards accrediting agencies must meet to be recognized by the ed .

accrediting agencies often state that the numerous ed - recognition criteria are onerous and unnecessary , potentially discouraging accrediting agencies from placing greater emphasis on educational rigor and innovation .

congress may wish to consider whether all aspects of the federal recognition process are necessary in determining whether an accrediting agency is a reliable authority on the quality of the education being offered or whether other steps could be taken to reduce the costs and burdens associated with the overall process .

some items that have been raised include decreasing or modifying the existing statutory and regulatory criteria for federal recognition of accrediting agencies and redistributing the responsibilities between accrediting agencies and ed ( eg , shifting more oversight of institutional financial sustainability to ed ) .

efforts to provide access to postsecondary education to a broad variety of students ( eg , older , working , and / or low - income students ) and potentially reduce postsecondary educational costs for students have resulted in the emergence or further proliferation of nontraditional educational delivery models and providers .

for instance , although competency - based education ( cbe ) has been used by some schools for decades , recently there has been an increased interest in cbe as a means to potentially decrease time to degree completion and , therefore , costs to students .

additionally , cbe and other models of online education delivery enable students to participate in education in ways that give students the flexibility to work around time constraints and focus on coursework when convenient .

while some accrediting agencies have already begun to address such issues in their review processes , congress could consider whether accreditation is the best way to address these types of educational offerings and , if so , to what extent it should do so .

undergraduate educational programs at public , private nonprofit , and proprietary institutions must meet standards pertaining to minimum amounts of instructional time to be eligible to participate in title iv federal student aid programs .

generally , these programs are measured in credit hours , with one credit hour typically equaling two hours of homework for each hour of class attendance required of a student per week .

historically , the amount of time a student spent receiving instruction was seen as an indication of the quality of the education being provided ( i.e. , the more instruction time required , the more a student was expected to learn ) ; however , ed has explicitly stated that there is no implicit "seat time" requirement under the credit hour regulations and that it is used only for federal program purposes , thus allowing institutions to set their own academic standards .

as part of the institutional accreditation process , accrediting agencies are required to review an institution's policies for determining credit hours but do not evaluate the course content at ihes .

cbe , an educational delivery model that has gained significant attention in recent years , focuses on assessing a student's mastery of specified learning objectives or competencies .

unlike a traditional educational program in which students must meet a specified number of credit hours to progress and graduate , students in cbe programs progress through a program by demonstrating the mastery of a competency .

however , for purposes of participating in the title iv fsa programs , institutions offering cbe programs must be able to demonstrate how the method of measuring learning equates to the credit hour ( i.e. , the institution must "convert" competencies into credit hours ) .

this framework , therefore , requires accrediting agencies to examine how the program's competency requirements match up to the traditional federal credit - hour requirement .

some argue that the accreditation framework may need to shift to enable accrediting agencies to better evaluate actual student learning and skills acquired , rather than time spent working .

for instance , because cbe programs are not based on time spent on work , might two paths to accreditation — a traditional path based on credit hours and a competency - based path — be established to better serve these two differing educational approaches ? .

doing so may provide agencies accrediting cbe programs with the ability to focus more attention on learning outcomes in such programs , but may also take time to fully implement , as well - designed assessments of learning outcomes need to be identified and / or developed .

accreditation agencies argue that the regulatory definition of credit hour discourages the use of cbe because it mandates measuring programs with seat time ; they recommend that accreditation agencies be given discretion to define the relevant elements of assessing student learning .

additionally , the issue of whether the credit hour should be completely decoupled from the accreditation process for cbe programs ( i.e. , institutions and their accrediting agencies would not be required to equate self - paced competency completion with credit hours ) may arise .

such decoupling could take place within the current accreditation framework or could be used in the above - described two - path framework .

as with the creation of a two - path framework , decoupling credit hours from cbe programs could provide accrediting agencies with greater ability to focus on learning outcomes , but it would take time to implement and develop well - designed assessments of learning outcomes .

under current law , the secretary may include within an accrediting agency's scope of recognition the ability to assess an ihe's distance education programs , which include online education programs .

over the last several years , the use of online education has increased significantly and new forms of online education have developed .

one such new form is massive open online courses ( moocs ) , which are typically free or low - cost online versions of college courses available to individuals outside of an institution's regular student body , and usually no credits are awarded for class completion .

although the initial view of moocs as potential higher education "game changers" has been muted , mooc - type offerings still remain viable options for the delivery of postsecondary education .

for instance , some ihes are integrating moocs into their course offerings in various ways , including offering "flipped classrooms," in which students learn content online at home and then complete assignments in class with faculty support and feedback ; offering "blended learning," in which courses are taught in a traditional classroom setting but also incorporate online components ; or providing supplementary materials for students .

alternatively , some providers of mooc - type offerings give students the opportunity to receive certificates of completion or "badges" that signify their mastery of a skill for a fee .

mastery of a skill can be illustrated in a number of ways , such as the passing of an exam , completing a project , or attending classes .

some ihes have begun exploring whether to award transfer of credit for obtaining badges and some employers may consider them when determining whether to employ an individual .

while many of these offerings are currently free - of - charge or incorporated into traditional classes , with some providers there may be fees associated with assessment to certify the mastery of a skill .

for instance , providers may charge students a fee for certification of course completion or ihes may charge students a fee for assessing a course before allowing them to transfer credits .

such charges are currently ineligible for coverage with title iv aid .

such innovative approaches to delivering a postsecondary education are promising , because they may provide more students with more convenient and lower cost access to postsecondary educational offerings .

as such , congress may be asked to consider whether such programs are prudent investments for federal student aid funds .

in doing so , issues of how to delineate accreditation's role in determining the quality of such new educational options might be addressed .

for example , different levels of accreditation ( eg , institutional - or course - level assessment ) may be needed to evaluate these offerings .

evaluating individual credentials , rather than entire institutions or degrees , may serve as a signal to employers that a student has a very specific skill that the employer may desire , rather than a broader skill set encompassed by an entire degree but that may not include the specific , employer - sought skill .

creating such a bifurcated system , however , may require an assessment of whether currently recognized accrediting agencies or other entities , such as professional organizations , are the appropriate bodies for reviewing these offerings .

congress may consider whether to implement other changes to the current accreditation framework , including reforms to address accrediting agencies' transparency and potential conflict - of - interest issues .

currently , ed - recognized accrediting agencies must make publicly available basic information about an ihe's accreditation status .

they must also make available to the secretary , the relevant state licensing or authorizing agency , and the public , upon request , a summary of an accreditation review leading to a final accreditation decision involving the denial , termination , or suspension of accreditation .

other documents pertaining to the accreditation process may remain private and their release to external parties is often at the discretion of the accrediting agency or ihe .

individuals , including industry participants , argue that more detailed information ( eg , reasons for why accreditation decisions were made , ihes' self - studies ) should be provided to potential consumers to enable them to make well - informed decisions .

such additional information , they assert , could increase public accountability and allow external stakeholders ( eg , potential and current students ) to make better informed decisions as to whether funds should be spent at a particular ihe .

there are concerns , however , that requiring additional information to be made available may hinder the private and candid discussions between accrediting agencies and institutions .

while additional information may be useful , some argue , decisionmakers must be wary of encumbering the candor that is inherent in the peer review - based accreditation process .

the foundation of accreditation is the peer - review process , in which the majority of members of the accrediting commissions or boards that make judgments about accreditation status are institutional faculty and administrators .

some view the idea of colleagues reviewing colleagues in accreditation evaluations as a weakness , citing the potential for conflicts of interest in a process that essentially serves a gate - keeping role for access to billions of dollars in federal student aid .

others , however , claim that such a review helps accentuate the difference between genuine quality review by industry experts and bureaucratic scrutiny for compliance , while pointing to the major role peer review plays in government and other nongovernment organizations in research , medicine , and other sciences .

to address these concerns , congress could explore whether a different methodology for institutional review is proper and to what extent peers may be involved in that evaluation .

