congress created federal inspectors general ( igs ) to combat waste , fraud , and abuse within designated federal departments and agencies .

generally , these igs head permanent , nonpartisan , and independent offices that conduct audits , investigations , and other evaluations of federal department and agency programs and operations .

offices of inspectors general ( oigs ) exist in more than 70 federal agencies , including all cabinet departments and larger agencies , numerous boards and commissions , and other entities .

federal oigs date back to the mid - 1970s .

since their establishment , they have been granted substantial independence and powers to audit , investigate , and evaluate federal programs and agencies to assist congress in its oversight duties .

in most cases , oigs produce reports , often made available to the public , that provide findings and recommendations to their affiliated agencies .

often these recommendations find ways to increase federal efficiency or examine allegations of employee misconduct .

oigs are predominantly located in executive branch agencies , but several legislative branch entities — for example , the library of congress , the government accountability office , and the government printing office — are also overseen by igs .

the overwhelming majority of igs are governed by the inspector general act of 1978 , as amended ( hereinafter referred to as the ig act ) .

the ig act structures ig appointments and removals , ig powers and authorities , and ig responsibilities and duties .

the law also authorizes and delineates the responsibilities of the council of the inspectors general for integrity and efficiency ( cigie ) , which comprises a vast majority of federal igs and "works to address integrity , economy , and effectiveness issues that transcend individual [g]overnment agencies" and seeks to "increase the professionalism and effectiveness of [oig] personnel by developing policies , standards , and approaches to aid in the establishment of a well - trained and highly skilled workforce. .

congress may have an interest in ensuring that federal oigs have the appropriate authorities and access they need to perform their investigations , audits , and evaluations .

concurrently , congress has a responsibility to protect from improper release some records and information , such as information related to national security or to ongoing criminal investigations .

this report provides background on the statutory creation of federal oigs and provides historical context for contemporary debates about the strengths and limitations of the offices .

since its enactment in 1978 , the ig act has been substantially amended twice: the inspector general act amendments of 1988 created a new set of igs in "designated federal entities" ( dfes ) , which are usually smaller federal agencies .

the ig act of 1988 also added to the reporting obligations of all igs and agency heads , among other things .

the inspector general reform act of 2008 established the council of the inspectors general for integrity and efficiency ; amended reporting obligations , salary , bonus , and award provisions ; amended removal requirements ; and added budget protections — including requiring that congress be provided igs' unaltered original budget submissions .

other laws have established or amended the authorities provided to igs in specified agencies or programs — either directly under the ig act or as separate pieces of legislation .

still other enactments have enhanced ig independence or added new responsibilities and powers on a selective basis .

as a result , statutory igs are not identical .

in certain cases , differences among igs are significant .

for example , some igs are appointed by an agency head while others are presidentially appointed with the advice and consent of the senate .

nonetheless , in general , statutory igs follow the standards , guidelines , and directives in the ig act .

typically , the jurisdiction of an inspector general includes only the programs and operations of a single affiliated agency and its components .

a few igs , however , have express authority to audit and investigate more than one agency , organization , program , or activity .

as noted above , statutory offices of inspector general are currently authorized in more than 70 federal establishments , designated federal entities , and other agencies or programs .

authority for most of the igs is provided by the ig act .

the statutory igs may be grouped by these criteria: the method of appointment , the authorizing statute , and the branch of government in which they are located .

in addition to appointment structure , however , igs can be identified and described using a host of different authorities , requirements , and operations .

this section provides an overview of the various similarities and differences among federal igs .

coordination among the igs and controls over their actions , which might include investigating charges of wrongdoing by the igs themselves , exist through several channels — including interagency councils created by public law or administrative directive .

congress has the authority to amend the ig act as well as oversee the operations of igs and their offices .

in recent congresses , these legislative and oversight authorities have been used in a variety of ways , including through introduction or passage of bills , through formal letters to and from overseers , and through oversight hearings .

the section below includes several recent examples of legislation and oversight that sought to amend the ig act or clarify congress's position on how the law should be executed .

congress has perennially attempted to address ig oversight through legislation in a number of ways , including expanding an existing ig's oversight to additional federal entities ; creating a new ig for an agency that appears to be without such an oversight mechanism ; amending the appointment structure of an existing ig ; requiring additional reporting measures by one or several igs ; and various other administrative initiatives like ensuring competitive pay rates for igs .

one example of legislation expanding the jurisdiction of an existing ig is p.l .

113-6 ( enacted in the 113 th congress ) , which established an ig at the commission on civil rights .

the law requires the ig at gao to "also hold the position of inspector general of the commission on civil rights. .

the law , among other things , also provided the new commission ig the same responsibilities and authorities as other federal dfe igs ; authorized the use of gao resources and personnel to perform the commission's ig responsibilities ; and created procedures to waive certain reporting requirements required of other federal igs ( pending approval from the house and senate committees on appropriation ) .

the inspector general improvement act ( introduced as h.r .

314 in the 113 th congress and h.r .

6723 in the 112 th congress ) is another example of legislative action that sought to amend the responsibilities of existing igs .

both bills sought to require existing igs to assume oversight responsibilities of smaller federal entities that appear not to have oig oversight .

for example , h.r .

314 would have required that the u.s. agency for international development ig "supervise , direct , and control audit and investigative activities" at the trade and development agency , the japan - united states friendship commission , and the overseas private investment corporation .

both bills were reported to the house committee on oversight and government reform .

no further action was taken on either bill .

in addition to amending the jurisdiction of existing igs to oversee the operations of certain federal entities , congress has , from time to time , proposed legislation seeking to create an entirely new ig .

for example , in december 2015 , congress created a new agency - head - appointed ig to oversee the operations of the committee for purchase from people who are blind and severely disabled , also known as the abilityone program .

the new ig was established following the release of a 2013 gao report that found "specific areas where the commission needs to establish adequate oversight procedures to better help ensure program integrity , transparency , and effectiveness. .

the gao report recommended establishing an abilityone ig .

the metropolitan washington airports authority inspector general act of 2013 ( h.r .

302 , 113 th congress ) sought to establish an ig for the metropolitan washington airports authority ( mwaa ) , which "operates a two - airport system that provides domestic and international air service for the mid - atlantic region. .

the bill was concurrently reported to the house committee on oversight and government reform and the house committee on transportation and infrastructure's subcommittee on aviation .

no further action was taken on the bill .

in another example , both the house and senate have introduced bills entitled the bureau of consumer financial protection - inspector general reform act of 2015 ( h.r .

957 and s. 510 , 114 th congress ) .

the similar bills seek to create a new , separate "federal establishment" ig to audit , investigate , and evaluate the cfpb .

the bills would require the president to appoint the cfpb's ig within 60 days of enactment .

h.r .

957 includes language that would provide the newly established cfpb ig a dedicated funding stream of 2% of the cfpb's total funding and require the ig to testify before appropriate congressional committees of jurisdiction , upon request , at least two times per year .

the legislation would require the ig's testimony to address the cfpb's and the cfpb oig's most recent semi - annual reports .

s. 510 does not include the same funding and testimony provisions .

on february 2 , 2015 , h.r .

957 was concurrently referred to the house committee on oversight and government reform and the house committee on financial services .

on september 9 , 2015 , h.r .

957 was ordered to be reported by the house committee on financial services .

on february 12 , 2015 , s. 510 was referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs .

no further action has been taken on either bill .

similar legislation seeking to establish an independent ig for the cfpb was introduced in the 113 th congress ( h.r .

3770 , 113 th congress ) .

in the 113 th congress ( 2013-2014 ) , several bills were introduced seeking to amend the appointment structure of federal igs .

sections 403 and 413 amended the appointment structures of the national security agency ig ( nsa ig ) and the national reconnaissance office ig ( nro ig ) from agency head appointments to presidential appointments with the advice and consent of the senate .

in a senate report to accompany one of the bills seeking to amend the igs' appointment structures , the committee wrote [t]his provision will ensure the nsa inspector general operates independently of the director of the agency in overseeing the activities of the nsa , particularly with respect to activities that may raise privacy concerns .

... by requiring presidential appointment and senate confirmation of the nro inspector general , this provision will ensure the nro inspector general continue to operate with appropriate independence from the nro director in overseeing the activities of the nro .

there have been a number of legislative efforts by congress in recent years to place additional reporting requirement on all igs , certain igs , or one particular ig .

for example , the foia act ( h.r .

1211 , 113 th congress ) , would have required igs government - wide to review their affiliated agency's compliance with the freedom of information act ( foia ) .

the reducing over - classification act ( p.l .

111-258 ) , among other provisions , required certain igs to evaluate whether agencies are appropriately applying classification policies and to "identify policies , procedures , rules , regulations , or management practices that may be contributing to persistent misclassification. .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-95 ) , among other provisions , required the department of transportation's ig to report to congress each fiscal year from 2013 to 2015 on "the number of new small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals," including veterans , that participated in certain federal aviation administration programs .

other bills may address several ig - community related issues .

in the 113 th congress , for example , the oversight workforce improvement act of 2014 ( s. 1953 ) , among other things , sought to codify the pay rates of igs at designated federal entities and would have statutorily required the ig of the intelligence community and the ig of the central intelligence agency ( cia ) to be members of cigie .

section 4 of s. 1953 sought to set the average pay of an ig at a designated federal entity as "no less than the average total compensation ( including bonuses ) " of the affiliated agency's "senior level officials," which include the "general counsel , chief information officer , chief financial officer , chief human capital officer , or chief acquisition officer. .

the bill would have provided cigie the authority to investigate allegations of wrongdoing made against an ig's special counsel or deputy special counsel .

currently , as noted above , cigie has the authority to investigate allegations of wrongdoing against only an ig or certain members of the ig's staff .

s. 1953 was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

no further action has been taken on the bill .

in addition to introducing legislation related to federal igs , some congressional committees have held hearings that examine ig - related issues .

for example , in november 2013 , the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs' subcommittee on efficiency and effectiveness of federal programs and federal workforce held a hearing entitled strengthening government oversight: examining the roles and effectiveness of oversight positions within the federal workforce .

at the hearing , two federal igs — one from the u.s. small business administration ( sba ) and another from the u.s. department of justice — provided testimony on the status and limitations of federal igs .

among the issues raised by peggy gustafson , the sba ig who also testified on behalf of cigie , was a suggestion to exempt federal igs from the computer matching and privacy protection act .

according to ms. gustafson , exempting igs from the act would allow some igs "to identify those who improperly receive federal assistance and payments and subsequently , seek removal of those persons from the program after verification of this information and due process is applied. .

ms. gustafson also stated that igs may need to be exempted from the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) , which requires agencies to acquire approval from the office of management and budget ( omb ) prior to surveying a particular community or seeking feedback from the public in certain cases .

an exemption from the pra , according to ms. gustafson , "would enhance our independence and remove lengthy processes that are hampering our ability to do our job. .

at a september 10 , 2014 , hearing before the house committee on oversight and government reform , three inspectors general testified to difficulties accessing records and information from their affiliated agencies .

the hearing followed the committee's receipt of a letter signed by 47 federal igs detailing difficulties of igs accessing requested records from three particular federal agencies: the peace corps , the chemical safety and hazard investigation board , and the department of justice .

pursuant to section 6 ( a ) of the ig act , federal igs are "to have access to all records , reports , audits , reviews , documents , papers , recommendations , or other material available to the applicable establishment which relate to programs and operations with respect to which that inspector general has responsibilities under this act. .

according to the igs affiliated with the three agencies listed above , the agencies either stalled in providing or did not provide information or records that the igs requested .

according to the peace corps ig , for example , the peace corps declined to provide the ig with records related to sexual assault victims who were peace corps volunteers .

the ig testified that the agency's general counsel had asserted that the kate puzy volunteer protection act of 2011 , which protects the release of certain personally identifiable information about sexual assault victims from being shared beyond "specified individuals," prevents the agency from providing the records to the ig .

a december 10 , 2015 , hearing before the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs examined igs' required processes for audit and follow - up on their audit recommendations .

in her opening statement , representative heidi heitkamp stated that igs do not maintain a centralized database in which all outstanding recommendations government - wide are input , stored , and made accessible to members of congress and the public.... [t]he current set - up right now doesn't allow congress or the public to track outstanding recommendations or recommendations over time .

and it's not just congress that would win with having a more open process regarding ig recommendations , but other igs would be able to see what is working at other ig departments .

at the hearing , michael horowitz , chairman of cigie , stated that a database of ig recommendations was "a great idea. .

he , however , added , it takes a fair amount of staff to do that kind of work and information technology infrastructure .

we do not think we even have the it capacity to do that at this point without an actual ... direct appropriation to do it .

on june 29 , 2016 , senator heidi heitkamp introduced the inspector general recommendation transparency act ( s. 3109 ) , which , among other requirements , would require federal igs to post online a list of the recommendations that the ig has made to the agency "that [have] not been adopted or implemented" by the agency affiliated with the ig .

the list of open recommendations would be required to be updated at least every six months .

in her press release announcing introduction of the bill , senator heitkamp stated , "posting inspectors general recommendations online will give agencies , congress , and the public more opportunities for oversight , and help inspectors general save taxpayers even more money. .

s. 3109 was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

no further action has been taken on the bill .

this appendix provides information about federal inspectors general , past and present , including the years of their establishment , their appointment structures , and tallies of the various types of igs .

