this report provides brief answers to frequently asked questions about selected campaign finance provisions in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( h.r .

83 ; p.l .

113-235 ) .

the house passed the measure ( 219 - 206 ) on december 11 , 2014 .

the senate did so ( 56-40 ) on december 13 , 2014 .

the president signed the bill into law on december 16 .

although other provisions address topics such as contractor disclosure , increased limits for contributions to national party committees have been the subject of most debate .

those increases , particularly for individual contributions , are the subject of this brief overview .

the relevant language in p.l .

113-235 increased contribution limits to national political party committees .

most prominently , these party committees include the democratic national committee ( dnc ) , democratic congressional campaign committee ( dccc ) , democratic senatorial campaign committee ( dscc ) , republican national committee ( rnc ) , national republican congressional committee ( nrcc ) , and the national republican senatorial committee ( nrsc ) .

these committees may also establish new accounts , each with separate contribution limits , to support party conventions , facilities , and recounts or other legal matters .

in practice , it appears that an individual's contributions to a national party could increase from at least $97,200 annually to at least $777,600 .

for a two - year election cycle , an individual could give twice that amount , or more than $1.5 million .

under inflation adjustments announced in february 2015 , it appears that an individual may contribute at least $801,600 to a national party committee in 2015 .

although this report emphasizes increases in individual contribution limits , political action committees ( pacs ) may also make larger contributions to parties .

for multicandidate pacs — the most common type of pac — contributions to a national party appear to have increased from $45,000 to at least $360,000 annually .

unlike limits for individual contributions , those for pacs are not adjusted for inflation .

ultimately , the impact of the proposed language will depend on a combination of agency implementation and political practice .

the federal election commission ( fec ) is responsible for administering the increased limits .

the agency's rulemaking , advisory opinions , or enforcement activities could further clarify how the provisions will affect donors and elections .

on december 17 , 2014 , the fec briefly stated that it was "assessing" the language and would issue guidance "as soon as practicable. .

similarly , donor and party decisions will determine how or whether fundraising practices change .

in particular , it is unclear how many donors have the ability or desire to make the larger contributions now permitted .

as of this writing , how the fec intends to interpret the contribution limits and how the parties intend to alter fundraising practices , if at all , remains to be seen .

the report has been prepared in response to evolving questions concerning ongoing legislative debate .

some implications remain unclear at this time , and the analysis below could change with additional information .

this report will be updated as additional information becomes available .

before p.l .

113-235 was enacted , the federal election campaign act ( feca ) permitted an individual to contribute $32,400 annually to national party committees ( reflecting 2014 limits , subsequently increased for inflation , as discussed below ) .

p.l .

113-235 increased the limits as discussed below .

these limits apply separately to the six political committees around which the two major parties are organized .

for both parties , these include a headquarters committee ( eg , the democratic national committee ) , a house campaign committee ( eg , the national republican congressional committee ) , and a senate campaign committee ( eg , the national republican senatorial committee ) .

previously , an individual could contribute no more than $97,200 annually to a typically organized national party .

in addition , an october 2014 fec advisory opinion ( ao ) determined that , following the recent repeal of public funding for presidential nominating conventions , separate contribution limits apply to convention funds .

therefore , it appears that a "maxed out" donor could have contributed $129,600 to a national party when counting all three traditional committees plus a convention committee .

division n , section 101 of p.l .

113-235 increased limits for individuals making contributions to national party committees .

these provisions , which are effective "on or after" the enactment date , permitted parties to establish new , segregated accounts and accept additional funds to support party conventions , facilities , and recounts or other legal matters .

specifically , the language permitted the national parties to establish up to three additional accounts for each purpose .

overall , it appears that maximum individual contributions increased from $97,200 ( or $129,600 if following the fec ao noted above ) for a typical party with three major committees to $777,600 .

during a two - year election cycle , it appears that an individual could , therefore , contribute up to $1,555,200 to a national party's typical committees .

these limits were annual amounts for 2014 — when the law was enacted .

the original versions of this report showed those amounts in table 1 below .

the current version of the table reflects inflation adjustments announced in february 2015 .

as the table shows , the 2015 base limit for individual contributions increased to $33,400 ( from $32,400 in 2014 ) .

although this report emphasizes proposed changes to the individual contribution limits , the language also increases limits for political action committees ( pacs ) as shown in table 2 and table 3 below .

although there are differences between the increased limits for multicandidate pacs and non - multicandidate pacs , it is unclear how consequential they might be in practice .

given the higher limits for non - multicandidate pacs , it appears that there could be an advantage to a pac not achieving multicandidate status , although such pacs are rare and it is perhaps unlikely that a committee could practically prevent itself from achieving multicandidate status .

in practice , therefore , it appears that the increased limits in table 3 will be more consequential than those in table 2 .

feca does not permit inflation adjustments for multicandidate pac contributions ( table 3 ) .

six committees appear to be most relevant .

the two major parties each have three main national political committees that perform similar functions and are organized similarly .

on the democratic side , these include the dnc , dccc , and dscc .

republican counterpart committees include the rnc , nrcc , and nrsc .

the new law appears to be relevant for all national party committees , including third parties .

the provisions do not appear to affect other fundraising or spending provisions in elections per se .

it is possible that with additional freedom to make comparatively large contributions to political parties , some donors who would have previously given money to super pacs or other "outside" groups would instead redirect those funds to parties .

it is also possible that increased party - funding limits will provide another outlet for donors but not necessarily redirect existing funds .

as of this writing , the fec has not yet announced regulations or formal guidance surrounding how it plans to interpret the new limits — including how the "base" contribution amounts might interact with the limits for the three new accounts , if at all .

similarly , the parties have yet to make widespread use of the new limits .

those supporting the increased limits have reportedly suggested that the proposed contributions would be more transparent than those given to groups such as politically active tax - exempt organizations ( eg , 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) social welfare groups ) , and would provide parties with more funds to compete in an environment increasingly dominated by nonparty groups .

opponents counter that the proposed changes have not been subject to substantial consideration and would represent a return to the "soft money" era that existed before congress enacted the bipartisan campaign reform act ( bcra ) , when parties could accept unlimited contributions for generic "party - building" activities .

the precise implications of the proposed new limits remain to be seen .

