the radiation exposure compensation act ( reca ) was enacted in 1990 and provides one - time cash benefits to certain persons who participated in atomic weapons testing or lived near the nevada test site during periods of atmospheric ( above - ground ) atomic weapons testing .

benefits under reca are also available to certain uranium miners , mill workers , and ore transporters who worked in the uranium industry between 1942 and 1971 , when the federal government stopped its procurement of radiation for the atomic weapons program .

all reca claimants must have contracted one of the medical conditions specified in the statute after possible exposure to ionizing radiation from the detonation of an atomic weapon or after working in the uranium industry .

the reca program is administered by the civil division of the department of justice ( doj ) .

to date , doj has approved more than 30,000 reca claims for nearly $2 billion in benefits .

the majority of reca claims are related to atomic weapons testing rather than the uranium industry .

complete reca program data are provided in table a - 1 in the appendix .

benefits under reca are paid out of general revenue and are considered mandatory spending .

pursuant to the radiation exposure compensation act amendments of 2000 , p.l .

106-245 , all reca benefit applications must be filed before july 10 , 2022 , at which point the program will sunset .

on july 16 , 1945 , the united states detonated the first atomic bomb at the trinity test site near alamogordo , new mexico .

this atomic weapons test , which was followed by the only two offensive uses of atomic weapons at hiroshima and nagasaki , japan , ushered in an era of extensive development and testing of atomic weapons that would last until 1992 .

during this period , the united states , under the auspices of the atomic energy commission ( aec ) and later department of energy ( doe ) , conducted 1,054 atomic weapons tests .

the majority ( 928 ) of these tests were conducted at the nevada test site ( nts ) , a 1,375 square - mile federal reservation located approximately 65 miles north of las vegas in nye county , nevada .

of the 928 tests conducted at nts , 828 were underground tests and 100 were atmospheric tests in which the atomic weapons exploded at or above ground level resulting in radioactive material being released into the atmosphere .

these 100 atmospheric tests and the initial trinity test were the only atmospheric atomic weapons tests conducted in the continental united states and alaska .

table 1 provides a summary of u.s. atomic weapons tests by location .

atmospheric atomic weapons tests at nts were conducted between january 27 , 1951 , and october 30 , 1958 , and again between july 7 , 1962 , and july 17 , 1962 .

the largest atmospheric test at nts in terms of energy yield was the hood test conducted on july 5 , 1957 , which had an energy yield equivalent to 74,000 tons ( 74 kilotons or kt ) of trinitrotoluene ( tnt ) .

as the reca program enters its 25 th year of providing benefits to onsite participants , downwinders , and uranium workers , some members of congress have introduced legislation to expand the eligibility area for downwinders and provide benefits to uranium workers who may have been exposed to radiation after 1971 .

while there have been no statutory changes to the reca program since 2000 , these outstanding issues will likely ensure that reca remains on the congressional agenda .

under current law , to qualify for reca benefits as a downwinder , a person must have been present in one of the designated counties in arizona , nevada , or utah during a period of atmospheric testing at nts .

residents of other areas during testing , including some areas closer to nts than the designated downwinder areas , areas near the trinity test site in new mexico , or residents of guam who may have been affected by fallout from atomic weapons testing in the pacific ocean area are not eligible for benefits and new downwinder eligibility areas cannot be added to the program through regulation or executive action .

however , even before reca became a federal program , residents of areas outside of the current downwinder eligibility area had expressed concern about the health effects of fallout from atomic weapons testing and attempted to gain compensation from the federal government through the civil courts .

the inability of downwinders to win civil judgments against either the federal government or atomic weapons testing contractors was one of the factors that led congress to create the reca program in 1990 .

the first bills to provide compensation to civilian downwinders affected by atmospheric testing at nts were introduced during the 96 th congress in 1979 .

in the house of representatives , h.r .

4766 would have made the united states liable for damages caused by atmospheric atomic testing at nts to downwinders with cancer , onsite participants , and sheep herds damaged by atmospheric tests in 1953 .

coverage under this bill would have been provided to downwinders with leukemia , thyroid cancer , bone cancer , or any other cancer that occurred more often in the affected area than would be expected as determined by the secretary of health , education , and welfare .

the affected area for downwinder eligibility in h.r .

4766 was a rectangular area around nts from 112 degrees to 117.5 degrees longitude and from 36.5 degrees to 39 degrees latitude .

in addition to areas in nevada , utah , and a small part of inyo county , california , this area includes the northern portions of mohave and coconino counties in arizona , but does not extend south as far as the colorado river .

the boundaries as proposed by h.r .

4766 are provided in the map in the appendix .

a companion senate bill ( s. 1865 ) also would have made the united states liable for damages to downwinders , onsite participants , and affected sheep herds as well as uranium miners .

the bill would have created a federal advisory board with the authority to add to the list of specified cancers .

the affected area for downwinder eligibility was expressed in terms of counties and other geographic features and included the following areas: in arizona , the area north of the grand canyon and west of the colorado river ; in nevada , the counties of eureka , lander , lincoln , nye , and white pine ; and in utah , the counties of beaver , carbon , duchesne , emery , garfield , grand , iron , kane , juab , millard , piute , san juan , sanpete , sevier , uintah , washington , and wayne .

in addition , the bill would have given the secretary of health , education , and welfare the authority to add to the list of affected areas .

the original reca statute included a smaller downwinder eligibility area than is currently covered by the program .

initially , only residents of the following areas were covered by reca: in arizona , the area north of the grand canyon and west of the colorado river ; in nevada , the counties of eureka , lander , lincoln , nye , and white pine and clark county townships 13 through 16 at ranges 63 through 71 ; and in utah , the counties of beaver , garfield , iron , kane , millard , piute , and sevier .

the current downwinder eligibility area was established with the enactment of the 2000 reca amendments , which added geographical areas in arizona and utah and created the current area described in table 3 .

the initial and current reca downwinder eligibility areas are provided in the map in the appendix .

since the enactment of the 2000 reca amendments , members of congress have introduced numerous bills over multiple congresses to expand the downwinder eligibility area .

these bills would have expanded eligibility for nts downwinders to persons who were living in colorado , idaho , montana , and new mexico as well as in the entire states of arizona , nevada , and utah during periods of atmospheric atomic weapons testing at nts .

additional legislation would have created downwinder eligibility for persons living in guam during atomic weapons testing in the pacific and for persons affected by fallout from the initial trinity test in new mexico .

in 2002 , in response to a mandate from congress contained in the house report to accompany the 2002 supplemental appropriations act for further recovery from and response to terrorist attacks on the united states , p.l .

107-206 , hrsa asked the national research council ( nrc ) board on radiation effects research to study scientific evidence related to the health effects of radiation exposure and make recommendations to congress , including whether the reca downwinder area should be expanded .

the nrc issued its final report on this study in 2005 .

the nrc concluded that any decisions on additional eligibility for downwinders should not be made solely on the basis of geographic area .

thus , it advised against simply adding more downwind counties .

citing studies showing that nts fallout covered the entire country and that people living far beyond the current downwinder eligibility area may have been exposed to higher amounts of radiation , the ntc recommended an alternative science - based approach to determining downwinder eligibility for reca benefits .

individuals' exposure to fallout depended on multiple factors , including where they lived , the amount of time they spent outdoors , and their consumption of milk .

that last factor is especially significant because the most important pathway of exposure was the ingestion of iodine 131 ( 131 i ) through the consumption of milk from cows and goats that ate contaminated vegetation .

to be equitable , the nrc report recommended that the reca program use a model of probability of causation to evaluate individual claims for benefits instead of basing downwinder eligibility solely on geography and a presumption of eligibility .

under this model , each applicant's individual absorbed dose of radionuclides would be estimated using geographic , demographic , and behavioral factors and every person in the country would be eligible to apply for benefits .

this estimated dose would then be used to calculate , using established radio - epidemiology formulas developed by nci , the probability that the individual's specific type of cancer was caused by his or her exposure to ionizing radiation .

congress would then have to set the threshold at which to award benefits or perhaps award varying levels of benefits based on a sliding scale of probabilities .

this model , which is similar to one of the methods used to determine eligibility for benefits under part b of eeoicpa and for disability compensation provided by the va , has never been part of the reca program or its amendments to expand the downwinder area .

no legislation has ever been introduced to convert reca downwinder eligibility from a model based on geography to one based on the probability of causation .

in addition , in both the eeoicpa and veterans' programs , the probability of causation model has been largely supplanted by a presumption of eligibility model similar to that used in reca .

the presumptive eligibility model used by reca may be favored by some advocates for compensation because the probability of causation model recommended by the nrc is likely to result in fewer successful claims .

this is due to the generally low levels of radiation exposure from fallout and the fact that ionizing radiation is not an especially potent cancer - causing agent .

in the executive summary to its report , the nrc states , the scientific evidence indicates that in most cases it is unlikely that exposure to radiation from fallout was a substantial contributing cause to developing cancer .

moreover , scientifically based changes that congress may make in the eligibility criteria for compensation in response to this report are likely to result in few successful claims .

the committee is aware that such conclusion may be disappointing , but they have been reached in accordance with the committee's charge to base its conclusions on the results of best available scientific information .

under current law , reca benefits for uranium miners , millers , and ore transporters are only available if the worker was exposed to radiation during uranium work before 1972 .

in the original reca legislation , the december 31 , 1971 cut - off date for uranium worker eligibility was selected because the federal government's procurement of uranium for atomic weapons ended in 1971 .

beginning in 1964 with the enactment of the private ownership of special nuclear materials act , p.l .

88-489 , private ownership of uranium for fuel for nuclear power plants has been legal , creating an additional market for mined and milled uranium and ensuring that mining , milling , and transporting uranium continued after the cut - off date for reca eligibility .

since the enactment of the 2000 reca amendments , legislation has been introduced in congress to expand reca eligibility to uranium workers who may have been exposed to radiation after 1971 .

legislation has also been introduced to include uranium mine core drillers in the reca program and to require research into the health effects of uranium tailing piles .

advocates for extending reca eligibility for uranium work after 1971 argue that despite improved safety regulations enacted since 1971 , including the enactment in 1977 of the mine safety and health act , p.l .

91-173 , uranium workers , especially miners , remain at elevated risk for radon - induced diseases .

for example , the current mine safety and health administration ( msha ) annual exposure limit for radiation of 4 wlm is higher than the annual exposure limit of 1 wlm recommended by the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) , meaning that current uranium miners can be exposed to higher than recommended levels of radon while still being in compliance with federal safety standards .

the intent of the reca program , as expressed in section 2 of the statute is to make "partial restitution" to persons who were affected by fallout from atomic weapons tests and uranium miners who were working in mines "that were providing uranium for the primary use and benefit of the nuclear weapons program of the united states government," in recognition that the "lives and health of uranium miners and of individuals who were exposed to radiation were subjected to increased risk of injury and disease to serve the national security interests of the united states. .

an expansion of reca to cover post - 1971 uranium activities would largely cover workers in the commercial uranium sector , which would expand the program beyond its original statutory intent .

in addition , illnesses contracted during uranium mining , milling , and ore transporting for commercial clients , rather than the federal government , would likely be covered by existing state workers' compensation systems , which are the traditional means of providing medical benefits and compensation in cases of commercial workplace injuries , illnesses , or deaths .

