the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) of 1996 was enacted to improve the availability and continuity of health insurance coverage ; promote long - term care insurance and the use of health savings accounts ; and combat waste , fraud , and abuse , particularly in medicare and medicaid .

many of those provisions have since been expanded and superseded by other laws , most notably by the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) .

hipaa also included a series of requirements under the subtitle "administrative simplification" to promote electronic record - keeping and claims processing in the health care system and to protect the privacy of electronic health information .

the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) was instructed to adopt electronic format and data standards for certain administrative and financial transactions that occur routinely between health care providers and payers ( eg , patient eligibility , claims processing ) , and list the code sets that must be used in these electronic transactions to identify specific diagnoses and clinical procedures .

the secretary also was directed to adopt unique identifiers ( id numbers ) for health care providers , health plans , and employers for use in standard electronic transactions .

finally , the secretary was required to adopt security standards — administrative , physical , and technical safeguards — to ensure the integrity and confidentiality of electronic health information and protect it against unauthorized access , use , or disclosure .

hipaa specified that the administrative simplification standards apply to the following three types of entities , collectively referred to as covered entities: ( 1 ) health plans , ( 2 ) health care clearinghouses , and ( 3 ) health care providers .

the hipaa privacy rule established a set of federal standards for the protection of personal health information .

first , it required covered entities ( i.e. , health plans , health care clearinghouses , and health care providers that conduct hipaa electronic transactions ) to put in place safeguards to protect health information from unauthorized access , use , or disclosure .

second , it described the circumstances under which covered entities are permitted to use or disclose an individual's health information .

finally , the rule gave individuals certain rights with respect to their health information .

those rights include the right of access to inspect and obtain a copy of their medical information , the right to amend inaccurate or incomplete information , and the right to an accounting of certain types of disclosures of the information .

the privacy rule covers "protected health information" ( phi ) that is created or received by a covered entity .

phi is broadly defined as individually identifiable information in any form or format — oral , paper - based , electronic — that "[r]elates to the past , present , or future physical or mental health or condition of an individual ; the provision of health care to an individual ; or the past , present , or future payment for the provision of health care to an individual. .

the rule includes a de - identification standard .

health information is de - identified if 18 specified types of identifiers are removed , or if a qualified statistician , using accepted principles , determines that the re - identification risk is very small .

de - identified information that meets this standard is not subject to the rule and may be used or disclosed by covered entities without regard to the rule's requirements .

the hipaa security rule requires covered entities and business associates to ensure the confidentiality , integrity , and availability of all electronic phi ( ephi ) that they create , receive , maintain , or transmit ( see text box ) .

covered entities and business associates are to protect against any reasonably anticipated threats or hazards to the security of ephi , and any reasonably anticipated uses or disclosures of such information that are in violation of the privacy rule .

u nlike the privacy rule , which applies to phi in any form or format , the security rules applies only to ephi .

the security rule and the privacy rule are closely interconnected .

while the privacy rule established standards for who may have access to phi , and for what purposes , the security rule created the standards for ensuring that only those who should have access to ephi will in fact have access .

when it developed the security rule , hhs adhered closely to the requirements of the privacy rule .

as noted in the previous section , the privacy rule requires covered entities to adopt reasonable administrative , technical , and physical safeguards in order to protect phi from unauthorized access , use , or disclosure .

but the privacy rule does not specify what those safeguards should be .

that is the purpose of the security rule , under which each of the safeguards — administrative , physical , and technical — is composed of a number of standards .

the hitech act included a series of provisions designed to expand and strengthen the hipaa privacy and security standards .

many of the changes were enacted to address the concerns of privacy advocates and other stakeholders .

these groups had complained that there was no notification requirement in the event of a breach of phi , and that ocr was not adequately enforcing the privacy and security rules .

among its provisions , the hitech act ( 1 ) established four categories of violations of the rules to reflect increasing levels of culpability , and four corresponding tiers of cmps that significantly increased the minimum penalty amount for each violation ; ( 2 ) required hhs to investigate all complaints indicating violations due to willful neglect ; ( 3 ) made business associates of covered entities — and their subcontractors — directly liable for violations of privacy and security rules ; and ( 4 ) required covered entities and their business associates to notify individuals whose phi was breached .

in addition , the hitech act established new limitations on the use and disclosure of phi for marketing and fundraising purposes ; prohibited the sale of phi in an otherwise permissible disclosure ; and expanded individuals' rights to access their phi , restrict certain disclosures to health plans , and obtain an accounting of routine disclosures of ephi .

gina also amended the privacy rule by clarifying that genetic information is phi , which was already the case , and prohibiting health plans from using or disclosing genetic information for eligibility or enrollment determination , or other underwriting purposes .

as noted earlier , the privacy rule permits health plans to use or disclose phi — other than genetic information — for such purposes .

most of the hitech act amendments to the hipaa privacy and security standards and their enforcement , as well as the changes required by gina , were finalized in a january 2013 "omnibus" rule .

the omnibus rule also included technical and other non - statutory revisions to the hipaa standards to improve their workability and effectiveness , most notably regarding authorizations for the use or disclosure of phi for research .

the text box summarizes significant changes made by the hitech act and gina to the hipaa standards .

it includes the new requirements for research authorizations .

several of these provisions are discussed in more detail below .

prior to the hitech act , hipaa applied directly to covered entities but not to business associates , which as noted earlier were regulated through contractual agreements ( i.e. , baas ) .

covered entities were not liable for , or required to actively monitor , their business associates .

however , if a covered entity found out about a material breach or violation of the baa , it had to take reasonable steps to remedy the situation and , if unsuccessful , terminate the contract .

if termination was not feasible , then the covered entity had to notify hhs .

the hitech act made business associates directly liable and subject to civil and criminal penalties for violations of hipaa or their baas ( see text box ) .

it also clarified that subcontractors of a business associate are themselves business associates .

thus , subcontractors along the contractual chain are subject to the same compliance obligations and are directly liable for hipaa violations .

just as business associates may use or disclose phi only as permitted by the baa or required by law , and may not use or disclose phi in a manner that would violate the privacy rule , so subcontractors are subject to the same limitations , as documented in subcontracts .

a covered entity ( or a business associate ) that knows of a pattern of activity or practice of its business associate ( or subcontractor ) that constitutes a material breach or violation of the baa must take reasonable steps to remedy the problem and , if such steps are unsuccessful , terminate the contract .

neither covered entities nor their business associates ( including subcontractors ) may intimidate , threaten , discriminate against , or take any other retaliatory action against an individual who files a complaint , cooperates with investigators , or opposes unlawful actions .

pursuant to the hitech act , patient safety organizations , health information exchange organizations and e - prescribing gateways are business associates .

the omnibus rule also clarifies that while a data transmission service — acting merely as a conduit for the flow of information ( including temporary storage that is incidental to the transmission service ) — is not a business associate , a service that provides more persistent storage ( eg , cloud ehrs ) is a business associate .

the hipaa breach notification program was established in 2009 , pursuant to the hitech act .

under the program , covered entities and their business associates must notify all individuals affected by a breach of unsecured ephi without unreasonable delay , but no later than 60 days after the discovery of the breach ( see text box ) .

unsecured ephi means information that has not been rendered unusable , unreadable , or indecipherable to unauthorized individuals through encryption .

the law exempted encrypted phi from the definition of a breach in an effort to encourage the practice of encrypting health information .

covered entities also must notify the hhs secretary of breaches of unsecured phi .

a "major" breach affecting 500 or more individuals must be reported to the secretary at the same time the affected individuals are notified .

entities may maintain a log of breaches involving fewer than 500 individuals and submit the log to hhs annually .

ocr is required to maintain a website listing all the major breaches ( i.e. , affecting at least 500 individuals ) .

the hitech act defines a breach as the "unauthorized acquisition , access , use , or disclosure of [phi] which compromises the security and privacy of such information.... " the definition excludes unintentional access or use of phi , inadvertent disclosures , and disclosures where the covered entity has a good faith belief that an unauthorized person to whom the disclosure was made would not reasonably have been able to retain the information .

in its initial rulemaking to implement the breach notification program , hhs stated that the phrase "compromises the security and privacy of phi" means "poses a significant risk of financial , reputational , or other harm to the individual. .

covered entities and business associates faced with an incident involving the unauthorized acquisition , access , use or disclosure of phi first had to determine whether it met this harm threshold .

if it did , and the incident constituted a breach , then notification was required .

the harm threshold was controversial .

consumer advocacy organizations and others criticized it for being too subjective and for discouraging reporting .

they argued for its modification or elimination .

hhs responded in the omnibus rule by removing the harm threshold and modifying the risk assessment portion of the breach notification rule to require the use of a more objective assessment .

an impermissible use or disclosure of phi "is presumed to be a breach unless the covered entity or business associate ... demonstrates that there is a low probability that the [phi] has been compromised based on a risk assessment.... " the modified rule lists the factors that must be included in the risk assessment .

now the default is notification , and the burden is on the covered entity or business associate to perform a risk assessment to determine whether there is a low probability that phi was compromised .

if that determination is made ( and documented ) , then the covered entity or business associate need not provide notification .

the secretary is required annually to submit a report to congress on the number and nature of the breaches reported to ocr , and the actions taken in response to such breaches .

to date , the secretary has submitted two reports , each analyzing two years of information .

the first report covers 2009-2010 , and the second one covers 2011-2012 .

cumulatively , through december 31 , 2012 , ocr received 710 reports of major breaches affecting a total of approximately 22.5 million individuals .

over the same period , ocr received 77,420 reports of breaches affecting fewer than 500 individuals .

in all , these breaches affected approximately 400,000 individuals .

thus , while the major breaches made up about 1% of breach reports , they accounted for more than 98% of all the individuals who were affected by a breach of their phi .

of all the categories of causes of breaches , theft accounted for about half of all incidents .

ocr identified the following lessons learned from the two breach reports: ensure that an organization's risk analysis and risk management plan is thorough and addresses all potential risks and vulnerabilities to ephi , regardless of location or media .

that includes ephi on computer hard drives , usb drives , laptops , mobile phones , and other portable devices , as well as ephi transmitted across networks .

ensure that security evaluations are conducted when there are operation changes ( eg , office moves ) and technical upgrades for hardware and software so that ephi remains secure .

ensure that ephi stored on portable electronic devices is properly secured , including through encryption , with clear policies on the use and removal of such devices from a facility .

implement clear policies and procedures for the proper disposal of phi in all forms .

ensure physical safeguards are in place to limit access to facilities and workstations that maintain phi .

ensure that employees are fully trained on the organization's privacy and security policies and procedures .

the hitech act's provisions to expand and strengthen hipaa enforcement were in part a response to the approach taken initially by ocr to work with entities in violation of the hipaa standards and encourage voluntary compliance through corrective action .

privacy advocates criticized the agency for not being more aggressive in its enforcement activities and for not penalizing noncompliant organizations .

at the time of the hitech act enactment , ocr had not levied a single civil penalty against a covered entity , though cases had been referred to doj for criminal prosecution .

the hitech act clarified that the criminal penalties for wrongful disclosure apply to individuals who without authorization use or disclose such information maintained by a covered entity , whether they are employees or not .

this provision was prompted by a memorandum opinion issued by the doj office of legal counsel in june 2005 clarifying the scope of hipaa criminal enforcement .

the opinion was interpreted by some to mean that employees of covered entities could not be held liable for a hipaa criminal violation ; only covered entities could be prosecuted directly .

table 2 summarizes the four tiers of cmps that replaced the original hipaa penalty of $100 per violation up to an annual maximum of $25,000 for multiple violations of the same requirement .

the lowest tier applies to entities that "did not know , and by exercising reasonable diligence would not have known" of the violation .

the second tier applies to violations due to reasonable cause and is likely to cover many common violations by otherwise generally compliant covered entities ; for example , those that occur due to human error , despite workforce training and appropriate policies and procedures .

reasonable cause covers violations in which the entity "knew , or by exercising reasonable diligence would have known" of the violation , "but did not act with willful neglect. .

the final two tiers , both dealing with violations due to willful neglect , are distinguished based on whether the entity took corrective action within 30 days .

willful neglect means "conscious , intentional failure or reckless indifference to the obligation to comply. .

ocr must investigate whenever there is evidence of a possible violation due to willful neglect .

however , the omnibus rule states that , absent indications of willful neglect , ocr will continue to seek compliance through informal , voluntary action if appropriate .

the hitech act requires the secretary to conduct periodic audits to ensure that covered entities and business associates comply with the privacy and security rules .

unlike complaint investigations or compliance reviews , which are initiated in response to specific events or incidents , audits are based on a set of objective selection criteria .

ocr developed and conducted a pilot audit program that targeted 115 covered entities representing a broad range of sizes and complexities .

the audits were conducted according to a protocol that identified the processes , controls , and policies of covered entities in three areas: privacy , security , and breach notification .

ocr engaged pricewaterhousecoopers ( pwc ) to evaluate the pilot audit program and is using pwc's findings to finalize plans for a permanent audit program .

ocr has requested additional funding to establish the audit program , which it believes will generate tools for covered entities to self - evaluate and help spread a culture of compliance within the health care sector as entities become aware of the program and its expectations .

the hitech act requires the secretary annually to submit a report to congress that summarizes the number and types of complaints received ; the compliance reviews and enforcement actions taken ; the number of audits performed and their findings ; and the secretary's plan for improving hipaa compliance and enforcement for the following year .

the secretary has submitted two such reports to date , each covering the same two - year period as the two breach notification reports submitted to congress , which were described earlier .

in 2009 , the institute of medicine ( iom ) released a report on the privacy rule's impact on research .

the iom concluded that the rule does not adequately protect the privacy of health information used for research .

it also concluded that the rule , as currently implemented , impedes the conduct of important new research .

the report found that there is considerable variation in how organizations that collect and use health data are interpreting and following the rule .

it discussed the challenges in reconciling the privacy rule with other federal regulations — primarily the common rule — that govern human subject research .

the report also examined inconsistencies between the privacy rule and the common rule , neither of which applies uniformly to all health research .

for example , the privacy rule generally prohibited combining an authorization with any other legal permission to create a "compound" authorization , unless it was for the same study .

thus , a privacy rule authorization for a specific research study could be combined with common rule informed consent to participate in the research .

but any separate research activity , such as collecting specimens or data for a central research database or repository , would require its own authorization .

unlike common rule informed consent , privacy rule authorizations also had to be study - specific ; authorizations for future research were prohibited .

the omnibus rule addressed some of these inconsistencies .

the privacy rule now permits compound authorizations for any type of research activity ( with limited exceptions ) and allows authorizations for future research , provided the description of the future research uses is sufficiently clear that it would be "reasonable for an individual to expect that his or her protected health information could be used or disclosed for such future research. .

