the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( 42 u.s.c .

5121 et seq. , henceforth the stafford act ) confers upon the president a broad set of authorities "to alleviate the suffering and damage" of affected tribal , state , and local governments , as well as individual citizens , from disasters .

the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has been given the responsibility of administering almost all of the president's stafford act authorities through other law , a series of executive orders , and a dhs delegation .

fema has established the public assistance ( pa ) grant program by combining the authority of multiple sections of the stafford act .

the pa program provides financial grant assistance to states , tribes , and local communities both in the response to and recovery from significant disasters .

between fy2000-fy2013 , the pa program has provided $52.6 billion in grant assistance to help communities pay for an array of eligible response and recovery activities , including debris removal , emergency protective measures , and the repair , replacement , or restoration of disaster - damaged , publicly owned facilities and the facilities of certain private nonprofit ( pnp ) organizations .

the authorities of the pa program were most recently significantly amended by the sandy recovery improvement act ( division b of p.l .

113-2 , the disaster relief appropriations act , 2013 ; henceforth sria ) .

for a brief legislative history of pa program authorities , see appendix a .

this report provides background on key elements of the pa program , such as the eligibility of applicants , the types of assistance available , and the methods fema uses for awarding grant assistance .

summary analysis of federal obligations for pa program assistance is also provided along important variables , such as the distribution of federal obligations across the pa program eligible categories of work assistance .

the report concludes with discussion of several policy issues that congress may wish to consider when evaluating the pa program in the future , including considerations of significant prospective changes to the pa program and the role of the pa program in the context of other federal agency disaster assistance authorities .

it is beyond the scope of this report to describe in full how fema administers the pa program .

fema has many publicly available resources that explain the complexity of the pa program in greater detail than is provided in this report .

this section of the report describes key elements of the pa program , such as major eligibility considerations , the types of grant assistance provided , and the methods for disbursing grant funding .

there are two general methods fema currently uses to determine the amount of , and award , grant assistance for both emergency and permanent work under the pa program .

fema will either award grants based on the estimated federal share of the total eligible cost for the project , or it will award grants on the federal share of actual eligible costs evidenced through documentation by the applicant / grantee .

succinctly , when a grant is provided by estimate , the applicant receives the full amount of assistance at the time the project is approved .

the actual cost basis method reimburses the applicant for eligible expenses only as actual costs are documented by the applicant .

when and how these methods are applied is described briefly below .

the sandy recovery improvement act ( sria ) reformed numerous stafford act assistance authorities , including the pa program .

the foremost change of sria to the pa program was to create a new section of the stafford act , section 428 , establishing "alternative procedures" for the pa program .

many of the changes made by sria were initially piloted under section 689j of p.l .

109-295 , the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 ( pkemra ) .

this section describes how fema chose to implement the sria alternative procedures and discusses some of the decisions made in this implementation process that may be of interest to congress .

the changes made by sria to the pa program are discussed in detail in the prior sections of this report and in a separate report by crs .

the following section provides analysis of pa program spending for major disasters in the period fy2000 through fy2013 .

fy2014 , and early data from fy2015 , were excluded from this analysis because these more recent data are subject to considerable modification as the recovery from major disasters advances and more pa projects are approved or have their obligations revised .

this could also affect actual obligation levels for early fiscal years to a lesser degree .

the data for this analysis were derived from fema datasets , including publicly available data that can be accessed through the openfema website .

additional information on these data , as well as important considerations regarding their reliability , is available in appendix b .

there are numerous policy issues that congress may consider when evaluating the pa program .

the following sections of this report discuss select issues that may arise in congressional oversight of the pa program .

the provisions of the stafford act that grant the pa program's authorities are , in many respects , broadly worded statutes that allow the president , and fema as the delegated agency , to define the conditions of disaster assistance .

it is reasonable for fema to develop complex policies and procedures for implementing the program when the law is silent on key definitions ( such as what constitutes a re pair or replacement project ) or has left it to the administration's discretion when to provide assistance ( such as when debris removal assistance can be provided on private properties ) .

for more on these examples of how fema has interpreted stafford act provisions through regulation and policy , see the text box .

that congress has granted this responsibility is not unique to the stafford act or fema , but such administrative discretion to implement the statute has resulted in policies and regulations that were revised or reversed by congress .

most recently , for example , congress enacted in sria a change to the treatment of eligible labor costs for emergency protective measures , revising previous policies established by fema .

also in sria , congress directed that fema review , update , and revise its regulations in totality for when fema recommends to the president that assistance is provided to individuals and households through section 408 authority of the stafford act .

congress has also passed laws , such as p.l .

109-308 , the pets evacuation and transportation standards act ( pets act ) of 2006 , that further specified the scope of stafford act authorities when fema's existing interpretation of its authorities limited the possibility of providing that assistance .

consistent with past precedents , congress may review current fema policies and procedures for the pa program , and , when desired , override the policies through further clarification in law or submit formal legislative recommendations on policies in committee or conference report language .

likewise , congress may also decide to codify existing policies without revising them , thereby assuring that they cannot be changed without legislative action .

the pa program is constantly evolving through revisions to administrative policies for the program .

these policy documents , generally referred to as the 9500 policy series by fema , supplement interpretations of the stafford act made in pa program regulations .

as established by section 325 of the stafford act , these policies are required to be shared for public comment .

in practice , fema provides the policies on their website and posts a notice in the federal register identifying that they are considering creating a new pa policy , or revising an existing policy , that clarifies its regulations .

fema will also solicit feedback through outreach mechanisms such as weekly external affairs newsletters and through various emergency management associations .

fema's review of these policies does not always include certain characteristics , such as cost - benefit analysis and paperwork reduction reviews , that is common for federal agencies , as outlined in the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

within fema's existing policy revision process , congress may wish to comment on and evaluate the proposed policy changes , hold oversight hearings and briefings on the changes , or provide input directly through other communications .

congress may also consider changing the policy revision process itself , possibly by amending section 325 of the stafford act , to ( among other options ) : create a formal reporting requirement to congress prior to the finalization of pa policies , possibly to include requirements for explanatory briefings regarding the nature and intent of the planned policy ; revise the existing requirements in law to expand the types of interim policies fema is required to seek consultation from stakeholders ; establish conditions for whether a policy should undergo a more extensive apa or apa - like procedure .

conversely , congress may determine the existing pa program policy revision process is unnecessarily cumbersome and inhibits rapid and necessary changes to the administrative practices of fema .

if so , congress may consider eliminating some or all of the existing requirements .

in addition to the generally constant evolution of fema pa program policies described above , there are two major potential changes currently underway for the pa program .

these are discussed below .

sria reformed the pa program primarily through the creation a new section of the stafford act establishing alternative procedures for the pa program .

as described earlier in this report , fema created the public assistance alternative procedures ( paap ) pilot program to implement these alternative procedures .

as described in law , the purpose of the pa alternative procedures is to: ( 1 ) reduc[e] the costs to the federal government of providing such assistance ; ( 2 ) increas[e] flexibility in the administration of such assistance ; ( 3 ) expedit[e] the provision of such assistance to a state , tribal or local government , or owner or operator of a private nonprofit facility ; and ( 4 ) provid[e] financial incentives and disincentives for a state , tribal or local government , or owner or operator of a private nonprofit facility for the timely and cost - effective completion of projects with such assistance reducing federal costs for providing assistance .

sria also requires the dhs ig to assess the effectiveness of the alternative procedures for permanent work projects .

of note , the ig's report is not specifically required to assess the portion of the alternative procedures for debris removal assistance , though the ig retains the standing authority to review and audit these grants .

by law , among other elements , the ig's report is required to contain assessments of whether the alternative procedures: increased the speed of disaster recovery for the community ; used estimates that were accurate ( presumably to mean accurate to actual costs ) ; and should be continued , with any recommendations for changes to them in future legislation .

the report is to be issued three to five years following enactment of sria ( so between january 2016 and january 2018 ) and is to be provided to the committees of jurisdiction for the stafford act ( the committee on transportation and infrastructure in the house , and the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs in the senate ) .

in a committee report requirement accompanying the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

114-4 ) , congress has also directed fema to produce quarterly reports on implementation of the paap pilot program , especially for permanent work .

these quarterly reports are instructed to include fema's assessment of "challenges and recommendations , including proposed authority modifications" to help the pilot program achieve its legislative objectives .

in addition , the quarterly reports are to contain , among other items , a financial summary of all permanent work projects in the paap pilot program and descriptions of projects over $50 million .

the issuances of the ig's report and fema's quarterly reports on the paap pilot program may provide congress with direction on how it could further revise the stafford act to improve the pa program .

prior to or after the issuances of these reports , congressional oversight of the implementation of the alternative procedures may focus on a number of factors , including whether the paap pilot program has accomplished the four goals of the procedures as intended in law ; the pilot program guidance produced by fema has properly construed the policy intentions of congress in the enacting legislation , or any new intentions of the current congress ; communities are receiving enough information and assistance from fema to participate fully in the pilot program , and if the participation period for the pilot is long enough ; and both the federal government and applicants have similar initial opinions on the benefits / costs of the alternative procedures .

for example , parties may disagree on the quality of fixed - estimates for large , permanent work grants , or the effectiveness of incentives for increasing the speed of debris removal .

fema is in the process of finalizing a rulemaking that would require grants based on estimates for large , permanent work projects , in fulfillment of a legal requirement of dma 2000 .

the dma 2000 grant estimation procedures were originally developed and approved by an expert panel in 2002 .

conservatively , if fema had adopted a final rule by october 2006 implementing the estimating procedure , a full four years after the expert panel released its final recommendations ( and six since passage of the law ) , the president would have been required to submit a review of the estimating procedures and the cef in october 2008 , and the expert panel would have submitted a review of the "appropriateness" of the cost estimating procedures in october 2007 , 2009 , 2011 , and 2013 .

in short , had the rule been implemented in a timelier manner , the dma 2000 grant estimation procedures may have evolved through the legally required reviews in ways that are currently unaccounted for by fema .

fema notes this possible issue in their proposed rulemaking , stating that they "contacted individual panel members to re - validate the 10 percent threshold recommendation" but did not "request that the panel validate any other portion of its recommendation , as the other portions of the recommendation are not meaningfully effected [sic] by the time that has elapsed. .

however , given the length of time since the passage of the initial dma 2000 legal requirement and the expert panel's recommendations , congress may consider whether to request or require the president to reengage with the expert panel before finalizing the cef rulemaking .

in addition , congress may broadly consider whether it still agrees with the development of the dma 2000 grant estimation procedure .

since passage of dma 2000 , congress enacted sria which also established alternative procedures for the issuance of fixed - estimate grants for large , permanent work projects .

table 2 highlights the some of the major differences between the sria alternative procedure methods and the dma 2000 methods .

congress may consider if some of the differences applied in law for sria's grant estimating alternative procedures should apply to the dma 2000 grant estimating procedures , and vice versa , and whether either estimation method remains necessary to be authorized in the presence of the other .

for example , congress may evaluate whether large , permanent work grants should be issued as fixed estimates , as with the alternative procedure , or with a floor and ceiling threshold , as with the dma 2000 procedure .

as a reminder , the dma 2000 procedure is not currently active or available to applicants , and would not be available until after fema implements a final rulemaking .

thus , if congress wishes to do so , congress could prevent , delay , reform , or endorse the implementation of the dma 2000 grant estimating procedure before it is implemented .

as with any grant program , the pa program is at risk for making improper payments , and experiencing fraud , waste , and abuse .

the dhs ig has a dedicated component office called the office of emergency management oversight ( emo ) that frequently produces , among other products , audits with recommendations for recouping improperly provided funds for the pa program .

the ig's audits also make recommendations for improving pa program management , and generally help ensure funds are appropriately provided and spent .

these audits are summarized annually in "capping reports" on the pa program and hmgp assistance .

the ig reported to crs that for fy2009 to fy2013 they questioned the expenditure of over $1.9 billion in pa assistance , and recommended that over $387 million of these funds be put to better use .

however , of those amounts , fema recovered only 13% of questioned costs ( about $245 million ) , and 64% of the funds that could be put to better use ( about $249 million ) .

fema has recently established a new "recovery audits unit" within its recovery directorate ( the element responsible for managing the pa program ) that may improve future performance .

this new unit was established as a result of an internal fema review of all ig and gao audits issued between 2011 and 2014 .

according to fema's internal review , "an overwhelming majority of the audits and recommendations applied to the pa program .

of the 202 audits analyzed , 188 ( 93.1% ) applied to pa , and 659 recommendations out of 680 ( 96.9% ) also applied to pa." in addition , dhs ig has recently begun conducting more "proactive" audits of the pa program by deploying in the initial phase of a disaster to prevent misuse of funds .

this approach has already resulted in several published audits that help applicants by giving them "the opportunity to correct noncompliance with federal regulations before they spend the majority of their funding. .

congress may evaluate both fema's new recovery audits unit and dhs ig's more proactive approach to determine if these changes will have an appreciable effect on the management of the pa program .

in addition to other recommendations produced by the ig , gao , and other entities , congress may also consider the following issues for improving pa program assistance .

as discussed previously , the stafford act authorizes assistance to help pay for expenses a grantee "reasonably incurs in administering and managing the pa grant that are not directly chargeable to a specific project. .

the amount of assistance provided is set by fema regulations and policies .

under policy guidance , fema has not "established any minimum or maximum for what constitutes a reasonable amount" that a grantee should pass through of the management award to subgrantees / applicants ( i.e. , how much should be shared by the state / tribe to a local government / pnp ) .

in an audit , gao found that few , if any , grantees passed through any amount of the management assistance to subgrantees , a finding confirmed by fema to crs .

in theory , funds for administrative expenses can be used to improve the overall management of pa projects , eliminating some improper usage of the overall assistance .

congress may consider whether existing or additional assistance for administrative costs could be provided to grantees with the specific requirement that the assistance be used to prevent misuse of pa program funds ; existing or additional management assistance should be given directly to subgrantees , regardless of grantee decisions as to whether or not assistance should be passed through to applicants ; fema should reestablish its earlier , pre - 2009 method of providing management cost assistance , or if fema should be directed to develop a new method irrespective the current and past models .

one of the challenges revealed during crs's research on the pa program was the limitations of existing data on pa projects .

some of these limitations are described in appendix b .

for example , as noted earlier in the report , fema does not have a ready method of implementing legal requirements to reduce cost - shares on repetitively damaged facilities , as established by dma 2000 , due to the quality of data retained and tracked from disaster to disaster , project to project .

in addition , gao noted that the emergency protective measures sheltering and temporary essential power ( step ) pilot program implemented after hurricane sandy may have inadequately collected data on recipients to prevent duplication of benefits .

more holistically , crs research into the program indicates that certain policy issues may be difficult , if not impossible , to evaluate properly because of project data limitations .

for example , fema is unable to readily identify or determine how many pnps first apply to the sba loan program before applying for grant assistance from the pa program , and the amount of assistance they receive from sba .

this information would be useful , for instance , in determining the financial assistance needs of pnps following disasters and whether both ( or either ) assistance programs are required .

as another example , it would be difficult , if not impossible , to identify if facilities that had received pa mitigation assistance in the past had their damage reduced in a future disaster per the intended purpose .

congress may consider overseeing current and future initiatives of fema to improve the quality and use of program data collected and maintained by fema .

for example , in 2011 , fema established a program called "femastat" to provide empirical , data - based reviews of fema's performance .

femastat , and other data - based initiatives , may lead to improvements in the quality of data collected by the pa program , and in turn the effective use of that data in policy analysis .

congress may wish to oversee the extent to which initiatives such as femastat are being implemented , their effectiveness , and whether they are improving , or perhaps worsening , the pa program .

congress may also wish to evaluate the quality of fema's database systems for pa program and other grant program information .

congressional oversight could involve , for instance , a review of the funding for these databases , and whether additional funding is required to improve or develop new database systems .

as a cautionary note , fema has a number of legacy database systems in addition to its current system , called the emergency management mission integrated environment ( emmie ) which was deployed full - time in 2008 .

as highlighted by the ig , the existence of multiple database systems can inhibit the tracking of information , such as insurance requirements , across disasters .

therefore , a new database system may not necessarily be beneficial if not properly designed .

the existing system may be able to be improved ( or used more effectively by field staff ) to account for issues congress may reveal in oversight of fema's database systems .

as has been done in past legislation , congress may wish to evaluate the types of applicants that are currently eligible for the pa program .

in doing so , it may consider expanding or restricting the scope of eligibility in a number of ways , possibly through the expansion / restriction of eligibility for certain nonprofit facility types , or the expansion of the pa program to include private sector facilities .

as authorized in the disaster relief act of 1970 , the pa program was only allowed to provide permanent work assistance to public facilities .

p.l .

92-209 was passed quickly thereafter , in 1971 , to provide limited assistance beyond public facilities , allowing for assistance to be provided for private nonprofit medical facilities .

when considering p.l .

92-209 , congress recognized that the need to protect our national medical care delivery systems requires that the same assistance should be authorized for privately owned , nonprofit medical care facilities — and their related administrative and support facilities — as present law provides for those which are publically owned .

since then , namely in the disaster relief act of 1974 and in the disaster relief and emergency assistance amendments of 1988 , permanent work assistance has expanded to include certain pnps with similar reasoning .

dma 2000 restricted this eligibility somewhat by establishing that a subset of eligible pnps must first apply to the sba for assistance before getting assistance from the pa program .

as described earlier in the report , the pa program currently provides assistance only to governmental entities and certain pnps .

congress may consider whether the eligibility of pnps is appropriately scoped , or if it could be more restricted / expanded .

for example , congress may evaluate whether the current standards are too inclusive / exclusive for the types of pnps that provide an "essential service of a governmental nature to the general public," and therefore meet minimum requirements of eligibility .

for example , entities such cemeteries may be excluded by this definition , while community arts centers are included ; are allowed to apply directly to the pa program for immediate grant assistance instead of first applying to the sba loan program ; and can receive assistance if their facilities are "dedicated to or primarily used for religious , political , athletic , recreational , or vocational purposes ... " such as houses of worship .

under past and current law , private entities , such as owners of private infrastructure facilities and individual homeowners , are excluded from pa program assistance for both emergency work and permanent work .

for emergency work , some assistance is granted indirectly to private entities , via eligible public sector or pnp applicants , namely for debris removal that is in the public interest and for emergency protective measures for the immediate preservation of life and property .

for permanent work , there is a restriction against repairing and restoring private facilities , though private homeowners may receive grant assistance through separate provisions of the stafford act .

congress may wish to evaluate whether it is appropriate to continue the exclusion of private infrastructure facilities for permanent work assistance .

following completion of this potential evaluation , revisions to the pa program may not be necessary if congress determines that it is appropriate to continue to exclude private facilities from pa program assistance for a variety of policy reasons ( eg , concerns over the moral hazards produced by the assistance , concerns that it would unduly influence capital markets , concerns that it assistance is too costly , etc .

 ) ; or any unique needs of private infrastructure can be provided by other governmental assistance programs ( eg , sba disaster loans or assistance from the economic development agency ) ; or any necessary private infrastructure assistance can be provided for in situational - dependent authorizations either immediately before or after disasters , in the pa program or other assistance programs , primarily hud's community development block grant ( cdbg ) program .

however , in an evaluation of pa program eligibility , congress may determine that the existing eligibility should be expanded to authorize assistance to private facilities .

if so , congress may then consider whether private facilities require grant or loan assistance , or some combination of the two ( for example , providing grant assistance up to a certain amount , and then loan assistance thereafter ) .

as has been done for pnps , congress may also consider whether only certain private facilities should receive pa program assistance , such as those determined by the president or secretary of dhs to be critical infrastructure .

here , the policy argument for providing assistance through the pa program is perhaps strongest .

as defined by statute , infrastructure is considered critical if the "incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on security , national economic security , national public health or safety , or any combination of those matters. .

however , congress may consider the definition of critical infrastructure to be not inclusive enough , as what is critical to any one community may not be critical to the nation ( eg , a local factory ) .

additional restrictions on the assistance to private infrastructure may also be considered , such as mandating that owners and operators commit to obtaining and maintaining sufficient insurance or structurally mitigating all of their facilities from similar consequences in future disasters .

as discussed earlier , hazard mitigation assistance can be provided as part of a permanent work project to repair an eligible facility in the pa program .

this assistance is provided to reduce future risk to the facility , and is provided in addition to repairing the facility to current codes and standards .

as shown earlier in figure 6 , between fy2000 and fy2013 , fema obligated approximately $3.7 billion in pa hazard mitigation assistance .

following hurricane sandy , for example , fema has approved over $2 billion in pa hazard mitigation assistance , including $589 million for the nyu langone medical center .

other programs authorized by the stafford act , notably the hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) authorized by section 404 , also specifically allow the president to provide assistance for hazard mitigation measures that are cost effective and substantially reduce future risk .

see table 6 for a summary regarding the differences between the assistance provided by the hmgp and pa hazard mitigation assistance .

of note , every dollar of pa hazard mitigation assistance subsequently increases the amount of federal assistance provided through the formula described in statute for hmgp assistance .

additional hmgp assistance provided as a result of pa hazard mitigation expenditures between fy2000 and fy2013 could be as low as $555 million , but could be as high as $647 million or more .

other stafford act programs , such as the predisaster mitigation grant program , are also independently authorized and appropriated for by congress .

therefore , congress may consider whether there is a separate policy need for assistance in the pa program given these other programs , or if the various mitigation authorities can be more closely aligned in statute or through fema's administrative policies .

separately , congress may also wish to review the current criteria and policy fema uses to provide hazard mitigation assistance .

congress may evaluate numerous issues , including whether the methods used under fema's criteria for determining if mitigation measures will lessen the costs ( societal and financial ) of future disasters ; a reform to pa mitigation assistance made for the sria alternative procedures should be made permanent or revoked .

for normal projects , pa mitigation funds are not available for alternate projects or improved projects that involve relocation or facility replacement at same site .

in sria alternative procedures , fema is allowing pa mitigation assistance on these projects , so long as it is approved and included in the fixed - estimate grant ; and there should be a cap on the total amount of pa mitigation assistance that can be provided per project .

current policy does not formally cap the amount of mitigation assistance , though there are additional restrictions on pa mitigation assistance over 15% of the total project cost , and then again over 100% of the project amount .

as previously discussed , crs analysis of data provided by fema indicates that pa mitigation assistance accounts for 38% of the total federal obligation for projects with any mitigation assistance .

congress may also wish to evaluate if assistance should be provided and / or required by the pa program for mitigation measures not otherwise required by the local and state building codes and standards ( i.e. , in effect , boosting those standards specifically only for the pa project ) .

it could be argued , for instance , that if a hazard mitigation measure is considered necessary by fema's criteria , it could be a requirement of the community's standards .

correspondingly , congress may consider whether the pa program should begin allowing as an eligible cost those measures associated with repairing / replacing facilities to improved codes and standards implemented post - disaster by grantees , as was done pre - 1999 .

as described in another crs product , the president recently revised e.o .

11988 , floodplain management , with the issuance of executive order 13960 , establishing a federal flood risk management standard and a process for further soliciting and considering stakeholder input .

implementation of e.o .

13960 will primarily involve the development and application across the federal government of a new federal flood risk management standard ( ffrms ) .

succinctly , e.o .

13960 and the ffrms could ultimately revise federal regulations on federal investment in floodplains , and the amount of hazard mitigation that is required to protect those investments from future flooding .

in the context of the pa program , the current requirements that may be revised are found in regulations on floodplain management .

it is too early to know exactly how the pa program will be affected by the ffrms , but it seems likely that the ffrms will , at a minimum , increase existing requirements by requiring additional "freeboard" for any facility that is being replaced as a permanent work project ( one that exceeds the 50% threshold of damage ) .

freeboard is the height of the facility above base flood elevation ( bfe ) in the 1 in 100 year flood hazard area ( 1% flood zone ) .

these requirements would increase the total cost of the project , and therefore the federal and applicant obligations as cost - shared under normal procedures .

as it is further refined and as fema proposes regulations to implement the ffrms , congress may consider the effects of e.o .

13960 and the ffrms on the pa program to determine if it is in alignment with current congressional intentions .

for example , congress may choose to increase or decrease the number of circumstances in which the proposed ffrms freeboard requirements are imposed for pa permanent work projects ( i.e. , apply the ffrms to all pa permanent work projects instead of just replacement projects , or conversely , apply it only to projects that are damaged by 75% or more instead of 50% , etc. ) .

congress may also choose to change the freeboard requirement writ large , such as requiring +1 foot , or +3 feet , above bfe for facilities ( instead of the proposed +2 for most types of facilities ) .

the broad eligibility of the pa program frequently overlaps with other federal agencies' disaster assistance authorities .

as a result , there are numerous circumstances where emergency work activities and permanent work on certain types of public facilities could be eligible for federal assistance through other federal programs .

in compliance with specific legal restrictions in the stafford act against the duplication of benefits , grantees can only receive assistance for the same activity from one federal program .

further , fema contends that it is bound by legal prohibitions against augmentation of appropriations from providing assistance for an activity under the broad authority of the stafford act when there is a more specifically authorized federal program for that purpose .

fema also contends , for the same augmentation of appropriations reason , that this restriction applies even when the other more specific federal program does not have sufficient ( or any ) appropriations to provide assistance .

therefore , fema and other federal agencies have sought to eliminate redundancies by delineating the circumstances under which the pa program will defer to another agency's more specific assistance authorities .

fema believes there is a firm legal restriction against providing permanent work assistance when another agency has more specific authority .

however , in fema's regulations on the subject , it suggests that fema is only "generally" prevented from providing such assistance , not legally restricted .

for example , fema , in conjunction with the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) and the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) , has issued policy guidance delineating the circumstances where the more specific authorities of these agencies to provide rehabilitation assistance for watershed developments , levees , and other flood control works takes precedence over the pa program authorities .

both flood control and watershed development are included in the definition of what a public facility is in the stafford act .

therefore , restoration of these types of facilities may otherwise be eligible for assistance under stafford act authority were usace and nrcs authority not more specific .

fema acknowledges that the eligibility of each activity is not necessarily distinguishable through existing policy guidance or regulation , and therefore fema will make assessments of eligibility on a "case - by - case" basis when other federal authorities may be more specific than the stafford act ( and thereby , take precedent over the stafford act ) .

the overlap between the pa program authorities and other federal agencies' assistance authorities can be a general source of confusion and frustration for many grantees , as they are frequently unsure which federal program will provide assistance to fulfill their post - disaster needs .

in addition , different programs have different cost shares and cost eligibility regulations , so the eligibility decision between one federal program or the pa program may affect the ultimate amount of spending required by the grantee .

for example , the usace's rehabilitation and improvement program ( rip ) generally has a cost - share of 80% federal , 20% grantee for non - federal projects ; whereas the pa program has a minimum of 75% federal share that can increase to 90% in regulation for a more severe disaster .

therefore , depending on the pa program's cost share for a declared major disaster , it can be fiscally beneficial to the grantee if a project is eligible under the pa program and not the rip , and vice versa .

however , the greatest challenge is presented when fema determines another agency's assistance program is more specific than the pa program , and that other program does not have appropriations sufficient to cover the expense of assisting the applicant .

in these situations , an activity that may otherwise be eligible for aid under the stafford act through the pa program can be denied assistance because the agency with more specific authority takes legal precedence .

fema has argued that it cannot provide assistance in these situations because doing so would augment the appropriation from congress for the other agency's program , even if the appropriation from congress was zero .

fema cited several comptroller general opinions for crs on appropriations law in explaining its legal interpretation .

however , no record could be found of a comptroller general opinion specifically on the overlapping of pa program authorities in the stafford act with other federal agencies' more specific disaster authorities .

in the stafford act , congress has helped clarify the potential redundancy of pa program assistance and the sba's disaster loan program assistance .

for permanent work , the law allows pnps that provide critical services to apply first to fema for permanent work assistance , whereas all other pnps must apply first to sba's disaster loan program .

in other cases , congress has rescinded the disaster assistance authorities of other federal agencies and as a result eliminated any potential redundancy with the other authority and the stafford act .

for example , congress revoked an authority the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) had to repair public housing facilities and repealed an authority the u.s. department of education had to provide disaster assistance to schools .

in other circumstances , fema interprets existing legal provisions as permitting the pa program to pay for activities authorized by other federal assistance programs .

as an example , fema interprets a provision found in the authorization for the emergency federal law enforcement assistance ( eflea ) program as allowing fema to reimburse the department of justice for the deployment of federal law enforcement officers , if the officers are providing pa emergency protective measures authorized by the stafford act .

congress has also enacted new disaster assistance authorities , and revised old authorities , to specifically clarify the role of the stafford act and pa program with regard to the other federal agency authority .

for example , in the creation of the new public transportation emergency relief program in map - 21 , congress provides that the new program did not "affect the ability of any other agency of the government , including the federal emergency management agency , or a state agency , a local governmental entity , organization , or person , to provide any other funds otherwise authorized by law. .

fema believes this provision allows it to provide assistance to public transit agencies through the pa program without augmenting appropriations for the new transit program .

also in map - 21 , congress amended the federal highway administration's emergency relief program to specifically allow for the program to provide debris removal assistance only in incidents that have not been declared major disasters under the stafford act .

therefore , the pa program is now the primary source of debris removal assistance , though not permanent repairs , for federal - aid roads when there is a disaster declaration .

congress may wish to evaluate the role of the pa program in consideration of the potential redundancies in eligibility presented by the broadly scoped pa program and other federal authorities .

to do so , congress could consider several options , including , but not limited to , requiring the president or fema to issue further regulations on the circumstances that stafford act authorities will provide assistance in the presence of more specific federal authorities , to possibly include revision of fema's regulation for permanent work on the matter ; requesting a formal opinion from the comptroller general on fema's legal interpretation of augmentations of appropriations law to determine if stafford act authorities can be used to provide assistance when another federal agency with more specific authority does not have sufficient appropriations to fund an activity ; giving further direction through law or report language to the executive branch regarding the conditions it should to defer to more specific authorities in lieu of the more broadly scoped stafford act , perhaps in the form of a delivery sequence outlining the order of precedence of federal programs for assistance ; and revising the stafford act to explicitly identify whether stafford act authorities may or may not provide assistance in substitution , or at grantee preference , for more specific federal disaster assistance authorities .

ultimately , congress may evaluate holistically whether the pa program should be a backstop source of funding for disaster assistance ( i.e. , only available when other programs do not apply to the activity ) or if it should be the principal , ascendant source of funding for disaster assistance ( i.e. , always eligible to provide assistance for all eligible activities under stafford act authority , regardless of other federal agency authorities ) .

appendix a .

brief legislative history of the public assistance grant program for the first half of the twentieth century , the federal government did not have an overall legal framework for disaster relief and emergency management .

instead , federal involvement was typically reactive and isolated to single large events , such as the great mississippi flood of 1927 .

since that time , the legal framework has been gradually expanding .

in 1950 , congress passed the federal disaster relief act ( p.l .

81-875 ) , establishing permanent authority for federal disaster relief activities and codifying an intergovernmental model for assistance .

additionally , this statute provided the president with the authority to determine when assistance would be provided through the first national disaster declaration process .

it also authorized the basic tenets of what has evolved into emergency work assistance under the current pa program , especially emergency protective measures .

the disaster relief act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-606 ) first authorized a form of permanent work assistance grants for the repair and restoration of public facilities .

it also formally authorized debris removal assistance separately from emergency work assistance .

the disaster relief act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-288 ) authorized the expansion of permanent work assistance grants for the repair and restoration of certain nonprofit facilities , and added features such as the in - lieu contribution and simplified procedures .

more than a decade later , the disaster relief and emergency assistance amendments of 1988 altered this legislation to , among many other reforms , set minimum federal cost - shares for pa program assistance , create an insurance requirement for facilities receiving assistance , and authorize the appeal process for pa assistance decisions .

following the passage of the 1988 amendments , the pa program had many of the same core authorities and requirements as it does today .

however , there have been a number of statutes since 1988 that have impacted the administration of the program .

the main report discusses the notable changes made to the pa program by the disaster mitigation act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-390 , dma 2000 ) , the post - katrina emergency reform act ( title vi of p.l .

109-295 , pkemra ) and the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 ( division b of p.l .

113-2 , sria ) .

appendix b .

worksheet dataset considerations this appendix highlights concerns crs identified with the data that fema makes available to the public related to individual worksheets for pa grants .

this information is intended to provide context for the analysis provided in this report and to identify potential caveats that should be considered when reviewing the results .

the analysis found throughout the report was primarily completed using two datasets: a publicly available dataset of pa program project worksheets and a drf obligation dataset provided directly by fema .

the data that crs received privately from fema included both projected and actual obligations for many programs funded through the drf , including infrastructure - related spending for pa grants and technical assistance contracts ( tac ) .

these contracts are used to hire the necessary contract staff to manage and operate the pa program .

the actual obligations within each program for fy2000 through fy2013 , provided by fema in january of 2015 , were used to complete all analysis in the section entitled "aggregate spending on public assistance. .

for the section " public assistance spending by type of work , category , and project size " all figures were derived from publicly available data on the openfema website , accessed in december 2014 .

obligation totals were based on the federal share obligated , with declarations being sorted into fiscal years by declaration date .

for the additional sections related to obligations for private nonprofit facilities and hazard mitigation expenses within the pa program , fema provided crs with separate datasets .

in each of these datasets , obligations were divided by declaration and funding category ( a through z ) , with totals based on the federal obligation through january 2015 .

scope of project worksheets the method fema uses to characterize and administer discrete projects creates difficulties in understanding the number of actual "projects" within a given disaster .

fema defines a project as "a logical method of performing work as a result of a declared event. .

in determining the parameters of a project , an applicant has the ability to combine work items into a single project as long as the resulting project is considered logical and consistent with fema criteria .

fema provides applicants with a list of generally accepted methods for consolidating projects .

for instance , an applicant may combine work items that relate to the same broad infrastructure system or the same type of facility .

in addition , a single "project" could be all the work for an applicant that falls within one geographic boundary or was awarded to one contractor .

while the ability to consolidate eligible activities onto a single project worksheet has administrative benefits for both fema and applicants , it makes it difficult to capture discrete work items and compare across disasters in aggregate .

for example , fema may assign individual project worksheets to each gravel road damaged in one disaster , but group all gravel roads onto one worksheet in a different disaster , depending on the situation .

as a result , any comparison of total projects within a disaster would necessarily be impacted by the project consolidation decisions made by the applicant and fema .

data entries that represent financial reconciliations instead of projects the public project worksheet dataset used by crs includes over 621,000 individual project worksheets .

however , a number of project worksheets appear not to represent a project in the lay sense of the word , but a financial reconciliation for the grantee ( or subgrantee ) for other project worksheets that did represent real projects .

first , there are a substantial number of worksheets for which the total project amount of federal obligation is either negative or below the threshold for a pa grant ( $1,000 ) .

in discussions with fema , these entries were characterized as the result of adjustments that are made to an applicant for the purpose of financial reconciliation .

these adjustments often led to the creation of a new worksheet to correct issues that were identified for a project that was currently listed under a separate worksheet .

second , the individual project worksheet data include a number of obligations , both positive and negative , that were made to reconcile issues for a grantee in the aggregate .

each of these was made in category z , state management .

for this reason , there could be obligations included in category z that would be more properly assigned to categories a though g. third , the data include disaster declarations for which the obligation total was negative for an entire category .

as described by fema , these instances occurred when a system - generated reconciliation was performed across all applicable categories , possibly as a result of a change in the cost - share between the federal and state government .

while there were not many instances of this in the data , it is possible that similar reconciliations were performed to adjust costs that were not identified because the total for the category within the declaration remained positive .

for the above reasons , crs limited the` analysis on the number of projects or the average cost per project , as a project worksheet may not actually represent a separate discrete project .

table 5 provides the only analysis based on numbers of project worksheets .

as project worksheets for financial reconciliations are not systematically identifiable across the data , crs was not able to adequately control for or eliminate all financial data entries .

however , crs did restrict the data for the most obvious of these entries , those project worksheets with reported obligations between $ - 1 and 1 .

even with this restriction , the data on the number of project worksheets likely inflate the number of real projects in a lay sense of the word .

data requiring proper manual categorization or characterization the analysis provided in the report includes multiple categorizations that are not available in the publicly available data , including obligations for hazard mitigation , private nonprofit facilities , and projects using alternative procedures .

to identify project worksheets that met these criteria , fema staff relied on text searches of fema data or other descriptors in their internal data .

there could be inconsistencies in tracking these data across time , region , or declaration because the entry relies upon individual users including information in the text .

as a result , the analysis addressing these topics cannot be recreated using the publicly available dataset or verified by crs .

