t he u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) has a statutory mission to ensure the safety of all food except for meat , poultry , and certain egg products over which the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) has regulatory oversight .

under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , the fda has the authority to regulate the manufacturing , processing , and labeling of food , with the primary goal of promoting food safety .

congress has vested the fda with the authority to take both administrative and judicial enforcement actions .

the agency initiates and carries out administrative enforcement actions while judicial enforcement actions , including seizures and injunctions , require some type of involvement by the federal courts .

while the fda gathers information to recommend a judicial enforcement action , the department of justice represents the fda before a federal court .

this report focuses on the statutory authority for both the fda and federal courts to initiate the following judicial enforcement actions: injunctions , seizures , and criminal prosecution .

for more information about fda administrative enforcement actions , see crs report r43794 , food recalls and other fda administrative enforcement actions , by [author name scrubbed] .

section 301 of the ffdca prohibits the violation of any of the substantive provisions of the act and serves as the basis for the fda's enforcement actions .

under section 301 , "causing" any of the prohibited acts as well as the act itself is prohibited .

the specific enforcement mechanisms available to the agency to enforce the ffdca are found throughout the act .

section 310 ( a ) states that "all proceedings for the enforcement , or to restrain violations , of this [act] shall be by and in the name of the united states. .

thus , private citizens do not have the right to sue to enforce the ffdca .

while the fda may initiate these enforcement actions , the department of justice represents the fda and the federal government in judicial enforcement proceedings .

an injunction is a civil judicial order initiated against an industry participant to stop or prevent a violation of the ffdca and to halt the flow of violative products in interstate commerce .

an injunction also provides an opportunity for the involved parties to correct the conditions that triggered the violation before the fda takes additional enforcement action .

the ffdca grants federal district courts with the jurisdiction to issue such an order .

this section of the report first discusses types of injunctions available to the fda and then describes the process for filing an injunction by the fda .

the section concludes by examining the legal standard considered by courts for initiating an injunction .

under section 304 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the ffdca , the government may seize an article of food in interstate commerce that is adulterated or misbranded .

a seizure is a civil action used by the federal government when the removal of adulterated or misbranded goods from interstate commerce is necessary to reduce consumer accessibility to those goods in order to protect public health .

the seizure must occur when the goods are in interstate commerce or held for sale after shipment in interstate commerce .

the ffdca broadly defines interstate commerce as "commerce between any state or territory and any place outside thereof. .

goods destined for sale in a state other than the place from which they are shipped qualify as goods in "interstate commerce," even though they may not have yet physically crossed a boundary .

in this context , courts have also interpreted "interstate commerce" to mean imported foods held at a port of entry into the united states .

generally , a seizure includes two steps: the u.s. government's physical seizure of the adulterated or misbranded articles of food followed by the judicial condemnation proceeding .

the u.s. district court where the article is found has jurisdiction over the seizure proceeding .

after a hearing on a seizure action , a district court may decree the "condemnation" of seized articles of food and order the destruction , sale , reconditioning , or export of such food .

the ffdca prohibits multiple proceedings , including seizure actions , against an article of food based upon the same alleged misbranding , except when the fda has probable cause to believe that the misbranded article is dangerous to health , exhibits fraudulent labeling , or is materially misleading causing injury to the consumer or purchaser .

section 304 does not prohibit multiple seizures of adulterated articles of food .

this section of the report first describes the types of seizures conducted by the federal government and the condemnation proceedings the federal government must follow when conducting a seizure .

the section then examines the legal standard for condemning seized goods .

the section concludes by analyzing the due process issues related to seizure proceedings .

the fda's office of criminal investigations conducts and coordinates criminal investigations and prosecutions against individuals and corporations for violations of the ffdca .

potential defendants of a criminal prosecution are strictly liable for these violations .

ignorance of the violation , a lack of intent to commit the violative act , or the absence of personal involvement are not defenses against ffdca violations under the strict liability standard .

this section of the report highlights two aspects of the criminal investigation process of particular relevance to fda enforcement and food safety .

the section first examines the ffdca's section 305 hearings , a prerequisite to any criminal proceeding .

the section then analyzes the supreme court's park doctrine , which grants the government the ability to prosecute both corporations and corporate officials .

the section concludes with a brief discussion on statutory penalties .

food safety and oversight , including enforcement actions such as those described above , are of a continual interest to congress .

two bills ( h.r .

609 and s. 287 ) introduced in the 114 th congress proposing the restructuring of federal oversight of food would impact the federal government's enforcement of various food safety issues .

h.r .

609 / s. 287 , known as the safe food act of 2015 , would create a single agency that administers and enforces food safety laws and oversees the implementation of federal food safety inspections , labeling requirements , enforcement , and research efforts .

under the proposed bills , related food safety agencies , currently within the jurisdiction of the department of agriculture , department of commerce , and the fda , would transfer certain responsibilities to this proposed agency .

the bills would also grant the new food safety agency several enforcement authorities , including mandatory recall authority .

under the proposed food safety framework , the administrator of the food safety agency would have the authority to impose both civil and criminal penalties of not more than $10,000 for both civil and criminal provisions and not more than a year of prison for criminal violations .

however , the administrator would have the discretion to increase the penalty for severe criminal violations .

the bills would permit a person , who has been assessed a civil penalty , to petition for judicial review of the order .

