this report provides a list of selected health - related programs and activities under specified titles of the social security act ( ssa ) , including the maternal and child health services block grant ( title v ) , general provisions , peer review , and administrative simplification ( title xi ) , medicare ( title xviii ) , medicaid ( title xix ) , and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ; title xxi ) ; the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) ; as well as selected provisions from the public health service act ( phsa ) that are scheduled to terminate during the first session of the 114 th congress ( i.e. , by december 31 , 2015 ) .

this report includes only those health care - related expiring provisions for which congressional action would be needed to extend the application of a provision once the expiration date is reached , and it does not include demonstration projects or pilot programs .

although the congressional research service ( crs ) has attempted to be comprehensive , crs cannot guarantee that every relevant provision is included here .

the report focuses specifically on health care - related expiring provisions and , in that context , it defines what constitutes an expiring provision , clarifies which issues do not meet the definition of an expiring provision , lists the legislative history of each of the programs and policies that are due to expire before the end of the first session of the 114 th congress , and includes future deadlines , when applicable , for those programs and policies .

the report will be updated as needed .

some health care - related statutes in current law include provisions that ( 1 ) are time limited and ( 2 ) will expire absent further congressional action .

most expiring provisions provide temporary increases or decreases in funding or special protections that may result in greater funding .

for example , one medicare provision provided increased payments for certain medicare mental health services provided during a certain time period ; when the provision was not extended , the bonus payments ended .

examples of funding protections include those medicare funding provisions that establish a floor ( eg , for a geographic adjustment index under the physician fee schedule ) or a "hold harmless. .

generally , the list covers provisions that have or will expire before the end of the first session of the 114 th congress ( i.e. , by december 31 , 2015 ) .

while medicare payments are reviewed for modification and updates each year , not every provision that changes medicare payments is considered an expiring provision .

services for which payments are automatically updated each year are not considered expiring provisions and are not included in this report .

for example , the physician fee schedule update is not considered an expiring provision because the statute prescribes the update process ( the sustainable growth rate , or sgr , system ) that applies each year , even though congress has regularly chosen to supersede those updates in almost all recent years .

similarly , a recent change in medicare payment policy included in the aca requires the payment updates for many medicare entities be adjusted by a productivity adjustment ( similar to the payment adjustment for physicians ) .

in general , the aca provisions specify that the adjustment may result in a negative payment update allowing the payment rate for a year to be less than the rate for the preceding year .

just as the medicare physician payment update is not considered an expiring provision , negative payment updates resulting from the productivity adjustment would not be considered expiring provisions because the updates are not time limited and do not expire absent congressional action , though , as with physician payments , congress may choose to modify those updates .

this report includes only those health care - related expiring provisions for which congressional action would be needed to extend the application of a provision once the expiration date is reached .

demonstration projects and pilot programs are not included .

provisions that expired or were repealed in 2013 are collected in the last section of the report .

the expiring provisions are summarized below , organized by ssa or phsa title and section , as appropriate .

the last part of the report includes provisions with expiration dates in 2013 that were not extended in any subsequent legislation .

because these programs and provisions are diverse , the provisions identified herein are not perfectly consistent , including with regard to the style of citations .

the legislative actions that created , modified , or extended the expiring provisions covered in this report are the following .

the following provisions have expiration dates on or before december 31 , 2013 , and were not addressed in any subsequent legislation .

the aca included maintenance of effort ( moe ) provisions under which states were required to maintain their medicaid programs for adults with no more restrictive eligibility standards , methodologies , and procedures until the exchanges were operational ( i.e. , through december 31 , 2013 ) , and for medicaid - eligible children up to the age of 19 until september 30 , 2019 .

failure to comply with the aca moe requirements means a state loses all of its federal medicaid matching funds .

current status: the aca adult moe requirement expired december 31 , 2013 .

the medicaid statute requires that states make disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) payments to hospitals treating large numbers of low - income patients .

while most federal medicaid funding is provided on an open - ended basis , federal dsh funding is capped .

each state receives an annual dsh allotment , which is the maximum amount of federal matching funds a state is permitted to claim for medicaid dsh payments .

states' medicaid dsh allotments are based on each state's prior year dsh allotment , but hawaii and tennessee have special statutory arrangements for the determination of their respective dsh allotments provided through multiple laws .

most recently , the aca provided hawaii a medicaid dsh allotment for fy2012 and subsequent years , and the tennessee provision provided an allotment for fy2012 and fy2013 .

trhca ( section 404 ) established a medicaid dsh allotment for fy2007 for tennessee .

mmsea ( section 204 ) extended the medicaid dsh allotment for tennessee through june 30 , 2008 .

mippa ( section 202 ) extended the medicaid dsh allotment for tennessee through the end of fy2008 , fy2009 , and for the first calendar quarter of fy2010 .

chipra ( section 616 ) extended the medicaid dsh allotment for tennessee through the end of fy2010 , fy2011 , and for the first calendar quarter of fy2012 .

aca ( section 2551 as modified by section 10201 ( e ) and section 1203 of hcera ) extended the medicaid dsh allotment for tennessee set tennessee's medicaid dsh allotment through the end of fy2012 and fy2013 .

current status: for fy2014 and subsequent years , tennessee is the only state without a medicaid dsh allotment .

chipra established performance bonus payments for states that increase their medicaid ( not chip ) enrollment among low - income children above a defined baseline .

from fy2009 through fy2013 , performance bonus payments were available to states .

to qualify for bonus payments , states had to have ( 1 ) implemented five out of eight specified enrollment and retention provisions and ( 2 ) achieved state - specific targets for increasing medicaid enrollment among children .

there were two tiers of bonus payments depending on how much the state's enrollment exceeded the baseline .

from fy2009 through fy2013 , 27 states received chipra performance bonus payments totaling $1.1 billion over the five years .

some states received payments in more than one year .

chipra ( section 104 ) established performance bonus payments for fy2009 through fy2013 .

current status: chipra performance bonus payments were authorized through fy2013 .

in the early years of the chip program , states were permitted and encouraged to extend chip coverage to uninsured pregnant women , parents , and childless adults aged 19 and older generally through the use of the section 1115 waiver authority .

however , congress acted to largely limit this practice through a series of laws .

the dra prohibited the use of chip funds from coverage of non - pregnant childless adults in any new waivers approved after february 8 , 2006 .

chipra terminated chip coverage of non - pregnant childless adults by the end of calendar year 2009 , prohibited new states from obtaining waivers to extend chip coverage to uninsured parents , and phased out coverage of parents altogether by fy2014 .

current status: the authority for states to use chip federal matching funds for parent coverage waivers expired september 30 , 2013 .

aca directly appropriated funding to support construction and renovation of school - based health centers .

the aca appropriated $50 million for each of fy2010 through fy2013 for a total of $200 million .

current status: no funding was appropriated in fy2014 or in f2015 as of the publication date of this report .

