there is increasing concern both in the united states and globally about whether a "pollinator crisis" has been occurring in recent decades .

reports worldwide indicate that populations of managed honey bees , wild bees , and native bees have been declining , with colony losses in some cases described as severe or unusual .

other reports indicate that many insect pollinator species may be becoming rarer , which some say may be a sign of an overall global biodiversity decline .

many reasons are cited for bee population declines , including bee pests and diseases , diet and nutrition , genetics , habitat loss , agricultural pesticides , and beekeeping management .

because pesticides have been the focus of concerns in europe and in the united states , this crs report briefly describes recent scientific research and analysis regarding the potential role of pesticides among the factors affecting the health and well - being of bees .

the report concludes with a summary of recent regulatory activity regarding neonicotinoids , a type of pesticide , and also provides the statutory authority and regulatory activities related to pesticide use at the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the federal agency charged with assessing risks and regulating u.s. sale and use of pesticides .

the focus of this report on bee exposure to pesticides is not intended to imply that pesticides are any more or less important in influencing the health and wellness of bees than any of the other identified factors influencing bee health .

in the united states , honey bee colony losses due to bee pests , parasites , pathogens , and disease are not uncommon .

however , in late 2006 , concerns about honey bees gained heightened attention when commercial beekeepers along the east coast began reporting sharp declines in their bee colonies .

because of the severity and unusual circumstances of these colony declines , scientists named this phenomenon colony collapse disorder ( ccd ) .

this issue was legislatively active in the 110 th congress and resulted in increased funding for honey bee research , among other types of farm program support to protect pollinators , as part of the 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .

110-246 ) .

the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) reauthorized and expanded upon many of these provisions .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) reports that u.s. beekeepers continue to lose colonies each year .

since 2006 , usda estimates that overwinter bee colony losses have averaged nearly 30% annually .

however , usda reports that in 2012 / 2013 , "there were more colonies that dwindled away" rather than suffering from ccd , which is characterized by a sudden loss in bee colony populations and the absence of dead bees .

usda also claims that "beekeepers did not report ccd as a major cause of colony loss" for overwinter losses reported in its 2012-2013 and 2011-2012 surveys .

these data are tracked for managed honey bees only .

comparable data and information is not collected available for native or wild bee species .

such data collection is complicated by sheer number and solitary nature of native and wild bee species .

to date , the precise reasons for honey bee colony losses are still unknown .

usda and most scientists working on the subject seem to agree that none of the research conclusively points to one single cause for the large - scale number of honey bee deaths .

this general conclusion was reconfirmed in a may 2013 report by usda and the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , national stakeholders conference on honey bee health ( commonly referred to as the "usda - epa joint report" ) .

a 2007 study by the national research council ( nrc ) of the national academy of sciences , status of pollinators in north america ( referred to here as the 2007 nrc study ) , also provides a detailed scientific context for bee health .

a series of other reports documenting the findings of usda's ongoing research also describes the many factors affecting honey bees .

see figure 1 .

reasons cited for bee population declines include a wide range of possible factors .

potential identified causes include bee pests and diseases , diet and nutrition , genetics , habitat loss and other environmental stressors , agricultural pesticides , and beekeeping management issues , as well as the possibility that bees are being harmed by cumulative , multiple exposures and / or the interactive effects of each of these factors .

one issue widely reported in the media is the potential role that pesticides — in particular , neonicotinoid pesticides — might play in overall bee health .

as one of the potential causes of honey bee colony declines , this report addresses what role , if any , pesticides play in influencing the health and wellness of bees .

regarding honey bee health , the current state of knowledge of pesticides was summarized in a 2013 report by usda and epa: there is broad consensus among all stakeholders that pesticide use should not affect honey bees in such a way that ( 1 ) honey production is reduced or ( 2 ) pollination services provided by bees are threatened... .

however , it is not clear , based on current research , whether pesticide exposure is a major factor associated with u.s. honey bee health declines in general , or specifically affects production of honey or delivery of pollination services .

it is clear , however , that in some instances honey bee colonies can be severely harmed by exposure to high doses of insecticides when these compounds are used on crops , or via drift onto flowers in areas adjacent to crops that are attractive to bees .

this report examines in greater detail the role of pesticides , providing a summary of selected scientific literature .

the relative importance of pesticides in u.s. or global bee health is a subject of numerous research projects , some of which are discussed in this report .

some groups have expressed concern about the assessment of most experts that the causes of pollinator health concerns are multifaceted and may involve the interaction of multiple factors , since this may deflect attention from the potential role of exposure to pesticides .

on the other hand , some groups appear unwilling to acknowledge that pesticide exposure may play an important role in pollinator health concerns , especially if this acknowledgment leads to restrictions or reductions in the use of certain pesticides or related crop pest controls .

this report provides information regarding the potential role of pesticides in the health of bee colonies , and also the importance of pesticides relative to other influences on bee health .

the report provides general information about the nature of pesticides , pesticide uses , and pesticide regulation in the united states , as well as more specific information about the registration status of a class of pesticides known as neonicotinoids , which have been implicated in some studies concerning honey bee colony declines .

this report also describes a range of options to address pesticide exposure by bees , including implementing crop - and / or product - specific best management practices ( bmps ) regarding pesticide use and applications .

some u.s. cities as well as some other countries , including canada and those in europe , have opted to institute restrictions on the use of certain pesticides .

congress has introduced similar legislation , but has also considered alternative policy options to address this issue .

bees can be exposed to numerous different types of pesticides applied to field crops and other types of plants in areas where they forage or maintain their hive .

in addition , beekeepers may also use pesticides registered for the control of bacteria , fungi , mites , and other bee pests .

these pesticides are applied within and in the vicinity of hives .

besides the active ingredients , pesticide products include other ingredients , such as "inerts" or adjuvants that are intended to improve delivery of the active ingredient to the target pest .

others are used to increase the toxicity of a pesticide , for example , by inhibiting breakdown of a pesticide by insets .

studies have shown that bees are exposed to pesticides in many ways throughout the foraging period: from planter exhaust material produced during the planting of treated seed ; from the soil of both planted and unplanted fields ; in flowers growing near these fields ; as well as applications in or near bee hives .

bees also sometimes are exposed to pesticides accidentally , either when pesticides are misused or misapplied or when they are used according to label directions to control pests in areas frequented by bees — for example , alongside roads or rights of way for the control of weeds , trees , or other pests ; on or near commercial farm crops ; or on or near fields , lawns , and gardens to control fleas , ticks , weeds , grubs , mosquitos , or other adult insects .

figure 2 illustrates some significant paths of bee exposure to pesticides applied as a spray or as a soil or seed treatment ( systemic ) .

if bees happen to fly through a newly treated field or dust clouds from planting of seeds coated with pesticide or are orally exposed to pesticide in food or water , and if exposure is high enough , bees may be sickened or die from pesticide exposure .

with respect to the role of pesticides in honey bee health , "[t]he most pressing research questions lie in determining the true pesticide exposure that bees receive and the effect , if any , that pervasive exposure to multiple pesticides have [sic] on the health and productivity of whole honey bee colonies. .

pesticides are reported to have adverse local impacts on honey bees and some native bees .

widespread use of herbicides reduces habitat available to bees ; many pesticides are known to be lethal to bees , given sufficient levels of exposure ; and some reports of local bee kill incidents have been well documented .

effects on individual bees may be lethal or sublethal depending on dose and other conditions of exposure .

a summary of the types of sublethal effects reported in bees exposed to pesticides includes decreased navigation , orientation , and communication abilities ; altered foraging behavior and motor activity ; short - and long - term memory loss ; impaired learning behavior and sensory detection ; compromised immune functioning ; increased susceptibility to diseases and pests ; reduced fecundity ( fertility and reproduction ) ; and impaired reproduction and development .

although pesticides have been shown to damage bee health , it is unclear whether the level of harm is sufficient to attribute pesticides as the single or as the major cause of honey bee population declines .

the appendix provides a summary of selected scientific literature based largely on publications in peer - reviewed journals .

in addition , a number of industry and advocacy groups have compiled literature reviews regarding pesticide effects on bees , not all of which are specifically discussed in this report .

in general , studies looking at impacts of pesticides on other animal species , such as birds , are also not addressed .

best management practices ( bmps ) are available for beekeepers , crop producers , and pesticide applicators and include environmentally responsible pest management practices to reduce risk and minimize pesticide exposure in bees .

a number of states have also developed guidance to protect pollinators .

some of these resources are listed on the pesticide environmental stewardship ( pes ) website and on epa's website .

for beekeepers , guidance by apiculturists and university extension services emphasizes the importance of reducing the exposure of bees to insecticides with high toxicity , recommending that if such chemicals are used in an area where bees are foraging , steps may be necessary to reduce risk of poisoning .

this involves both selecting a site for an apiary in an area with low pesticide risk and notifying "growers and applicators in the area , the county agent , and the state apiary inspector of the location of your hives... .

if the insecticide to be used has a long residual life and is being applied to a plant where bees are foraging , it may be best to move your bees out of the area. .

for growers , recommendations involve reducing the hazards associated with insecticides , including avoiding the use of dusts , such as those from treated seeds , and using chemicals with reduced risk to bees whenever possible .

other recommendations include applying insecticides "in the late evening , night , or early morning when fewer bees will be foraging , and when spray drift and volatilization due to extreme heat are at a minimum" ; not spraying "when winds favor drifting , and us[ing] ground applications instead of air where possible" ; and avoiding "spraying when the crop or other plants in the field or nearby ( including weeds ) are in bloom. .

some agricultural groups provide such guidance to their growers .

for example , the almond board of california recommends that growers avoid applying insecticides when plants are in bloom or when pollen is available and honey bees are feeding .

additional grower bmps are listed in the text box below .

pesticide applicator bmps recommend avoiding pesticide use when crops are blooming and applying pesticides to blooming crops only after bees are done foraging for the day and preferably at night .

bayer crop science notes the importance of following pesticide label recommendations as "naturally beneficial to bees' safety," as well as cooperation between farmers and beekeepers "to optimize spray times and minimize exposure to foraging bees. .

such bmp guidance is generally voluntary .

several studies suggest , in general , adoption of voluntary bmps is characterized by both slow adoption rates ( i.e. , long lead times ) and long lag times between bmp adoption and observed effects ; also bmp implementation tends to be mostly self - funded .

some claim therefore that reliance on voluntary agricultural bmps regarding pesticide use and potential pollinator impacts is unlikely to produce timely behavioral changes and bmp adoption , even with a broad outreach and education program .

in response to recent bee die - offs in canada , federal agencies there have instituted additional protective requirements when using treated seed in corn and soybean production .

these include required use of safer dust - reducing seed flow lubricants ; adherence to safer seed planting practices ; pesticide and seed package labels with enhanced warnings ; and evaluation of the need for neonicotinoid treatment on certain commercial crops .

 ( more information on canada's requirements is discussed in " restrictions in canada ." ) .

agro - chemical industry representatives maintain that unwanted pesticide exposure is best addressed through "effective product labeling and the implementation of meaningful stewardship actions that help minimize harmful interactions," along with "crop - and product - specific integrated pest management ( ipm ) practices and messaging to improve bee and pollinator safety. .

however , some claim that because the use of systemic insecticides applied via seed coatings is mostly "prophylactic" ( i.e. , applied regardless of actual pest pressure ) the use of such insecticides violates basic ipm principles , which recommend minimizing use of chemical pesticides through pest monitoring , maximizing the use of biological and cultural controls , applying chemical pesticides only when needed , and avoiding broad - spectrum , persistent compounds .

the text box below provides additional information on ipm practices .

other guidance by apiculturists and university extension focuses on providing recommendations to private landowners and homeowners for proper use of pest control products on ornamental plants .

one recommendation is to avoid applying any pesticides , including insecticides and fungicides , during bloom of ornamental plants that attract bees ( eg , heather , lavender , linden , rhododendron , and rose ) .

it is also recommended that any pesticides be applied "only after flower petals have fallen , when ornamental plants are less attractive to bees," and that all specific requirements to protect bees on the pesticide label be strictly followed .

if pesticides are used when plants are in bloom , those that are less toxic to bees are recommended .

some recommend using certain pesticides — including products containing clothianidin , dinotefuran , imidacloprid , and thiamethoxam — only after flower petals have fallen , and avoiding soil drench or tree injection methods when using these products for plants known to attract bees because "these methods may contaminate nectar and pollen for up to several years after the insecticide is applied," or , alternatively , recommend against buying plants treated with insecticides containing these ingredients .

consumer campaigns have been initiated to encourage businesses and home gardening centers to stop selling certain pesticides or plants treated with these products because of concerns about the effects on bees and other pollinators .

a consumer campaign initiated by the center for food safety highlights that more than 60 commonly used home and garden products contain neonicotinoid pesticides and recommends that homeowners avoid certain commonly used pesticide products .

in addition , concerns have been raised about the use of mosquito control services by some homeowners , because of potential adverse effects to bees and other beneficial insects that might feed on plants or be exposed to pesticides within the sprayed areas , as well as effects to species on adjacent or nearby property due to drift .

given continued concerns about the health and well - being of honey bees and other pollinators , this issue has continued to be legislatively active .

the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) reauthorized and expanded provisions supporting research on honey bees and other pollinators that were enacted in the 2008 farm bill .

in previous congresses , bills were introduced to promote and improve habitat for honey bees and wild bees , among other pollinators .

still other introduced legislation would address a range of pesticide issues affecting pollinators .

over the past few years , congress has conducted hearings on this issue and hosted a series of congressional briefings to discuss these and related issues representing a broad range of interested groups .

for the 114 th congress , representative rodney davis , the incoming chairman of the house agriculture subcommittee on biotechnology , horticulture , and research , is quoted as saying that bee health will be a top issue for his subcommittee .

in the 113 th congress , representatives earl blumenauer and john conyers jr. introduced h.r .

2692 , the saving america's pollinators act of 2013 .

the bill would have suspended registrations of neonicotinoids and banned new registrations of any pesticide for use on "bee attractive plants , trees , and cereals. .

this bill was initially introduced , in part , as a response to reports that 50,000 bees were found dead in a suburban shopping - center parking lot in wilsonville , oregon , in june 2013 , reportedly due to exposure to pesticides used on trees near the parking lot to control aphids .

specifically , the bill would have required epa to "suspend the registration of imidacloprid , clothianidin , thiamethoxam , dinotafuran , and any other members of the nitro group of neonicotinoid insecticides to the extent such insecticide is registered , conditionally or otherwise," under fifra ( 7 u.s.c .

136 et seq. ) .

"for use in seed treatment , soil application , or foliar treatment on bee attractive plants , trees , and cereals. .

these suspensions on existing registrations and restrictions on new registrations would remain until more research is conducted and epa determines that the insecticide will not cause "unreasonable adverse effects" on pollinators , including honey bees , native bees , and other pollinators .

such an assessment would be based on an evaluation of the published and peer - reviewed scientific evidence and a completed field study .

the bill also would have required the department of the interior to coordinate with epa in monitoring the health and populations of native bees , and annually report to congress on their health and population status .

h.r .

2692 was similar to proposals being implemented or considered in the eu and canada .

in particular , the bill's language regarding "bee attractive plants , trees , and cereals" is similar to that under the eu's ban of the use of three neonicotinoid pesticides — clothianidin , imidacloprid and thiamethoxam — for "seed treatment , soil application ( granules ) and foliar treatment on bee attractive plants and cereals. .

however , the eu's restrictions provide for certain exceptions ( such as greenhouses and open - air fields after flowering ) , which are not provided for in h.r .

2692 .

 ( see " restrictions in the european union " for additional information on the eu's ban. ) .

in september 2014 , the sponsors of h.r .

2692 , along with 58 other members of the u.s. house of representatives , sent a letter to epa urging the agency to "restrict and / or suspend the use of neonicotinoids on bee - attractive crops and ornamental application," including restricting the "times , methods of application , and location" for use of these pesticides , as well as urging epa to review its policies related to epa's pesticide registration , among other recommendations .

epa received a similar letter from many environmental and sustainable agriculture organizations , including cfs , friends of the earth , food and water watch , and other groups .

groups opposed to restrictions on pesticide use contend that comprehensive studies "challenge unsubstantiated claims against pesticides as a significant cause of colony decline" and note that "infrequent accidental exposures are not indicative of the general health of honey bee colonies. .

some further claim "there is no evidence linking neonicotinoids to bee declines" or to adverse health effects on bees .

they generally challenge studies that target neonicotinoids as the sole factor contributing to pollinator declines , and further maintain that unwanted pesticide exposure may be best addressed through "effective product labeling and the implementation of meaningful stewardship actions that help minimize harmful interactions. .

others question whether crop - applied pesticides pose a major risk to bees , given current approved uses and beekeeping practices .

in the 113 th congress , representative austin scott introduced h.r .

5447 , which would have amended u.s. pesticide laws ( fifra ; 7 u.s.c .

136a ( c ) ( 10 ) ) to provide for expedited registration of pesticides that "improve managed pollinator bee health , including managing resistance to parasitic pests" and for expedited review of a pesticide registration that is "reasonably expected to improve the health of managed pollinator bees , including managing resistance to parasitic pests of managed pollinator bees," such as miticides .

h.r .

5447 would have also required reports to congress from both usda and epa .

the report required from usda would address the "extent and scope of the threat to the health of managed pollinator bees" from pathological factors ( such as the parasitic mite , varroa destructor ; other arthropod pests ; and fungal , microbial , and viral diseases ) and from environmental factors ( including habitat , forage , beekeeper practices and husbandry , and nutritional needs of managed bees ) .

the report required by epa would address the availability of pesticides to manage parasites and also epa's efforts to expedite approvals of new products to control parasites of managed bees .

the bill would have defined "managed pollinator bee" to mean "any bee that is raised and housed in a managed hive or other appropriate housing and used for honey production , managed pollination of crops , or breeding for commercial purposes. .

the bill was supported by some u.s. crop producers and other industry groups .

some advocacy groups were opposed to h.r .

5447 and contend that "fast - tracking pesticide approvals" has contributed to current concerns involving bees and pesticides .

they further complain that focusing attention on other factors contributing to bee declines ( such as mites ) tends to shift attention away from remedies that could address beekeeper concerns about pesticide exposure , such as instituting agricultural best management practices ( bmps ) that might avoid application of insecticides during bloom , and minimize exposure to bees by avoiding applications when pollen is available and bees are feeding .

in february 2015 , epa announced its intentions to fast track approval of oxalic acid dihydrate for use as a miticide in beehives .

oxalic acid has been used against varroa mites and is generally considered more safe compared to other higher risk chemicals .

it has been approved for use in canada since 2010 , where a government analysis there claims: "an evaluation of available scientific information found that under the approved conditions of use the product has value and does not present an unacceptable risk to human health or the environment. .

following is a summary of selected scientific literature based largely on publications in peer - reviewed journals .

bee exposure to pesticides researchers at usda and others found that "high levels" of fungicides were present in both crop and non - crop pollen collected by bees , and that "real world pollen - pesticide blends affect honey bee health. .

these scientists found very high levels of the fungicide chlorothalonil in pollen and wax , and found high levels of at least four insecticides , three other fungicides , and an herbicide .

chlorothalonil and the two miticides , fluvalinate and coumaphos , were most frequently detected in pollen and wax .

a 2010 study tested samples of beebread , trapped pollen , brood nest wax , beeswax foundation , and adult bees and brood and found a broad range of pesticides , including acaricides ( which kill arachnids like spiders , ticks , and mites ) , fungicides , insecticides , and herbicides .

bees can be exposed to neonicotinoids in many ways .

one study identified multiple routes of exposure to low levels of neonicotinoids for honey bees living and foraging near agricultural fields planted with corn or soybeans .

the highest potential exposure to the pesticides appeared to occur during planting season , when bee mortality was also high .

clothianidin was found in about half the bee - collected pollen sampled , thiamethoxam ( which is quickly metabolized to become clothianidin ) in 3 of 20 samples , and fungicides in all pollen samples .

levels of clothianidin in some pollen were high enough to kill bees .

clothianidin was detected in all dead and dying bees but in no healthy bees .

although corn is not an insect - pollinated crop , this research demonstrated that bees forage for corn pollen and take it back to the hive .

about half the hive pollen sampled came from corn in this study .

in addition , the study documented high levels of pesticide in exhaust material from mechanical planters when pesticides and talc were used to coat seeds , and found clothianidin in soil samples from planted and unplanted fields .

other studies have measured neonicotinoids in pollen and nectar of canola ( rape seed ) , corn , and sunflowers grown from seed coated with pesticides .

levels found were below those known to be acutely toxic .

other studies have found that imidacloprid and thiamethoxam concentrations in nectar were greater in squash and pumpkin flowers when insecticide was applied to the soil than they were in canola and sunflowers grown from seed treated with neonicotinoids .

researchers also found metabolites of imidacloprid and thiamethoxam ( clothianidin ) in all parts of squash plants , along with the parent compound .

a 2012 study found levels of neonicotinoids in bee - collected corn pollen that were similar to levels of imidacloprid determined by other scientists to have sublethal effects potentially affecting colony health .

similarly , a subsequent study in 2013 found that imidacloprid levels in pollen gathered from bees in the field were high enough to cause sublethal effects on honey bees and bumble bees , based on laboratory research .

a 2013 study by the european food safety agency ( efsa ) of three neonicotinoid pesticides — imidacloprid , clothianidin , and thiamethoxam — determined that bees faced several risks including exposure to pollen and nectar , dust , and guttation fluid from maize .

another potential source of exposure was suggested by another 2012 study , showing that bees might be exposed to neonicotinoids in the corn syrup they are sometimes fed during the winter by beekeepers .

however , the researchers did not sample corn syrup actually fed to bees , but rather showed that bees would consume sufficient imidacloprid to produce toxic sublethal effects if they were provided contaminated corn syrup in the hive .

other research found no pesticides in samples of high - fructose corn syrup obtained from three major suppliers .

pesticide effects on bee health according to research cited in a 2007 study by the national research council ( nrc ) , "the application of pesticides , especially insecticides used to control crop pests , kills or weakens thousands of honey bee colonies in the united states each year. .

nevertheless , the study concluded that local bee kills "likely have not contributed significantly to the recent national decline in colony populations" [emphasis added] .

recent studies have begun to identify mechanisms by which some chemical interactions occur .

for example , some fungicides may inhibit an enzyme that bees need to detoxify miticides .

however , further research is needed since measurement difficulties continue to complicate study of this issue , including difficulty testing the in - field or field - realistic doses ; effects at different life stages ; how to account for cases of accidental exposure or exposure to multiple different types of pesticides ; and how to account for species diversity ( eg , between honey bees and native bees ) , differences in nutritional needs / access and nesting sites , biological organization , and floral specialization .

generalizations about the relative importance of pesticides for global bee health cannot be drawn from available data , given the disparate study designs and results .

moreover , research has been and continues to be conducted , with most scientists focusing on a single pesticide or pathogen at a time .

consideration of interactions has been minimal — whether exposure from different types of chemicals or exposure from chemicals in combination with other factors .

one study explains: attempts to correlate global bee declines or ccd with increased pesticide exposures alone , have not been successful to date.… pesticide interactions among various mixtures as well as with other stressors including varroa and nosema , iapv , beneficial hive microbes , and impacts on bee immune systems all require further study .

it seems to us that it is far too early to attempt to link or to dismiss pesticide impacts with ccd .

the study noted that the doses of individual pesticides found in bees were not concentrated enough to be lethal , but the authors remained concerned about possible chronic problems caused by long - term exposure and possible additive or synergistic effects of exposure to the combinations of pesticides found .

for example , numerous pesticides classified as pyrethroids that were found in the field have been shown to cause disorientation in honey bees .

it is important to note that virtually all information about pesticide risks to bees derives from studies in cultivated fields or laboratories .

there is little or no information about the possible impacts on bee populations of pesticides applied by homeowners ( for example , to control mosquitos ) or to ornamental plantings .

nevertheless , a sizeable and growing body of scientific research presents compelling evidence suggesting that pesticide exposure may be harmful to bees and other animal species .

for example , a 2014 meta - analysis covering 800 peer - reviewed reports over two decades examined the reported effects of systemic pesticides on ecosystems and a range of animal species — terrestrial invertebrates , including insect pollinators ; aquatic invertebrates ; and birds .

the analysis , conducted by entomologists and ornithologists based in europe , concluded that neonicotinoid pesticides "pose a serious risk to honeybees and other pollinators such as butterflies and to a wide range of other invertebrates such as earthworms and vertebrates including birds. .

in response to reports that honey bees are disappearing and causing hives to collapse , recent studies of the impacts of exposure to imidacloprid and other neonicotinoids have focused more on their potential to affect complex behaviors in insects , including flight , navigation , olfactory memory , recruitment , foraging , and coordination .

one study reported sublethal effects of neonicotinoid pesticides on honey bee foraging behavior that may impair the navigational and foraging abilities of honey bees .

another study found a reduction of foraging activity and homing behavior of honey bees exposed to treated crops at certain exposure levels of neonicotinoids .

scientists at bayer crop science argue with the findings of these and other studies , claiming that the dose of pesticide delivered to bees in some studies is not "field - relevant," resulting in findings obtained "under artificial conditions" and "in conflict with" earlier studies .

some of the statements made in the 2012 bayer crop science review of the scientific literature have been rebutted by researchers at purdue university and pennsylvania state university , based on comments submitted by the center for food safety as part of epa's public rulemaking docket .

among a list of concerns regarding various statements in the bayer crop science report , professor frazier from pennsylvania state university states: "to object to a specific dose on the basis of an estimated level without giving the reader the actual basis for this neglects not only good science protocol , but also obfuscates any arguments. .

among other comments , professor krupke from purdue university further acknowledges: "these data suggest that there is a strong likelihood that the neonicotinoids thiamethoxam and / or clothianidin were responsible for the bee kills we investigated. .

epa has determined that clothianidin "has the potential to be highly toxic on both a contact and an oral basis" to honey bees .

epa also has reported that one honey bee field study submitted to the agency indicates that "mortality , pollen foraging activity , and honey yield were negatively affected by residues of clothianidin," but the residue levels causing the effect were not reported .

acute effects also have been demonstrated in another field study .

it showed that honey bees can be killed by exposure to pesticide - contaminated talc if they fly through dust clouds associated with planting , but mortality appears to depend on high levels of humidity .

health canada has concluded that corn planting also was implicated in bee mortalities in ontario during the spring planting season in 2012 .

research has shown that honey bee exposure to sublethal levels of pesticides , including neonicotinoids , exhibit impaired brood development , impaired olfactory associative behavior , and impaired homing ability .

exposure to sublethal levels of neonicotinoid has also been associated with higher rates of nosema infection , and also reduced immune functioning in those bees infected , making bees more susceptible to viral infections .

in another study , responsiveness to sucrose and the bee's "waggle dancing" abilities were adversely affected when honey bees ingested imidacloprid .

another study alternatively fed honey bee hives corn syrup treated with imidacloprid , while other hives were fed untreated corn syrup .

after 6 months , nearly all the treated hives collapsed , while the untreated control hives remained healthy .

another study showed that imidacloprid ingestion by larvae of the stingless bee ( melipona quadrifasciata anthidioidides ) resulted in decreased survival rates , negatively affected development of a specific region of the bee brain , and impaired walking behavior of newly emerged adult worker bees .

a 2013 study found that exposure to a combination of an insecticide ( imidacloprid ) and a miticide ( coumaphos ) impaired learning and memory formation , important behaviors involved in foraging , in honey bees exposed under "field - realistic concentrations. .

a similar study also showed cognitive impairments from exposure to these same pesticides .

studies also have found increased honey bee susceptibility to and mortality from nosema after exposure to sublethal concentrations of some pesticides ( fipronil , amitraz , fluvalinate , chlorothalonil , pyraclostrobin , and imidacloprid ) .

another study concluded that high levels of the fungicide chlorothalonil in pollen and wax may be associated with entombing behavior , a sign that a hive has been poisoned .

these and other pesticides commonly used to control mites have also been shown to have toxic effects on developing honey bee larvae at levels currently found in hives .

a 2014 study reported linkages between ccd and sublethal exposure of neonicotinoid pesticides — imidacloprid and clothianidin — which affected the winterization of the bees , comparing exposed bee colonies to a control of non - exposed bee colonies .

in the study , one - half the bee colonies exposed to neonicotinoids exhibited symptoms resembling ccd and had abandoned their hives during the winter , whereas one - sixth of the control colonies were lost exhibiting nosema ceranae symptoms .

the control colonies did not abandon their hives but re - populated quickly ; the surviving exposed colonies were small and either without queen bees or had no brood , according to the study .

some have criticized this study for its small sample size , lack of replication at each location , and the use of pesticide doses that may not reflect realistic field conditions .

researchers at usda and affiliated bee laboratories at land grant universities throughout the united states continue to study the effects of neonicotinoids and other pesticides , including the effects of interactions between pesticides and other stressors .

some of these studies demonstrate that exposure by bees to certain pesticides and / or combinations of insecticides ( eg , neonicotinoids with miticides ) may affect the bee's overall energy budget , including its metabolism , physical activity , digestion , and immunity ; cause other types of physiological effects ; and affect different parts of the bee's nervous system , depending on the type or combination of insecticides studied among other variables , including diet and nutrition .

a few studies have examined the effects of pesticides on various species of bumble bees .

one study found that bumble bee exposure to imidacloprid may affect bee brain functioning , as well as colony growth and nest conditions .

another study found that bumble bee colonies exposed in a laboratory to low levels of imidacloprid had a significantly reduced growth rate and an 85% reduction in queen production relative to untreated colonies .

other studies have found that exposure of neonicotinoids could adversely affect foraging behavior , reproductive success , and locomotor behavior .

another study showed effects following direct contact with a range of pesticides , including shortened life spans and inability to produce brood in worker bees ; however , some pesticides and all fungicides tested reportedly did not result in sublethal effects .

yet another study reported no adverse impacts on brood production or other sublethal effects on bumble bees from exposure to the neonicotinoid thiamethoxam .

one study showed that chronic exposure to two pesticides , one a neonicotinoid , at concentrations close to those found in fields "impairs natural foraging behavior and increases worker mortality leading to significant reductions in bumblebee brood development and colony success. .

bayer crop science argues that the results of some of these studies were also obtained "under artificial conditions and are in conflict with" earlier studies .

a 2013 study examining the health of bumble bee colonies placed near crops treated with neonicotinoids were inconclusive due to weather and insufficient data , underlining the need to conduct further field studies that complement laboratory studies .

some cite this study as evidence against the need to impose restrictions on the use of neonicotinoid pesticides , while others criticize some of the study's published sources and research methodologies .

