in june 2014 , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) published a proposed rule that would require states to address carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions from existing fossil fuel - fired electric generating units .

the proposal relies on authority asserted by epa in section 111 ( d ) of the clean air act ( caa ) .

however , many have questioned various aspects of epa's proposed rule , including the agency's statutory authority to issue the rule pursuant to section 111 ( d ) .

in addition , the proposed rule has received considerable attention from congress , state officials , and a range of stakeholder groups .

the proposal creates co 2 emission rate goals — measured in pounds of co 2 emissions per megawatt - hour ( mwh ) of electricity generation — for each state to achieve by 2030 and an interim goal in 2029 , based on the average of a state's emission rates between 2020 and 2029 .

epa's goals include potential emission reduction opportunities that are considered "outside the fence" of fossil fuel - fired generating facilities .

these include increased renewable energy generation and energy efficiency improvements .

thus , the emission rate goals effectively apply to a state's overall electricity generation portfolio , not just the fossil fuel units .

epa estimates that if the states achieve their individual emission rate goals , the 2030 co 2 emissions from the electric power sector in the united states would be reduced by 30% compared to 2005 levels .

although epa's proposed rule measures state compliance in terms of a co 2 emissions rate , epa allows states considerable flexibility in terms of meeting its emissions rate goals .

in particular , epa's proposed rule would allow states to meet their compliance obligations by converting their emission rate targets to mass - based targets — measured in metric tons of co 2 .

when epa issued its proposal , the agency published a technical support document ( "projecting egu co 2 emission performance in state plans" ) that provided one option for converting from rate - based to mass - based targets .

after receiving feedback from states about the conversion process , epa provided additional information in november 2014 , including a new technical support document: "translation of the clean power plan emission rate‐based co 2 goals to mass‐based equivalents. .

this report discusses epa's mass - based conversion methodology and the resulting state - specific mass - based targets .

the state - specific targets and percentage reduction requirements are provided in table 1 , allowing the states to compare their compliance obligations .

a state might consider using a mass - based target for a variety of reasons , including the opportunity to link with existing mass - based programs ( eg , the regional greenhouse gas initiative ) or to continue existing , state emission reduction goals .

this report indicates that the mass - based reduction requirements may be less stringent in some states than the emission rate requirements .

thus , some states may factor such a comparison into their decision process .

the first section of this report provides an overview of the emission rate methodology , which plays a role in the mass - based conversion calculations .

the second section describes epa's mass - based conversion methodologies: approach 1 , which includes existing sources of electricity , and approach 2 , which includes existing and new sources of electricity .

the final section provides some observations about the results of the mass - based conversions , including a comparison of the required percentage reductions to the percentage reductions from the emission rate formula .

this report complements two other crs reports: 1 .

crs report r43572 , epa's proposed greenhouse gas regulations for existing power plants: frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

this report discusses a range of issues — legal , historical , and procedural — regarding epa's proposed rule .

2 .

crs report r43652 , state co2 emission rate goals in epa's proposed rule for existing power plants , by [author name scrubbed] .

this report discusses in detail epa's emission rate methodology ( i.e. , the "building blocks" ) and the state - specific emission rates that result from epa's calculations .

epa's emission rate methodology plays a critical role in the agency's mass - based conversion calculations .

an overview of the emission rate formula is helpful in understanding epa's mass - based conversion calculations .

epa determined emission rate goals by first calculating each state's 2012 emission rate baseline , which is generally each state's portfolio of electricity generation in 2012 .

the resulting baselines in each state vary considerably , reflecting , among other things , the different energy sources used to generate electricity in each state .

next , epa applied four "building blocks" to the state baselines .

the building blocks involve estimates of various opportunities for states to decrease their emission rates: building block 1: coal - fired power plant efficiency improvements , such as operation and maintenance best practices and equipment upgrades ; building block 2: natural gas combined cycle ( ngcc ) displacement of more carbon - intensive sources of electricity , particularly coal - fired generation ; building block 3: increased use of renewable energy and preservation of existing and under - construction nuclear power ; and building block 4: energy efficiency improvements , which result in decreased electricity generation .

although epa used the building blocks to create state - specific emission rates , the agency would not require states to precisely implement the activities epa used in the building blocks .

states may choose to meet their emission rate goals by focusing on one or more of the building block strategies ( eg , increase renewable energy beyond building block 3 expectations ) or through alternative methods .

for further details about epa's emission rate methodology and state - specific results , see crs report r43652 , state co2 emission rate goals in epa's proposed rule for existing power plants , by [author name scrubbed] .

epa's november 2014 support document describes two approaches states could use to convert their emission rate targets to mass - based targets .

epa states that the approaches "are illustrations of two potential options that implementing authorities may choose to adopt if they choose to use a mass - based form of the emission rate - based goal. .

with each approach , epa prepared state - specific mass - based targets , which , according to epa , "could be considered equivalent to the proposed rate - based goals. .

the first approach is generally based on historical ( 2012 ) emissions from existing sources .

the second is based on historical emissions from existing sources and projected emissions from existing and new sources .

the basic formula for converting from an emission rate to a mass - based target is the following: the state - specific co 2 emission rate targets in the above formula are included in epa's june 2014 proposed rule .

to convert a rate target to a mass - based target , a state would need an annual estimate of its electricity generation in future years ( i.e. , 2020-2029 ) .

epa's november 2014 support document provides two methodologies that the agency used to calculate these electricity generation estimates .

these methodologies are discussed below .

 table 1 lists the state - specific , mass - based targets ( 2030 ) that epa prepared using both approaches and compares these targets to each state's 2012 co 2 emission baseline .

in addition , table 1 provides the 2012 emission rate baseline , 2030 emission rate target , and the emission rate percentage reduction required between 2012 and 2030 .

as with the emission rate reduction requirements , the mass - based reduction targets ( calculated by epa ) vary by state .

this section discusses some observations about the targets , how they compare with one another , and how they compare to emission rate targets .

for the vast majority of states , the percentage reductions ( between the 2012 baseline and 2030 targets ) required by the emission rates match those required by the mass - based targets epa created using approach 1 ( existing sources ) .

however , in some cases the percentage reductions differ .

the reasons for these differences vary .

in nine states — california , colorado , florida , kentucky , mississippi , north carolina , ohio , virginia , and wyoming — the mass - based targets for existing sources result in a smaller percentage reduction requirement from the 2012 baseline than the percentage reduction requirement for the emission rate target .

the percentage reductions for these states are highlighted in blue in table 1 .

the differences in percentage reductions range from 1% to 14% .

for example , if virginia were to use an emission rate target , its percentage reduction requirement would be 38% between 2012 and 2030 .

however , virginia's mass - based target requires a 24% reduction during the same time period .

the reason for the percentage differences in these states relates to epa's treatment of ngcc units that are under construction .

these nine states are the only ones with ngcc units under construction .

in epa's mass - based conversion methodology , the agency includes under - construction ngcc units in the 2012 fossil fuel - fired generation baseline .

however , in the emission rate methodology the generation from these units is not included in the 2012 baseline .

thus , the baselines for these nine states are effectively higher using the mass - based methodology , and a relatively higher baseline yields a smaller reduction requirement .

two other states — washington and idaho — also have lower percentage reduction requirements under the mass - based methodology .

their reduction percentages are highlighted in green in table 1 .

these differences are the result of an adjustment epa made to the states' "adjusted affected fossil fuel generation. .

as discussed above ( step 2 in the mass - based methodology for existing sources ) , epa calculates a state's "adjusted affected fossil fuel generation" by subtracting incremental renewable energy and energy efficiency values from a state's 2012 fossil fuel generation baseline .

if epa were to strictly apply this step for these states , the resulting values would be negative , an impossible outcome .

if a negative value were allowed ( "on paper" ) for the purposes of the calculations , these states' percentage reductions would match their emission rate percentage reductions .

epa adjusts the calculations in these states , by holding the "adjusted affected fossil fuel generation" at zero .

four other states — iowa , maine , minnesota , and south dakota — have larger percentage reductions under the mass - based targets for the existing sources approach .

the percentage reductions for these states are highlighted in orange in table 1 .

the reason for these differences is due to the treatment of renewable energy ( re ) in epa's emission rate methodology , particularly its treatment in building block 3 .

in building block 3 , epa applies an annual growth rate to each state's re generation in 2012 to estimate annual re generation for each state from 2017 through 2030 .

if the growth factor results in an individual state equaling or exceeding its 2030 re target , the state's re use is held constant at the level that matches its regional target .

the 2012 re generation in these four states matched or exceeded their 2030 re targets , so the estimated future re generation ( for the purposes of the emission rate calculations ) in these states actually decreases to match their regional targets .

arguably , this outcome artificially lowers the emission rate targets for these states .

in the mass - based methodology , re generation is captured in the target calculations , not in the 2012 baseline .

thus , in comparison to the emission rate reductions , the mass - based reductions in these states are greater .

epa's second approach for converting to mass - based targets , which includes electricity generation from both existing and new sources , provides some results that may be of interest to policymakers and stakeholders .

table 1 lists the state - specific 2012 emission baselines , 2030 emission targets , and their percentage changes .

all of the states have lower percentage reduction requirements than those in approach 1 ( existing sources only ) , because approach 2 includes projected increases of electricity generation .

however , the range of percentage reduction requirements varies considerably .

in particular , three states — california , hawaii , and idaho — have emission targets in 2030 that are higher than their 2012 baseline ( highlighted in yellow in table 1 ) .

three other states — alaska , kentucky , and virginia — have percentage reduction requirements that are 3% or less .

several factors help explain the range of percentage reduction requirements that result from approach 2 .

first , as discussed above , the methodology in this approach uses a regional growth factor to project electricity demand in future years .

these growth factors vary significantly — from 0.29% in the northeast region to 1.31% in the southwest region .

assuming these factors hold true , arizona's demand for electricity will increase by 25% between 2012 and 2029 .

in contrast , the demand for electricity in massachusetts will increase by 5% over the same time period .

second , epa uses electricity sales data in 2012 to calculate future electricity demand .

the 2012 sales data include electricity generation from all sources , including hydroelectricity .

this source of generation is included in epa's emission rate methodology , but to a lesser extent than in the mass - based methodology .

the different accounting mechanisms appear to have an impact in states that generate a significant percentage of electricity generation from hydropower ( eg , idaho , washington , oregon ) .

moreover , these three states are located in a region with a relatively high electricity growth factor ( figure 1 ) .

third , as with approach 1 ( discussed above ) , the co 2 emissions from ngcc units that are under construction are counted ( at a 55% capacity rate ) toward a state's 2012 baseline .

this is a factor in nine states , particularly virginia .

in that state , under - construction ngcc units account for approximately 20% of the state's fossil - fuel fired generation in 2012 , although these plants generated no power that year .

