central governance in yemen , embodied by the decades - long rule of former president ali abdullah saleh , began to unravel in 2011 , when political unrest broke out throughout the arab world .

popular youth protests in yemen were gradually supplanted by political elites jockeying to replace then - president saleh .

ultimately , infighting among various centers of yemeni political power broke out in the capital , and government authority throughout the country eroded .

soon , militias associated with al qaeda in the arabian peninsula ( aqap ) seized territory in one southern province .

concerned that the political unrest and resulting security vacuum were strengthening terrorist elements , the united states , saudi arabia , and other members of the international community attempted to broker a political compromise .

a transition plan was brokered , and in 2012 former vice president abdu rabbu mansour hadi became president .

with the support of the united states , saudi arabia , and the united nations security council , president hadi attempted to reform yemen's political system .

throughout 2013 , key players convened a national dialogue conference aimed at reaching broad national consensus on a new political order .

however , in january 2014 it ended without agreement .

one antigovernment group in particular , the northern yemeni houthi movement , sought to use military force to reshape the political order .

within weeks of the national dialogue conference concluding , it launched a military offensive against various tribal allies of president hadi .

the houthi were joined by the forces still loyal to former president saleh , creating an alliance of convenience that was a formidable opponent to president hadi and his allies .

in 2014 , houthi militants took over the capital of sanaa ( also spelled sana'a ) and violated several power - sharing arrangements .

in 2015 , houthi forces advanced southward from the capital all the way to aden on the arabian sea .

in march 2015 , after president hadi , who had fled to saudi arabia , appealed for international intervention , saudi arabia and a hastily assembled international coalition launched a military offensive aimed at restoring hadi's rule and evicting houthi fighters from the capital and other major cities .

in april 2015 , the united nations security council passed resolution ( unscr ) 2216 demanding that houthi - saleh forces end their use of violence and that all yemeni parties avoid "further unilateral actions that could undermine the political transition in yemen. .

the united states agreed to provide limited assistance to the coalition military operations , assistance which has evolved over time in response to conditions in the conflict and in light of congressional scrutiny .

in early december 2017 , the houthi - saleh alliance unraveled , culminating in the killing of former president saleh on december 4 , 2017 .

since saleh's death , the coalition has made military gains , advancing northward along the red sea coast toward the port of hudaydah ( also spelled hodeidah , hudayda ) .

nevertheless , houthi forces remain ensconced in northern yemen and remain in control of the capital .

the war has exacerbated a humanitarian crisis in yemen that began in 2011 ; as of january 2019 , over half of the population required emergency food assistance .

access restrictions to certain areas of yemen make it problematic for governments and aid agencies to count the war's casualties .

one u.s. and european - funded organization , the armed conflict location & event data project ( acled ) , estimates that 60,000 yemenis have been killed since january 2016 .

unhcr estimates that 3.9 million yemenis were displaced internally as of january 2019 .

in january 2019 , the united nations panel of experts on yemen released their annual report covering 2018 .

this report noted that yemen continues to "slide towards humanitarian and economic catastrophe. .

though the actual ground war remains confined to "relatively small areas," the effect of the conflict on the economy , as well as the growing presence of armed groups and deep - rooted corruption , has impacted ordinary yemenis within both houthi - held areas and liberated areas .

on december 6 , 2018 , the warring parties to the conflict in yemen convened in sweden under the auspices of the united nations to discuss various de - escalation proposals and a possible road map to a comprehensive peace settlement .

the talks were the first formal negotiations since 2016 .

after a week of negotiations , all sides agreed to the stockholm agreement , which consists of three components: a cease - fire around the port city of hudaydah , a prisoner swap , and a statement of understanding that all sides would form a committee to discuss the war - torn city taiz .

though fighting continues along several fronts , on december 13 , 2018 , special envoy of the united nations secretary - general for yemen martin griffiths brokered a cease - fire centered on the besieged red sea port city of hudaydah , yemen's largest port .

as part of the deal , the coalition and the houthis agreed to redeploy their forces outside hudaydah city and port .

the united nations agreed to chair a redeployment coordination committee ( rcc ) to monitor the cease - fire and redeployment .

on january 16 , the united nations security council ( unscr ) passed unscr 2452 , which authorized ( for a 6-month period ) the creation of the united nations mission to support the hudaydah agreement ( unmha ) , of which the rcc was a significant component .

for nearly two months , implementation of the stockholm agreement stalled .

according to u.n. special envoy griffiths , "the initial timelines were rather ambitious….we are dealing with a complex situation on the ground. .

the stockholm agreement did not specify which local actors were to assume responsibility for security in hudaydah after both parties redeployed .

on february 17 , the united nations announced that "the parties reached an agreement on phase 1 of the mutual redeployment of forces" whereby the houthis would withdraw from hudaydah port and the saudi - led coalition would move out of the eastern outskirts of hudaydah city .

still , the warring parties have yet to agree on the identities of local police forces to take over security in hudaydah .

as of march 2019 , the parties had made "significant progress towards an agreement to implement phase one of the redeployments of the hudayda agreement. .

until a final redeployment is reached , the houthis remain ensconced in hudaydah , with barricades , trenches and roadblocks still present throughout the city .

the houthis want local coast guard units to assume control .

the coalition claims , however , that the leaders of the local coast guards are loyal to the houthis , and u.n. observers may have difficulty in verifying the neutrality of security personnel in hudaydah .

u.n. officials have reported to the security council that the houthis fear that a withdrawal from hudaydah will make their forces vulnerable to attack by the coalition .

meanwhile , in jordan , several meetings between the houthis and the hadi government have taken place over a planned prisoner exchange as called for in the stockholm agreement .

although some exchanges of wounded personnel and prisoners have taken place , the talks have not produced a comprehensive agreement to date .

overall , many observers remain skeptical that the cease - fire reflects a broader impulse to end the war , seeing it instead as a means of easing international pressure on the coalition .

since the signing of the stockholm agreement , the saudi - led coalition has conducted airstrikes in sanaa in retaliation for a houthi drone attack against a yemeni military parade .

in late january , artillery fire struck a camp for internally displaced people in yemen's northwestern hajjah province , killing eight civilians and wounding 30 others .

according to reporting by the united nations , implementation of the stockholm agreement has been hindered by an overall lack of trust and a reluctance to make operational concessions outside of a comprehensive political agreement .

in 2019 , the trump administration has continued to support united nations - led efforts in addressing the humanitarian situation and working toward a comprehensive peace in yemen .

at the same time , the united states has continued to cooperate with saudi arabia and the uae in countering terrorism and attempting to limit iran's influence in yemen .

for the trump administration , u.s. officials have supported the continued defense of saudi arabia against houthi missile and rocket strikes , while also openly calling on coalition members to use air power judiciously to minimize civilian casualties .

after ending u.s. refueling support at the coalition's request in november 2018 , the administration has argued against congressional attempts to block arms sales or to end or condition u.s. assistance , arguing that continued u.s. assistance is more likely to achieve the objectives of limiting civilian casualties and maintaining strategic ties to gulf partners than a punitive approach .

to address congressional concerns over errant coalition airstrikes against yemeni civilians , on november 11 , 2018 , the united states halted in - flight refueling support for coalition aircraft at the request of the coalition .

a month later , then - u.s. ambassador - designate to yemen christopher henzel noted in his senate confirmation hearing that "at our urging , the saudi - led coalition has incorporated the no - strike list into its target development procedures , stopped the use of cluster munitions , changed its rules of engagement to incorporate u.s. recommendations , and established the joint incident assessment team .

the united states will continue to press the coalition and the republic of yemen government to minimize civilian casualties and expand urgent humanitarian efforts throughout the country. .

in early february 2019 , centcom commander general joseph votel testified before the senate armed services committee regarding the u.s. role in assisting saudi arabia .

general votel remarked that: the united states will continue to support our regional partners developing processes and procedures to counter ballistic missiles ( cbm ) and counter unmanned armed aerial systems ( c - uas ) to help mitigate threats to civilian populations and critical infrastructure… .

we continue to share our own experiences and processes in an effort to improve saudi arabia's operational performance and reduce civilian casualties .

centcom's security cooperation with saudi arabia remains a critical link in our efforts to strengthen partners in the region and meet current and future challenges .

the work of u.s. advisors is essential to the success of our mission , and saudi arabia underwrites the lion's share of their presence .

in february 2019 , cnn reported that saudi arabia and the uae had provided u.s. military equipment ( armored vehicles ) to local yemeni units fighting the houthis in possible violation of end - user foreign military sale or direct commercial sale agreements .

the coalition has denied these charges , while the u.s. state department has said that it is "seeking additional information" on the issue .

at the february 2019 ministerial to promote a future of peace and security in the middle east in warsaw , poland , members of the self - described "quad" ( united states , united kingdom , saudi arabia , and the united arab emirates ) met to coordinate their policy toward the yemen conflict .

the quad emphasized the importance of implementing the stockholm agreement , the problematic role iran plays in arming and financing the houthis , and the need for additional humanitarian assistance .

the foreign ministers comprising the quad also "expressed full support for saudi arabia and its legitimate national security concerns and called for an immediate end to such attacks by houthi forces and their allies. .

on february 13 , 2019 , the house passed ( 248-177 ) h.j.res .

37 , a joint resolution "directing the removal of united states armed forces from hostilities in the republic of yemen that have not been authorized by congress. .

prior to its passage by the house , the white house issued a statement of administration policy in which the administration argued that "the premise of the joint resolution is flawed" because the united states has provided only "limited support to member countries of the saudi - led coalition" and u.s. forces providing such intelligence and logistics support are not engaged in hostilities .

as amended and passed by the house , section 4 of h.j.res .

37 includes a rule of construction stating that "nothing in this joint resolution may be construed to influence or disrupt any intelligence , counterintelligence , or investigative activities conducted by , or in conjunction with , the united states government…" the senate companion resolution , s.j.res .

7 , was introduced on january 30 , 2019 and passed by the senate ( 54-46 ) on march 13 , 2019 .

as amended , s.j.res .

7 includes rules of construction stating that "nothing in this joint resolution may be construed to influence or disrupt any intelligence , counterintelligence or investigative activities relating to threats in or emanating from yemen conducted by , or in conjunction with , the united states government…" ( section 4 ) and that "nothing in this joint resolution may be construed as authorizing the use of military force" ( section 7 ) .

on february 7 , 2019 , ranking member on the senate foreign relations committee senator robert menendez introduced s. 398 , the saudi arabia accountability and yemen act of 2019 .

this bill , which was originally introduced in the 115 th congress , would , among other things , require the end of in - flight refueling for saudi - led coalition operations in yemen , suspend certain arms sales to the kingdom , sanction persons blocking humanitarian access in yemen , and sanction persons supporting the houthis in yemen .

as the saudi - led coalition's campaign against the houthis continues and yemen fragments , the united states has sustained counterterrorism operations against al qaeda in the arabian peninsula ( aqap ) and various affiliates of the islamic state .

in total , centcom conducted 36 air strikes in yemen in 2018 .

according to president trump's december 2018 letter to congress consistent with the war powers resolution , "a small number of united states military personnel are deployed to yemen to conduct operations against al - qa'ida in the arabian peninsula ( aqap ) and isis‑yemen. .

in december 2018 , general frank mckenzie testified before the senate armed services committee stating that "they [aqap] have an aspiration to attack the united states .

they are prevented from generating that only because of the direct pressure that remains on them .

so that is a clear , unequivocal national interest of the united states. .

some observers contend that aqap's power inside yemen has diminished considerably as a result of losses sustained from u.s. counterterrorism operations and of competing yemeni factions vying for supremacy .

according to gregory d. johnsen , resident scholar at the arabia foundation , "aqap is weaker now than it has been at any point since it was formed in 2009. .

in august 2018 , u.s. officials claimed that one of the most high - value targets in the aqap organization , bomb maker ibrahim al asiri , had been killed in a u.s. air strike last year .

asiri was a saudi national who was believed to have created the explosive devices used in the 2009 christmas day attempted bombing of northwest airlines flight 253 , in a 2009 attack against former saudi arabian intelligence chief mohammed bin nayef , and in the october 2010 air cargo packages destined for jewish sites in chicago .

in january 2019 , u.s. officials confirmed that jamal al - badawi , an al qaeda operative involved in the october 2000 bombing of the uss cole in aden , was killed in a precision strike in marib governorate on january 1 .

al - badawi had been indicted by a federal grand jury in 2003 for the murder of u.s. nationals and u.s. military personnel .

to date , two american soldiers have died in the ongoing u.s. counterterrorism campaign against aqap and other terrorists inside yemen .

in january 2017 , ryan owens , a navy seal , died during a counterterrorism raid in which between 4 and 12 yemeni civilians also were killed , including several children , one of whom was a u.s. citizen .

the raid was the trump administration's first acknowledged counterterror operation .

in august 2017 , emil rivera - lopez , a member of the elite 160th special operation aviation regiment , died when his black hawk helicopter crashed off the coast of yemen during a training exercise .

while the stockholm agreement has the potential to lead to a broader , nation - wide cease - fire , the longer it takes to implement , the greater risk of the agreement's collapse and the prospect for renewed conflict in hudaydah .

although fighting has continued along several fronts since december 2018 , the stockholm agreement has provided the saudi - led coalition with the possibility of gradually extricating itself its intervention in yemen .

if the cease - fire collapses , then the coalition would have to weigh the benefits of trying to evict the houthis from hudaydah militarily with the humanitarian costs to the yemeni people and the reputational damage it would incur within the international community .

even if the united nations is able to make progress toward a comprehensive peace agreement , yemen is still beset by multiple political conflicts and violence .

in the south , regional secessionists are at odds with what remains of president hadi's internationally recognized government .

in the partially houthi - besieged city of taiz , yemen's third - largest city , rival militias backed by the coalition have engaged in internecine warfare and have been accused by human rights groups of committing war crimes .

many key questions about the future of yemen remain unanswered .

in the context of the current houthi - saudi - led coalition conflict , few observers have insight into whether or under what conditions the houthis might be willing to relinquish their heavy or advanced weaponry used to threaten saudi arabia , the united arab emirates , and maritime shipping .

iran , now involved in yemen in new ways , may prove unwilling to sever ties that vex its saudi adversaries .

political and military compromise between the coalition and the houthis could bring fighting to an end , but might also entrench an anti - u.s. and anti - saudi houthi movement as a leading force in a new order in yemen .

the complexity of yemen's internal politics and the short - term need to resolve the current conflict have overshadowed domestic and international consideration of what the future of yemeni governance may be .

overall , the prospects for returning to a unified yemen appear dim .

according to the united nations panel of experts on yemen , "the authority of the legitimate government of yemen has now eroded to the point that it is doubtful whether it will ever be able to reunite yemen as a single country. .

while the country's unity is a relatively recent historical phenomenon ( dating to 1990 ) , the international community had widely supported the reform of yemen's political system under a unified government just a few years ago .

in 2013 , yemenis from across the political spectrum convened a national dialogue conference aimed at reaching broad national consensus on a new political order .

however , in january 2014 it ended without agreement , and the houthis launched a war .

the failure of the 2013 national dialogue conference aimed at reaching broad national consensus on a new political order continues to violently reverberate throughout yemen .

if some semblance of normalcy is to return to the country , local players will have to return to addressing key issues , such as the power of a central government , the devolution of power to regional authorities , and the composition of national security forces .

the longer these issues remain unresolved , the greater the prospect for yemen's dissolution into competing self - declared autonomous regions .

