the federal perkins loan program is one of three postsecondary student financial aid programs that are collectively referred to as the campus - based programs .

the perkins loan program authorizes the allocation of federal funds to institutions of higher education ( ihes ) to assist them in capitalizing revolving loan funds for the purpose of making low - interest loans to students with exceptional financial need .

the program is authorized under title iv , part e of the higher education act ( hea ) .

it supersedes title ii — loans to students in institutions of higher education — of the national defense education act of 1958 ( p.l .

85-864 ) , which was incorporated into the hea through the education amendments of 1972 ( p.l .

92-318 ) .

previously , these loans were known as national defense student loans and national direct student loans .

institutions capitalize revolving loan funds created under the program with a combination of federal and institutional capital contributions ( fccs and iccs , respectively ) .

each institution's icc must equal one - third of the fcc received .

the fcc is allocated according to statutorily prescribed procedures .

after making loans , ihes recapitalize their loan funds by depositing the principal and interest repaid by students who borrowed under the program , as well as any other charges or earnings associated with the operation of the program .

perkins loans are available to undergraduate and graduate and professional students .

they must be made reasonably available to all eligible students , with priority given to students with exceptional financial need .

interest on perkins loans is fixed at a rate of 5% per year , and no interest accrues prior to a student beginning repayment , nor while repayment is suspended during deferment .

individuals who have engaged in a variety of public service endeavors ( eg , full - time elementary or secondary school teachers employed at a public or private nonprofit school in which low - income students are more than 30% of total enrollment , full - time law enforcement officers ) are eligible to have part or all of their perkins loan cancelled .

the secretary of education ( the secretary ) is required to reimburse ihes for perkins loans cancelled for students engaged in public service .

funds for reimbursing institutions for loan cancellations may not come from appropriations designated for fccs ; rather , these funds are appropriated under a separate authorization .

in academic year 2013-2014 , approximately 1,500 ihes disbursed $1.2 billion in new perkins loans to approximately 539,000 students .

the authorization of appropriations under hea section 461 ( b ) ( 1 ) , for the purpose of enabling the secretary to make fccs to ihes for their revolving perkins loan funds , expired at the end of fy2014 .

however , section 422 of the general education provisions act ( gepa ) provides that , generally , in the absence of legislation to extend or repeal a program administered by the department of education ( ed ) , the authorization of appropriations , or the duration of a program , is extended for one additional fiscal year beyond its terminal year .

the authorized level of appropriations for a program in the additional year shall be the same as that for the terminal year of the program .

thus , because congress did not extend or repeal the perkins loan program prior to its expiration on september 30 , 2014 , the authorization of appropriations for the program was automatically extended for an additional year , through fy2015 .

ed considers the authorization of appropriations under hea section 461 ( b ) ( 1 ) to control the duration of the perkins loan program and has interpreted this section , along with the automatic one - year extension under gepa section 422 , to mean that the perkins loan program is authorized through september 30 , 2015 .

hea section 461 ( b ) ( 1 ) authorizes discretionary appropriations to enable the secretary to make fccs to student loan funds established and operated at individual ihes .

under this section $300 million in appropriations are authorized annually for fy2009 through fy2014 , and through fy2015 under gepa section 422 .

however , discretionary appropriations for fccs were last provided in fy2004 .

along with the regular authorization of appropriations , hea section 465 ( b ) states that the secretary "shall pay to each institution ... an amount equal to the amount of loans from its student loan fund which are cancelled" for employment in specified public service jobs .

although there is no explicit authorization of appropriations language , in the past congress has appropriated funds specifically for reimbursing ihes for perkins loans cancellation .

funds for the reimbursement of perkins loans cancellations were last appropriated in fy2009 .

as described above , the statutory authority under the hea to appropriate funds for the perkins loan program expired on september 30 , 2014 , and has been automatically extended through fy2015 under gepa section 422 , and ed has interpreted this language to control the overall duration of the program .

absent congressional action prior to october 1 , 2015 , authorization of appropriations for the perkins loan program will expire .

it is not yet clear what the cost would be to the federal government if authorization of appropriations for the perkins loan program is extended .

based on the section 466 distribution of assets and late collections provisions , it could be argued that the federal government is expecting federal funds to be returned to it .

if so , then continuing the program could postpone the return of these funds and thereby create a cost to the government , as it would be "losing" an expected stream of revenue .

however , the congressional budget office has indicated it has not yet determined how to calculate cost estimates in this novel situation .

