the federal employees health benefits ( fehb ) program is the largest employer - sponsored health insurance program in the country .

it provides more than $40 billion in health care benefits annually to employees and retirees of the federal government , the largest employer in the united states .

in a typical year , fehb provides health insurance coverage to about 8.2 million federal employees , retirees , and their dependents .

employees and retirees make up roughly half of that figure , or about 4 million policyholders .

of these , about 50% are retirees .

participation in fehb is voluntary .

about 85% of federal employees participate , and about 90% of retirees participate .

the statute governing fehb is in title 5 , chapter 89 of the united states code .

it specifies that the federal government and the employee or retiree will share the cost of health insurance , with the federal government contributing 72% of the weighted average premium of all plans but no more than 75% of any given plan's premium , with the exception of employees of the usps , whose share of the premium is collectively bargained .

the office of personnel management ( opm ) administers the program .

 ( for more detailed information on opm's role , see the appendix . ) .

opm has statutory authority to contract with health insurance carriers that offer insurance coverage for comprehensive medical services and to prescribe regulations to carry out that authority .

for example , opm coordinates the administration of fehb with federal agencies , manages contingency reserve funds for the health plans , and applies sanctions to health care providers according to federal regulations .

similar to most other federal agencies , the usps offers health care benefits to its employees , retirees , and their dependents through fehb .

however , as an agency , the usps is governed by arrangements that are unique within the federal government in regard to its contributions to health care benefits .

federal retirees and employees aged 65 or older have the option of enrolling in medicare in addition to continuing coverage in fehb .

although most fehb enrollees continue their coverage into retirement , not all enrollees take up the medicare coverage available to them .

several coverage options are available through the medicare program: the hospital insurance ( hi ) program in medicare part a , the supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) program in medicare part b , and prescription drug coverage in medicare part d .

the aca passed in 2010 and included a number of provisions that established new requirements for all private health plans , including fehb health plans .

for example , the new law allowed all adult children ( including those who are married ) to enroll in or remain on their parents' plan until the age of 26 .

however , many aca provisions had no meaningful effect on fehb because many fehb plans already met the requirements established under the law , such as the provision that people with preexisting conditions cannot be denied health coverage .

in some cases , how an aca provision could impact fehb is unknown .

for example , it is unclear how many fehb health plans could be subject to the aca's excise tax on high - cost health plans , often referred to as the cadillac tax , which goes into effect in 2020 .

in addition , the employer mandate could result in penalties to fehb , starting in 2015 , if any full - time federal worker obtains a subsidy for health insurance on the exchange .

the employer requirements and penalty will be phased in — the requirement will apply to large firms with 100 or more full - time equivalent ( fte ) employees in 2015 and employers with 50 or more fte employees in 2016 .

opm has published guidance on implementing aca provisions , and in some cases it has expanded the scope of those provisions .

for example , although most fehb plans do not impose annual limits on what they will pay for essential health benefits , some plans had established such limits prior to passage of the aca .

beginning in plan year 2013 , opm directed all fehb plans to eliminate annual limits on essential health benefits .

that deadline for fehb plans came a full year earlier than the effective date specified in the aca .

for a detailed list of the aca provisions that affect fehb , see crs report r42741 , laws affecting the federal employees health benefits ( fehb ) program .

the federal employees health benefits ( fehb ) program is administered by the office of personnel management ( opm ) in accordance with the statute ( title 5 , chapter 89of the u.s. code ) and its implementing regulations ( title 5 , part 890 and title 48 , chapter 16 of the code of federal regulations ) .

the fehb statute establishes the basic rules for benefits , enrollment , and participation , among other general requirements , while still allowing opm broad authority to implement regulations , contract with plans , establish benefits , and administer the program .

in general , opm , federal agencies , and the health insurance carriers each have defined roles in fehb .

opm is authorized to contract with health insurance carriers ; approve health plans for participation in the program ; negotiate with carriers about benefit and premium levels ; determine the times and conditions for open seasons during which eligible individuals may elect coverage or change plans ; make information available to employees concerning plan options ; apply administrative sanctions to health care providers that have committed certain violations ; and administer the program's financing .

opm is responsible for maintaining the funds that hold contingency reserves for the plans and the fund that receives premium payments from enrollees and federal agencies , from which premiums are disbursed to participating plans .

opm supervises all health insurance activities for retirees .

it determines whether retiring employees or survivor retirees meet the requirements to continue health insurance coverage ; takes the action necessary to terminate , accept , or continue enrollment ; oversees the automatic deduction of premiums from monthly annuity checks and credits the premiums , along with the applicable government contribution , to the proper account ; processes all enrollment changes ; notifies affected carriers of enrollment changes ; and keeps enrolled retirees advised of rate and benefit changes within their plan .

annual cycle of fehb activity for opm opm enters into an annual contract with carriers following a negotiation process .

each spring , that annual negotiation process begins when opm sends all health plans a call letter to advise them on goals and procedures for negotiating contracts for the following calendar year and to request that participating health plans submit their benefit and rate proposals for the next year .

the call letter includes any changes in the services opm seeks to make available for federal workers and retirees , as well as notification of services that opm discourages .

next , opm reviews proposals for rates ( premiums ) for the fee - for - service ( ffs ) plans in relation to many factors , including the cost of covered services , managed care initiatives , a plan's past experience , health care utilization patterns of the enrolled group , and health care cost inflation in general .

pursuant to the negotiations , opm and the plans ( including both ffs plans and health maintenance organizations , or hmos ) agree to specific terms and conditions that each party is obligated to meet in the next contract year .

descriptions of both covered and excluded services are incorporated into the final contracts , and the plans print brochures describing the benefits and costs according to a standard format specified by opm .

the brochures are binding statements of benefits and exclusions that plans must follow as parties to fehb contracts .

opm then announces an open season ( which generally runs for one month , beginning in early november ) .

opm prints and distributes to personnel offices and retirees a guide describing the major features and premiums for all participating plans .

this guide includes the findings of surveys of enrollee satisfaction with the different plans and information about the factors participants should consider in making their selection .

personal advice is not provided , although opm's website provides information about how to select a plan ( http: / / www.opm.gov / insure ) .

employees are responsible for obtaining from their personnel office a copy of opm's general guide and the detailed brochures of the specific plans in which they are interested .

retirees are responsible for obtaining detailed plan brochures by contacting the individual carriers .

information about the different plans also is available on opm's website at http: / / www.opm.gov / healthcare - insurance / .

following is a summary of the annual cycle of opm's activities regarding plan contracts: end of march / early april — call letter distributed to plans may 31 — plan responses due to opm ( electronic format ) june through august — contract negotiations september / october — print and distribute opm guides and plan brochures november / december — open season early december / january 1 — enrollment data distributed to plans january 1 — plan year starts march — reconciliation of hmo premiums opm's role with federal agencies personnel offices in every federal agency manage participation in fehb for their employees according to procedures prescribed by opm .

they administer the annual open seasons and adjust coverage and payroll withholding when workers' family or employment situations change and when new workers enter .

agencies are responsible for withholding employee premium payments , adding the government share ( which is appropriated to agencies annually ) , and providing documentation of these actions to opm .

they keep records and information on withholdings from employee salaries and agency contributions , enrollment statistics , and other necessary data .

opm's role with the plans fehb plans are required to allow eligible individuals to enroll during open season and other special election periods and may not discriminate on the basis of health status , race , sex , or age .

the carriers process and pay claims , answer enrollee questions , respond to claims disputes , print annual open season brochures according to a format specified by opm , and maintain data regarding enrollment , claims , and other financial information required by opm .

in addition , carriers assume all insurance risk .

contracts the contracts opm enters into with fehb plans are for at least one year and may be automatically renewable in the absence of notice by either party of intention to terminate .

opm may terminate a carrier's contract at the end of the year if the carrier did not have 300 or more enrolled employees and retirees , exclusive of family members , at any point during the preceding two contract terms .

each contract must contain a detailed statement of benefits .

contracts must offer enrollees and their family members temporary extension of coverage with an option to convert to a nongroup contract without requiring evidence of good health .

plans that are discontinued , other than through a merger , may reenter after three contract years from the time they left the program .

licensure an fehb plan must be licensed to sell group health insurance under state law in every area of a state in which it operates as an fehb plan .

nationwide plans must be licensed in every state .

hmos must have an internal quality - assurance program and must credential and periodically re - credential participating providers .

opm requires that each fehb plan submit copies of its state license ( s ) with its application to participate in fehb ; in addition , as part of the plan's contract with fehb the plan is required to inform opm if a state has withdrawn , or intends to withdraw , the plan's license .

quality each year , fehb plans with 500 or more subscribers must mail the consumers assessment of health plan survey ( cahps ) to a random sample of plan members .

for hmos and point - of - service plans , the sample consists of all commercial plan members , including nonfederal members .

for ffs or preferred provider organization plans , the sample includes federal members only .

the cahps survey consists of a set of standardized health plan performance measures that evaluate members' satisfaction with their health plans .

independent vendors certified by the national committee for quality assurance administer the surveys .

opm sets cahps requirements for the plans each year , which include instructions to send opm a copy of any survey results .

all plans also must complete quality - assurance reports as well as fraud and abuse case reports and submit these reports to opm .

additionally , hmos with more than 500 fehb enrollees must complete the health plan and employer data information set ( hedis ) , which includes clinical performance measures based on information such as members' medical records .

each year , opm outlines the procedures for collecting the hedis measures ; these measures help to compare how well plans prevent and treat illness .

provider networks opm reviews applications for health benefit plans for evidence of a plan's ability to provide reasonable access to and choice of quality primary and specialty medical care throughout the service area , specifically ( 1 ) in the individual practice setting , contractual arrangements for the services of a significant number of primary care and specialty physicians in the service area ; and ( 2 ) in the group practice setting , compliance with statutes , preferably demonstrated by full - time providers specializing in internal medicine , family practice , pediatrics , and obstetrics and gynecology .

other administrative responsibilities opm's other administrative responsibilities include data warehousing , considering appeal of denials of coverage or payment , applying sanctions against providers , and determining applicability of state and local laws .

data warehousing opm is continuing to develop a health claims data warehouse that will , among other things , be used to collect , manage , and analyze health services data for fehb .

generally , opm analysts will use de - identified data for analytic purposes , such as examining health trends , developing risk - adjustment methodologies , and conducting oversight of pharmacy pricing and negotiation .

data with personal identifiers also may be used within opm , in accordance with applicable privacy standards , for the purposes of a congressional inquiry , for judicial and administrative proceedings , and for investigations by law enforcement officials .

grievance and appeals all plan brochures include an explanation of the procedures enrollees should follow if they disagree with a denial of coverage or payment .

an enrollee must first submit a written request to the plan for reconsideration within six months of the denial of coverage .

within 30 days of receiving the request , the plan must approve the claim , request additional information , or provide a written statement explaining the denial .

if the plan decides against the enrollee , a written appeal can be filed with opm within 90 days of the plan's second denial .

if opm determines the enrollee is entitled to coverage , the plan must provide or pay for the care .

if opm decides against the enrollee , he or she can appeal in federal district court .

sanctions opm may , and in some cases must , apply sanctions to health care providers .

these sanctions include debarment , suspension , civil monetary penalties , and financial assessments .

the regulations establish the circumstances under which these sanctions may occur , along with procedures for appeals .

state and local laws the terms of a contract relating to coverage or benefits , including payments , supersede and preempt any state or local laws and regulations relating to health insurance or plans .

although opm requires hmos to provide their fehb plan enrollees with the mandated benefits of the state in which they live , opm has the authority to override these state requirements if it determines that doing so would be in the best interest of federal enrollees .

