the islamic state , also known as isil or isis , has been described by senior u.s. officials as one of the best - funded terrorist organizations .

its wealth has contributed to the group's ability to finance sophisticated military operations across parts of iraq and syria .

it also seeks to use its revenue to administratively control and govern the territory it has seized .

in several respects , the islamic state presents a unique policy challenge to combating terrorist financing .

its financial strength lies in its ability to secure large amounts of funding from primarily internal sources , its lack of reliance on international sources of funds , and its exploitation of ungoverned spaces and porous borders to move funds with impunity .

these characteristics often place the organization's finances beyond the reach of some of the most common counterterrorist financing policy tools .

the islamic state controls a variety of public resources and infrastructure in parts of iraq and syria , enabling it to assemble a "diverse financial portfolio. .

some of these resources , such as oil and antiquities , can be smuggled and sold for considerable profit .

others — agriculture and energy and water utilities — generate limited revenue and require a significant investment in inputs or technical expertise , but help the group portray itself as exercising the functions of a legitimate government .

activities such as kidnapping for ransom or the looting of state banks in iraq are profitable in the near - term but not necessarily sustainable .

in other cases , is control over a set of resources is notable not solely for the revenue the group derives from it , but also for the extent to which it limits the ability of the iraqi and syrian governments to conduct trade , provide utility services , or feed its citizens .

targeting the islamic state's finances is one of five core lines of effort to degrade and defeat the terrorist organization .

general john allen , the u.s. special presidential envoy for the global coalition to counter isil , stated in early 2015 that the united states cannot defeat isil through military efforts alone , and highlighted the need to deprive the group of access to financial resources .

u.s. policy to counteract is financing has concentrated on three primary areas: disrupting the group's main sources of funding , restricting its access to the international financial system , and imposing sanctions on its senior leadership and financial facilitators .

the united states also has sought to collaborate with international partners , including through cooperation on financial intelligence collection and analysis .

although military airstrikes on is - linked oil infrastructure and supply networks have already altered the organization's financial profile , counterterrorist financing policy responses remain nascent .

policymakers continue to grapple with how to develop quick and effective responses to combat is financing .

some caution that counter - finance tactics may need to be balanced with consideration of the economic harm such actions may inflict on civilian populations in is - controlled territory .

in the absence of alternatives , particularly for key resources such as oil , utilities , and agriculture , efforts to counter is - financing could damage local economies and services and contribute to an expanding humanitarian crisis in the region .

early international efforts to address is financing have focused on gathering information and generating a common understanding of the organization's financial capabilities .

as part of the international counter - isil coalition , the united states , italy , and saudi arabia are co - leading the counter - isil finance group ( cifg ) , which met for the first time in march 2015 .

several united nations security council resolutions have authorized international action against is financing , most recently in resolution 2199 ( 2015 ) , and , in an initiative co - led by the united states and turkey , the financial action task force issued a report in february 2015 that describes is financing typologies .

u.s. officials have sought to reduce expectations regarding the pace of efforts to combat the sources of is revenue , emphasizing that counter - is financing is a work in progress , requires further refinement , and is unlikely to result in immediate success .

to date , the obama administration has not requested new authorities from congress specifically to counter is financing .

as part of broader efforts to evaluate the administration's counter - is response , congress also has an interest specifically in evaluating u.s. efforts to target is financing and to combat terrorist financing generally .

in november 2014 , the u.s. house committee on financial services held a hearing on "terrorist financing and the islamic state. .

more recently , in march 2015 , the committee on financial services established a six - month bipartisan "task force to investigate terrorism financing" in order to conduct hearings and investigations related to u.s. responses to terrorist financing issues .

the islamic state's system of financing is likely shaped by the experiences of the group's predecessor organizations , the islamic state of iraq ( isi ) and al qaeda in iraq ( aqi ) .

captured battlefield documents and media reports provide the basis for what researchers know about how precursors to the islamic state were funded .

for example , documents describing isi operations in sinjar reveal a group that was reliant on incoming foreign fighters for funds , internal transfers from other areas under isi's control , local donations , and conflict loot .

other areas under isi's control were reportedly funded through oil revenue , agricultural production , ransom payments , and external donors .

based on other captured financial records , a rand study analyzed the finances of aqi in anbar province during the group's peak power and influence in 2005 and 2006 .

the rand study concluded that regional financial managers wielded significant autonomy in budgetary decisionmaking .

this was due partly to the preponderance of locally sourced revenue streams , including the theft and resale of local high - value goods , such as construction equipment , generators , electrical cables , and cars , as well as extortion .

notably absent from the financial records analyzed by rand was data to suggest that the group profited primarily from oil smuggling or relied on wealthy foreign donors .

the rand study found that transfers of funds were conducted primarily through cash couriers , rather than the formal financial sector , and that the group was sufficiently profitable to redistribute some its wealth to other provinces and to other countries , including possibly to senior al qaeda leadership in pakistan .

yet , the study also found the group to lack substantial cash reserves and thus to be dependent on consistent cash flows in order to keep pace with outlays for daily operations , particularly salaries .

another battlefield document captured in 2008 appears to highlight the centrality of effective financial management for aqi's operations .

in this document , isi fighters compiled a list of lessons learned , based on what they perceived as al qaeda's failures in iraq .

among them was a critique of its use of financial resources , describing a failure to distribute funding among local cells effectively and the lack of a regular funding source , particularly a foreign state sponsor .

u.s. and iraqi forces to date have captured a limited number of internal islamic state documents , which have not been publicly released .

in june 2014 , iraqi special forces recovered a trove of documents on memory sticks and hard drives during a raid that killed abdul rahman al bilawi , the islamic state's military chief of staff for iraqi territory .

some media outlets were permitted to review a selection of the material , which reportedly included details of the group's leadership structure as well as expenditure lists .

according to congressional testimony by patrick johnston of the rand corporation in late 2014 , the key difference between the financial activities of the islamic state's predecessors and its current financial profile is not the types of revenue sources , but the scale of activities .

between august 2008 and january 2009 , isi's master financial ledgers in mosul reportedly showed the group generating slightly less than $1 million in fundraising per month .

in 2014 , the islamic state was able to generate the same amount — or more — per day .

this section surveys specific is revenue sources , some of which were initially cultivated by aqi and isi .

the islamic state has established a network of ministries to govern the territory it controls and has sought able administrators .

is leader abu bakr al baghdadi in a july 2014 audio recording called for "scientists , scholars , preachers , judges , doctors , engineers and people with administrative expertise of all domains" to move to the islamic state , which required their expertise .

in december 2014 , the is office of zakat — a finance ministry equivalent — announced that it would give a series of assessment tests to recruit new staff .

the office said it was seeking candidates with phds in islamic law and economics , as well as those with high school diplomas .

the islamic state in late 2014 also announced plans to mint its own currency out of gold , silver , and copper , but as of early 2015 this had not materialized .

iraqi sources in january 2015 stated that the islamic state had established its own bank in mosul , which granted loans and accepted deposits .

the islamic state approved a $2 billion dollar budget for the year in early 2015 , including a projected $250 million dollar surplus , designed to cover the costs of operations in both iraq and syria .

some have argued that despite this budget , the group does not generate enough revenue to fully cover all of its expenses .

in addition to the cost of military operations , the islamic state must also provide salaries , maintain and repair infrastructure , and fill other state functions , such as the provision of social services .

in addition to military strikes against revenue - generating targets like oil facilities , as part of the obama administration's strategy to "degrade and ultimately defeat" the islamic state , the u.s. department of the treasury leads u.s. government efforts to apply financial measures that will undermine the group's finances .

these financial measures include a mix of targeted financial and economic sanctions , as well as enhancements to the international financial regulatory system .

in october 2014 remarks at the carnegie endowment for international peace , david cohen , under secretary of the treasury for terrorism and financial intelligence , outlined the three key prongs in the u.s. government's strategy to combat is financing as follows: disrupt its main sources of funding ; restrict its access to the international financial system ; and block access to assets and resources of its senior leadership and financial facilitators .

u.s. efforts have prioritized collaboration with international partners , including cooperation on financial intelligence collection and analysis .

one goal of such ongoing information sharing is to improve the international community's understanding of how the group raises , moves , and uses funds and other assets .

the islamic state's ability to draw on multiple sources of funding poses a challenge to u.s. and international efforts to contain and degrade the group's strength .

the diverse sources of revenue may well safeguard the group , at least in the short term , from shocks that could result from the disruption of any single revenue stream .

for example , although some observers have expressed hope that recent reductions in the global price of oil may disrupt the islamic state's financial base , the group seems to have found viable alternative fundraising opportunities , including local extortion , kidnap for ransom schemes , increased import duties , and receipt of donations from foreign benefactors .

in several respects , however , the islamic state depends on controlling territory in order to finance its operations ; if the group loses or fails to seize additional territory , its financial strength may not be sustainable in the long term .

the islamic state's appropriation of illicit trafficking networks for its financial gain is a testament to the enduring nature of cross - border smuggling in the region , which the saddam hussein regime used in the 1990s to evade u.n. sanctions against iraq and exploit the u.n. oil - for - food program .

the existence of long - standing smuggling routes in the region also suggests that dismantling the smuggling routes will be difficult .

researchers suggest that the diversity of the islamic state's funding sources necessitate a counter - finance response that is similarly diverse .

moreover , the u.n. security council's analytical support and sanctions monitoring team cautions that the international community's success or failure at stemming is resources could have implications for the long - term threat posed by the al qaeda movement: the importance of the significant financial assets — and the potential for continuing revenue — of isil should not be underestimated .

should the leader of isil , or individuals within the network with access to funds , choose to fund al - qaida core or other parts of the al - qaida movement , the potential for a revived ( and well - funded ) transnational terrorist architecture will grow .

many observers recognize that a strategy focused on counter - finance may weaken , but not destroy , the islamic state .

for its part , the department of the treasury has cautioned against expectations that efforts to combat the islamic state's finances will bear fruit quickly .

in remarks to the carnegie endowment for international peace , under secretary cohen warned that "efforts to combat its [islamic state] financing will take time .

we have no silver bullet , no secret weapon to empty isil's coffers overnight .

this will be a sustained fight , and we are in the early stages. .

even if efforts to eliminate the islamic state's external sources of funding are unequivocally successful , the islamic state will likely continue to benefit from local donations and extortion schemes within the territory it controls .

to this end , some have emphasized the importance of developing the capacity of local and regional partners to target is financial facilitators and local revenue sources that are not within u.s. reach .

such efforts , however , may inflict hardship on local populations where the islamic state operates and some suggest that counter - finance tactics should be balanced with a consideration of the suffering that such actions may cause .

moreover , some caution that the islamic state , known for its sophisticated propaganda skills , may blame the international community for any economic distress that local populations may experience .

nevertheless , some observers argue that international pressure against the islamic state's revenue streams , particularly oil - related revenue , has contributed to the group's declining financial prospects .

many observers also foresee vulnerabilities in the organization's longer - term financial stability .

replenishing battlefield resources , including equipment repairs and salaries for fighters , along with other costs associated with administering territory under its control , may ultimately stress its financial capabilities .

according to a treasury official , the long - term trajectory of the islamic state's financial profile may already be toward decline: while we are actively working to disrupt isil's financial activities , it is important to note that the sources of isil's wealth — notably the money stolen from banks and revenues from oil sales — are either no longer replenished or diminish over time , we expect isil will increasingly struggle to finance its operations .

just like any commercial enterprise whose income is less than its expenses , isil's financial strength will diminish unless it is able to find alternative sources of revenue or take additional territory .

some observers have criticized the treasury department's response to the islamic state for closely resembling the counter - terrorist financing campaigns of years past — despite recognition that the islamic state , in key respects , presents a unique financial profile .

u.s. officials , too , have acknowledged the islamic state's unique financial capabilities , and note that the u.s. government , particularly the treasury department , faces an urgent challenge to adapt existing counter - terrorist financing tools and techniques to respond to the islamic state .

policymakers may choose to evaluate the effectiveness of the treasury department's efforts to combat is financing and assess whether its current resources and capabilities are sufficient to meet the challenge that the islamic state presents .

as the 114 th congress continues to consider and evaluate u.s. policy responses to address the islamic state , a focus of concern may center on whether u.s. counterterrorist financing tools are capable of diminishing is sources of funds .

key questions may include whether current u.s. efforts are effective and sufficiently resourced , or require new legislative authorities , to respond to the islamic state's ability to accumulate and distribute funds .

although congress has been active in evaluating u.s. policy responses and options to address the islamic state , particularly the military response and prospects for congressional authorization for the use of military force , legislative proposals to stem the islamic state's access to and use of funds have been limited .

two bills introduced in the 113 th congress addressed islamic state financing , including h.r .

5431 , the isolating isis act ; and h.r .

5463 , the end financing to isil act .

islamic state financing is a topic that is often discussed in congressional hearings on broader topics , including u.s. counterterrorism strategy and regional responses to the situation in iraq and syria .

the house committee on financial services did , however , hold a hearing specifically on "terrorist financing and the islamic state" on november 13 , 2014 .

for fy2015 , the 113 th congress appropriated $112.5 million to the u.s. department of the treasury's office of terrorism and financial intelligence in p.l .

113-235 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( up from $102 million in fy2014 ) .

the explanatory statement accompanying the fy2015 bill additionally specified that the treasury department should "fully implement sanctions... applicable to the islamic state of iraq and the levant" among others , and should "promptly notify the committees on appropriations of the house and senate of any resource constraints that adversely impact the implementation of these sanctions programs. .

for fy2016 , the treasury department requested $109.6 million for its office of terrorism and financial intelligence and stated that its request supports efforts to combat is finances .

in august 2014 , senators bob casey and marco rubio sent a letter to secretary of state john kerry , urging the obama administration to designate the islamic state as a "transnational criminal organization" ( tco ) , pursuant to executive order ( eo ) 13581 .

eo 13581 authorizes the establishment of a targeted financial sanctions regime against tcos , similar to those already in place against sdgts , pursuant to eo 13224 .

"although isis is already under both u.s. and international sanctions , we should employ all available tools to curtail these activities and disrupt its financial networks," the letter to secretary kerry stated .

"we believe the state and treasury departments should also consider designating isis as a tco , which would send a strong signal to our partners in the region that we are prioritizing cutting off isis's financial support. .

the 114 th congress may also address is financing policy issues through the recently established task force to investigate terrorism financing .

on march 25 , 2015 , the u.s. house committee on financial services passed a resolution to establish this six - month bipartisan task force , with the goal of conducting hearings and investigations related to u.s. responses to terrorist financing issues , including the issuance of possible reports to the committee that detail findings and policy recommendations to enhance u.s. responses .

appendi .

