early childhood home visiting is a strategy for delivering services to improve health , well - being , and education outcomes for vulnerable families with young children .

nurses , social workers , and other professionals visit the homes of families who participate on a voluntary basis .

the federal government has long supported early childhood programs in which home visiting is a major component or is otherwise permitted .

the maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting ( miechv ) program is the primary federal program that focuses exclusively on home visiting .

the program was implemented in march 2010 , following the obama administration's budget request for a national home visiting program and a home visitation pilot program carried out in 15 states that had been initiated by the george w. bush administration .

congress considered proposals to establish home visiting programs as part of health care reform in 2010 and in prior years .

hhs provides miechv funding to states , territories , and tribal entities for home visiting services in at - risk communities , as identified by these jurisdictions .

miechv prioritizes certain populations , including low - income families , young mothers , or individuals who have a history of substance abuse , among other risk factors .

families participate on a voluntary basis .

in fy2017 , the miechv program served 156,297 individual parents and children who participated in 942,676 home visits .

jurisdictions that carry out home visiting programs under the program must adhere to specific requirements .

for example , they must use most of their program funding to implement one or more home visiting models that have been identified by hhs to be effective .

separately , hhs provides training and technical assistance to jurisdictions and is carrying out research activities to evaluate the impacts of the program on participants' outcomes .

this report begins with an overview of the miechv program and home visiting generally , and discusses federal efforts to increase and support home visiting services .

it goes on to describe the program , including information about its administration , coordination , and funding .

following this is an outline of miechv requirements for states and other jurisdictions , including information on the types of home visiting models that have been implemented across jurisdictions .

the report concludes with information about efforts to research , evaluate , and provide technical assistance within the miechv program .

appendix a includes federal legislative history on home visiting ; appendix b includes funding levels by state for the miechv program in selected years ; appendix c includes a timeline of relevant dates for the program ; and appendix d provides information about home visiting models adopted by jurisdictions , and features of selected home visiting models that meet hhs criteria for being effective .

under the miechv program , jurisdictions provide home visiting services to eligible families who volunteer to participate .

an eligible family includes ( 1 ) a woman who is pregnant , and the father - to - be , if available ; ( 2 ) a parent or primary caregiver of a child , including grandparents or other relatives of the child , and foster parents , who is serving as the child's primary caregiver from birth to entry into kindergarten ; and ( 3 ) a noncustodial parent who has an ongoing relationship with , and at times provides physical care for , the child from birth to entry into kindergarten .

jurisdictions must give priority to serving eligible families who meet any of the following criteria: reside in communities that are in need of home visiting services , as identified in the needs assessment conducted by the jurisdiction and accounting for other factors ( staffing , community resources , and other requirements ) that are necessary to operate at least one approved home visiting model in those communities ; are low - income ; include a pregnant woman under the age of 21 ; have a history of child abuse or neglect or have had interactions with child welfare services ; have a history of substance abuse or need substance abuse treatment ; have users of tobacco products in the home ; have children with low student achievement ; have children with developmental delays or disabilities ; or individuals who are serving , or formerly served , in the armed forces , including such families that have members of the armed forces who have had multiple deployments outside of the united states .

funding for the miechv program has increased over time from $100 million to $400 million annually .

the authorizing law requires that 3% of the annual funding is to be reserved for indian tribal entities , and another 3% is to be reserved for selected technical assistance , research , and evaluation .

miechv funding may be expended by the jurisdiction through the end of the second succeeding fiscal year after the award .

the law does not specify how the funds are to be awarded , though the most recent reauthorization of the program under bba 2018 included language that directs hhs to use the most accurate data available for eligible jurisdictions if funding is awarded on the basis of relative population or poverty considerations .

in practice , hhs has distributed miechv funds by both formula and competitive grants to states and other jurisdictions .

hhs formula and competitive grant funding for states and territories is allocated to a lead agency in each state that successfully applies for the miechv program .

jurisdictions are required to effectively implement home visiting models ( or a single home visiting model ) in the state's at - risk community or communities , as identified by the jurisdiction via its needs assessment .

states and territories can determine which lead agency or agencies will administer the miechv program .

the public health department is the lead agency that administers home visiting funds in most states , the district of columbia , and the five territories .

in 13 of these jurisdictions ( alaska , delaware , guam , idaho , kentucky , maine , michigan , montana , nebraska , nevada , new hampshire , north carolina , and west virginia ) the department of health also includes the state social service agency .

in addition , 13 states administer the program through other departments with a social service focus ( alabama , colorado , connecticut , illinois , kentucky , mississippi , new mexico , oregon , pennsylvania , texas , vermont , washington , and wisconsin ) .

south carolina operates its program through a nonprofit organization , the children's trust fund of south carolina , which is authorized under state law and overseen by the state office of executive policy and programs .

three states ( florida , north dakota , and wyoming ) have declined funding for the program , and , as permitted under law , nonprofits have applied and have operated the program in these states in selected years: florida association of healthy start coalitions ( florida ) ; prevent child abuse ( north dakota ) ; and parents as teachers national center ( wyoming ) .

the nonprofit organizations receive funding that otherwise would have been awarded to the states in which they operate .

to be eligible to operate home visiting programs under miechv , nonprofits must have an established record of providing early childhood home visiting programs or initiatives in one or more states .

jurisdictions must use at least 75% of their total funding ( regardless of whether they are formula or competitive funds ) within a given fiscal year to carry out home visiting models that are "evidence - based. .

as outlined in the statute , models are evidence - based if they have been in existence for at least three years ; are associated with a national organization or institution of higher education that has comprehensive standards to ensure that services are high - quality and that the program continuously makes improvements ; are research - based and grounded in relevant empirically - based knowledge ; and have demonstrated significant positive outcomes in the benchmark areas and the desired individual family outcomes when evaluated using well - designed and rigorous quasi - experimental research designs or randomized controlled research design in which the evaluation results have been published in peer - reviewed journals .

in implementing the miechv program , hhs established criteria for determining which home visiting models have evidence of effectiveness after seeking public comment on the criteria ( as required under the law ) .

the criteria expand on the requirements in the law about models that are linked to specified outcomes and demonstrate significant positive outcomes .

the criteria are as follows: at least one high - or moderate - quality impact study of the model finds favorable , statistically significant impacts in two or more of eight outcome domains ; or at least two high - or moderate - quality impact studies of the model using nonoverlapping study samples find one or more favorable , statistically significant impacts in the same outcome domain .

in this context , impact studies evaluate whether the home visiting model results in favorable outcomes for participants generally .

as specified by hhs ( and in accordance with the miechv law ) , the outcome domains are generally consistent with the benchmark areas and individual family outcomes for the program: ( 1 ) maternal health ; ( 2 ) child health ; ( 3 ) child development and school readiness ; ( 4 ) positive parenting practices ; ( 5 ) family economic self - sufficiency ; ( 6 ) reductions in child maltreatment ; ( 7 ) reductions in juvenile delinquency , family violence , and crime ; and ( 8 ) linkages and referrals .

jurisdictions may use up to 25% of their formula and / or competitively awarded funds for administering home visiting models that conform to a promising and new approach for achieving improved outcomes under the benchmark areas and improved family outcomes .

the law specifies that such a "promising" model must have been developed or identified by a national organization or institution of higher education and will be evaluated through a well - designed and rigorous process led by the jurisdiction .

hhs has further explained that a promising approach is one that meets the standards outlined in the statute but for which there is little to no evidence of effectiveness ; one with evidence that does not meet the criteria for an evidence - based model ; or a modified version of an evidence - based model that includes significant alterations to core components .

the law directs the hhs secretary to provide technical assistance ( ta ) to grantees , specifically with regard to administering programs or activities that are funded by the miechv program .

in addition , hhs is to provide technical assistance to any jurisdiction that is required to implement an improvement plan because it failed to improve in the benchmark ( or outcome ) areas .

jurisdictions receive ta from federal staff , developers of home visiting models , and ta providers contracted with hhs .

multiple hhs - contracted providers assist grantees .

hrsa provides assistance to grantees through the miechv home visiting - improvement action center ( hv - impact ) , which is operated under a contract with the education development center , a national nonprofit organization that provides support to states and territories in implementing and improving their programs .

hv - impact provides training and technical assistance that focuses on administering high - quality programs , strengthening coordination of early childhood systems , and improving program outcomes .

acf provides similar types of technical assistance to tribal miechv grantees via programmatic assistance for tribal home visiting ( path ) , operated by zero to three , a national nonprofit organization .

acf also provides assistance to grantees through the design options for maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting evaluation ( dohve ) technical assistance team .

james bell associates operates the dohve technical assistance team .

dohve provides technical assistance to jurisdictions on their research and evaluation efforts .

for example , they assist jurisdictions with developing meaningful plans to evaluate home visiting programs and disseminate findings , building capacity to analyze returns on investments in home visiting , integrating home visiting data into other early childhood data systems , and coordinating state and tribal home visiting efforts .

tribal entities receive technical assistance on these same topics via the tribal evaluation institute ( tei ) .

james bell associates operates tei .

the law directs the hhs secretary to carry out a continuous program of research and evaluation activities to increase knowledge about home visiting programs , using random assignment designs when feasible .

in practice , these activities include developing studies of home visiting models and sharing research and best practices .

in addition , hhs requires jurisdictions to conduct evaluations of home visiting programs if they are implementing promising models ( as opposed to a model that hhs has determined is evidence - based ) or receive competitive awards .

since 2014 , congress has held oversight hearings on the miechv program and considered legislation to extend funding for and reauthorize it .

the program was reauthorized through fy2022 under the bipartisan budget act of 2018 in february 2018 .

on january 9 , 2014 , the house energy and commerce committee held a hearing on the extension of health care policies that included discussion of the miechv program .

two witnesses from hhs testified about how the miechv program has been carried out and on the screening and use of evidence - based models selected by jurisdictions in the program .

on april 1 , 2014 , president obama signed into law the protecting access to medicare act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-93 ) , which extended funding for the miechv program through march 31 , 2015 ( the law also extended funding for other health care programs and policies ) .

on april 2 , 2014 , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources held a hearing on the miechv program .

witnesses included a home visiting nurse and her client , an administrator of a home visiting program , and two researchers .

they discussed how the program works in practice , both from the perspectives of program staff and the client .

in addition , researchers discussed the current research on home visiting , including the efficacy of selected home visiting models .

on march 15 , 2017 , the subcommittee on human resources held another hearing that focused on reauthorization of the program , including testimony from staff and a client with a national home visiting model , a home visiting manager , and a state committee in illinois that promotes home visiting services .

witnesses generally discussed the benefits of home visiting .

as mentioned , the protecting access to medicare act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-93 ) was signed into law on april 1 , 2014 , and provided funding of $400 million for the first half of fy2015 ( october 1 , 2014 , through march 31 , 2015 ) .

the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-10 ) , signed into law on april 16 , 2015 , extended the $400 million made available under p.l .

113-93 through all of fy2015 ( october 1 , 2014 , through september 30 , 2015 ) .

p.l .

114-10 also provided $400 million for each of fy2016 and fy2017 under the program .

on june 8 , 2017 , the increasing opportunity through evidence - based home visiting act ( h.r .

2824 ) was introduced and referred to the house ways and means committee and the house energy and commerce committee .

the bill sought to reauthorize , and make substantive changes to , the miechv program .

at a september 13 , 2017 , markup , the ways and means committee considered amendments to h.r .

2824 .

the committee reported the bill , as amended .

on september 26 , 2017 , the house passed h.r .

2824 with additional amendments .

on september 19 , 2017 , the strong families act of 2017 ( s. 1829 ) was introduced , and included several of the same provisions in h.r .

2824 .

the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( h.r .

1892 ) , enacted on february 9 , 2018 as p.l .

115-123 , incorporated all of s. 1829 and a provision in h.r .

2824 that directs hhs to use the most accurate relative federal population and poverty data if hhs awards funds based on these factors .

appendix a .

legislative history of home visiting federal efforts to establish a home visiting program congressional and executive branch interest in early childhood home visiting programs predated the affordable care act and implementation of the maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting ( miechv ) program .

since 2004 , congress has considered home visiting legislation and held related hearings across multiple committees .

some of these efforts have supported selected home visiting models and / or particular aspects of home visiting , such as its role in promoting parent and child education , responding to domestic violence , and reducing child maltreatment .

some home visiting proposals reflected government - wide efforts beginning in the george w. bush administration and extending into the obama administration to expand social programs that work and eliminate those that do not .

education begins at home act the education begins at home act ( s. 2412 ; 108 th congress ) , introduced in 2004 , sought to authorize a stand - alone home visiting program , and would have directed the departments of education and health and human services to collaboratively award grants to support home visiting .

it would have also amended the early head start program to establish standards for home visiting staff .

the bill was not taken up ; however , several similar bills were introduced in subsequent years .

one of these similar bills ( the education begins at home act , h.r .

3628 ; 109 th congress ) was the focus of a hearing by the house education and the workforce committee .

at the hearing , representative osborne said that home visiting can "deliver parent education and family support services directly to parents with young children and aim to offer guidance to parents on how to support their children's development from birth through their enrollment in kindergarten. .

other witnesses , including representatives from two home visiting programs ( parents as teachers and nurse - family partnership ) , testified about the role of home visiting in improving multiple child and family outcomes in education , health , and other domains .

home visiting and domestic violence program in 2006 , the violence against women and department of justice reauthorization act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-162 ) was signed into law .

it authorized $7.0 million each fiscal year for fy2007-fy2011 for the department of justice to develop and implement policies and procedures to help home visitors address the effect of domestic violence on pregnant women as well as young children and their parents .

congress did not appropriate funds for the program , and the violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-4 ) repealed the authorizing language .

supporting evidence - based home visiting to prevent child maltreatment congress subsequently funded a home visiting pilot program that had been proposed by the bush administration in the fy2008 budget request and had a child maltreatment focus .

as part of the request , the administration sought $10 million ( as a set - aside within the discretionary activities account of the child abuse prevention and treatment act , capta ) for competitive grants to expand , upgrade , or develop home visiting programs that have "proven effective models," and to support a national cross - site evaluation to examine factors associated with successful replication or expansion of such models .

to support this initiative , congress provided $10 million in fy2008 and $13.5 million in fy2009 as a set - aside from the capta discretionary activities account .

funding in years 3 through 5 of the initiative was provided under miechv .

this initiative — supporting evidence - based home visiting to prevent child maltreatment ( ebhv ) — was carried out by acf , which awarded cooperative agreements to 17 grantees ( mostly private , nonprofit organizations ; state or local agencies ; or hospitals or medical centers ) in 15 states .

the goals of the initiative were to ( 1 ) support implementation with fidelity to home visiting program models ; ( 2 ) help scale up home visiting models , by replicating the program in a new area , adapting the model for a new population , or increasing enrollment capacity in an existing service area ; and ( 3 ) help sustain the home visiting model beyond the end of the grant period .

ebhv funding was not used to cover the full cost of direct home visiting services ; instead , grantees used other funding sources for such services .

grantees were expected to adopt home visiting models that , as defined by acf , were evidence - based programs .

each grantee worked with one or more implementing agencies to deliver home visiting services to families or served as the agency and provided services directly .

the implementing agencies used one or more of the following five models in carrying out home visiting services: healthy families america , nurse - family partnership ( nfp ) , parents as teachers ( pat ) , safecare , and triple p. in addition to the cooperative agreements , acf awarded funds to mathematica policy research , inc. , and the chapin hall center for children to conduct a cross - site evaluation of the funded programs .

the evaluation found that the grantees generally adhered to standards that measured fidelity to a home visiting model ; however , they often struggled to maintain caseloads and deliver services as intended .

in addition , the grantees participated in activities to build infrastructure and partnerships .

such activities included strengthening fiscal capacity through partnering and fundraising , building community awareness or political support for programs , and evaluating and monitoring programs .

the evaluation found that grantees with greater investment in these activities tended to achieve the initiative's goals .

while the ebhv initiative was underway , the obama administration proposed a new capped entitlement program as part of its fy2010 budget request for grants to states , territories , and tribes to establish and expand evidence - based home visitation programs for low - income mothers and pregnant women .

the program was intended to "create long - term positive impacts for children and their families , as well as generate long - term positive impacts for society as a whole. .

under the proposal , the administration sought to give priority to funding for home visiting models "that have been rigorously evaluated and shown to have positive effects on critical outcomes for families and children. .

the proposal also included provisions to ensure that states and other jurisdictions would adhere to a proven program model and sought to direct some of this funding for technical assistance and program assessment and monitoring .

the administration requested $124 million for an initial year of the program and envisioned a "gradual growth" in the program so that it would reach an estimated 450,000 new families at a cost of $1.8 billion over a 10-year period .

home visiting as part of health care reform at the same time that congress was considering whether to fund the obama administration's initiative , other home visiting proposals were moving forward in the house and the senate .

in june 2009 , the house ways and means subcommittee on income security and family support held a hearing on early childhood home visitation programs , related research , and a bill introduced by members of the subcommittee ( h.r .

2667 ) to establish a home visiting program .

witnesses included researchers , an administrator of state - funded home visitation programs , a former participant and current home visitor , and a nurse consultant .

the witnesses generally supported broader implementation of early childhood home visiting models with a proven record of positive outcomes for families based on rigorous research .

in november 2009 , the house passed the affordable health care for america act ( h.r .

3962 ) .

the bill included two home visiting provisions .

section 1713 specified that the medicaid program support home visits by trained nurses .

this section appeared to draw from the healthy children and families act of 2007 ( h.r .

3024 / s. 1052 ) .

section 1904 sought to provide a program for home visiting , to be funded at $750 million over five years ( fy2010-fy2014 ) .

this section appears to have been drawn primarily from h.r .

2667 , which had been introduced earlier in 2009 .

separate health care reform efforts in the senate culminated in the passage of the patient protection and affordable care act ( h.r .

3590 ) on december 24 , 2009 ; the bill included the miechv program .

h.r .

3590 was taken up by the house on march 21 , 2010 , and was signed into law on march 23 , 2010 , as p.l .

111-148 .

hhs first allocated funding for the miechv program in fy2010 .

as the miechv program was implemented , the ebhv grantees entered into subcontracts with the miechv lead agency in their states , and these states received additional funds from fy2010 through fy2012 to pass through to ebhv grantees .

some of the ebhv grantees received miechv funds to allow them to sustain services beyond the ebhv funding period or to expand services .

however , some grantees were using models that did not meet hhs criteria under the miechv program for being effective and therefore were ineligible for funding .

appendix b. miechv formula funding by state and territory appendix c. timeline for the miechv program appendix d. home visiting models used under the miechv progra .

