in response to vulnerabilities that had arisen during the financial crisis that began in 2007 , congress passed the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) to strengthen financial stability and protect consumers .

as the dodd - frank act and other reforms have been implemented through recent rulemaking by financial regulators , some in congress have claimed that the pendulum has swung too far .

they argue that the additional regulation has resulted in significant regulatory burden , particularly for small banks , that has stymied economic growth and reduced consumers' access to credit .

a frequently heard critique is that the regulations are "one - size - fits - all," and are unduly burdensome to small banks even though they were not the cause of the crisis .

those who are sympathetic to this argument believe that because large banks pose greater risks to the stability of the overall financial system , small banks should be exempted from regulations that might be useful or necessary for large banks .

others , however , view the current regulatory structure as having achieved the appropriate tradeoff between the benefits and costs of regulation , and are concerned that regulatory relief for banks or other financial institutions could negatively affect consumers and market stability .

this report explains the concept of regulatory burden and the different ways it can be manifested .

it analyzes whether small banks are relatively more burdened by regulation than big banks .

to help answer that question , the report looks at the relative treatment of small and large banks in recent major regulatory proposals .

it does not attempt to answer the question of whether small banks face too much or too little regulation in absolute terms , since that depends on policymakers' judgments about balancing financial stability , credit availability , consumer protection , and other objectives .

the report also evaluates rationales for reducing the regulatory burden on small banks relative to large banks , policy approaches to do so , and the potential consequences on other market participants of providing relief to small banks .

congressional debate on regulatory burden often emphasizes issues related to bank size , which will be discussed in detail in the rest of the report .

size is only one of several factors that influences burden , however .

the regulatory burden borne by a bank depends on what rules are applied to it ( rulemaking ) and how those rules are applied ( supervision and enforcement ) .

the factors that determine what rules are applied and how include the following: c harter — because a bank's primary regulator depends on its charter , to the extent that different bank regulators have different practices and policies , the charter will influence the regulatory burden .

however , to reduce disparate treatment between regulators , the occ , fdic , and fed often undertake joint rulemaking and participate in an interagency council , the federal financial institutions examination council ( ffiec ) , established by congress to "prescribe uniform principles and standards for federal examination of financial institutions" and create standardized reporting forms .

ffiec consists of representatives from the occ , fed , fdic , ncua , cfpb , and a state regulator .

state regulators can issue regulations that apply to state banks , as long as they do not conflict with federal law .

state chartered banks have a state and primary federal regulator ( either the fdic or fed ) .

if the bank has a state charter , supervisory examinations can alternate between the state banking regulation and its primary federal regulator .

differences in regulation and regulatory burden between banks and credit unions are a perennial concern of congress , but beyond the scope of this report .

risk profile — not all banks pose the same risk of failure , risk to consumers , and risk to the overall system , so policymakers tailor some regulations and supervisory practices by risk profile in order to reduce regulatory burden .

for example , because small banks with higher supervisory ratings — signaling that they are perceived to be healthier — are , all else equal , less likely to fail , they are examined less frequently and intensely than banks with lower ratings .

business model — certain activities will attract more regulatory scrutiny than others because they are riskier , more complex , pose more risk to consumers or the broader economy , and so on .

different banks offer different types of services and engage in different types of activities ; therefore , some banks will have greater regulatory compliance costs because they are involved in more activities or lines of businesses that require oversight .

in other words , the same activity will require a certain amount of regulatory compliance at any bank that undertakes it , but some banks will undertake more of that activity than others , which will result in proportionately more regulatory burden .

notably , if banks engage in certain activities , such as operating in the securities or derivatives market , it will trigger additional activity - based regulation .

the factors listed above can be correlated to different degrees with size .

size and charter are not closely correlated among the three federal bank regulators , in the sense that there is not a predominantly "big bank" or "small bank" regulator .

each is the primary regulator of at least 100 banks with more than $1 billion in assets and at least 700 banks with less than $1 billion in assets .

in absolute terms , the fdic regulates the most banks over and under $1 billion in assets .

just as there are small and large banks regulated by each bank regulator , size is not the only factor determining whether to charter as a bank or credit union .

most credit unions are small , but there are also over 200 credit unions with more than $1 billion in assets , of which only 5 with more than $10 billion in assets .

there is only one credit union with more than $50 billion in assets .

it is difficult to draw any conclusions about the correlation between size and risk profile because information on supervisory ratings is confidential .

both small and large banks became financially distressed during and after the financial crisis .

looking at the correlation between size and measures such as capital ratios gives an incomplete picture of risk profile .

size is somewhat correlated with business model in terms of the types of activities that large and small banks engage in .

on average , small banks devote more of their activities to the traditional business model of taking deposits and making loans than large banks .

the fdic's definition of community bank can be used as a proxy for a traditional banking business model .

as of the end of 2010 , the fdic found that 92 of 6,286 institutions with less than $1 billion in assets did not meet the fdic's criteria of "community bank," which is defined in such a way that a certain percentage of the banks activities must be lending and deposit taking .

by contrast , 298 of 628 institutions with more than $1 billion in assets did not meet the definition of community banks ; these institutions held $11.3 trillion of $13.3 trillion in total industry assets .

while there is no simple metric for determining the complexity of a bank's business model , a comparison of data from the bank holding company peer reports can be used as an example of the extent to large banks are more involved in more complex activities than small banks .

for example , banks with less than $500 million in assets are less likely than banks with more than $10 billion in assets to have non - bank subsidiaries , such as broker - dealers , use derivatives , guarantee credit derivatives , have foreign activities , or fund themselves with other types of debt than deposits .

as mentioned in the previous section , size is one of the factors that policymakers may consider in deciding whether to apply certain regulations to a bank and how a bank should be supervised .

this section provides an overview of how small banks are regulated compared to larger banks .

some argue that there is a one - size - fits - all model of regulation .

one recent whitepaper opined , "the major flaw of the federal banking regulatory system is that it treats a community bank with $165 million in assets ( the median - sized american bank ) as the same essential creature as jp morgan chase or bank of america. .

echoing a similar sentiment , federal reserve governor daniel tarullo has described banking regulation as historically following a "unitary model," which he describes as a system where the broad principles underlying bank regulation are the same for all banks , regardless of their size and activities .

a unitary approach to bank regulation was justified on the grounds that the basic rationale for safety and soundness regulation is to protect taxpayers in the presence of federal deposit insurance .

in other words , the primary goal of regulation is to minimize the likelihood that a bank failure will require an infusion of federal dollars to make insured depositors whole , regardless of whether the bank is small or large .

after the lessons learned from the financial crisis , however , governor tarullo argues that "the unitary approach of the pre - crisis period has been abandoned" in the regulatory reforms of the last few years .

he states that the dodd - frank act and other reforms created "different categories of banking organizations — largely , but not exclusively , on the basis of total assets — to which different regulatory requirements are to apply. .

part of the rationale for establishing different categories of banks is the acknowledgment that , should larger banks fail , they do not just pose a risk to taxpayers through the deposit insurance fund but also jeopardize the stability of the broader financial system .

because the risks banks pose may differ by size , the regulation those banks face should also differ .

community banks , governor tarullo argues , "will suffer the fallout from systemic problems , [but] are unlikely to cause such problems" and their regulation should reflect their lower level of risk relative to large banks .

governor tarullo does not argue that the existing regulatory approach for small banks is perfectly tailored and even suggests specific regulations that he believes may be applied unnecessarily to small banks , such as the volcker rule .

but , in general , governor tarullo argues that recent reforms have largely differentiated between banks based on size and provided exemptions to smaller banks .

the following assesses the arguments made by governor tarullo and others who argue that small banks have been largely exempt from recent regulatory actions by analyzing whether rulemaking , supervision , and enforcement are different for small and large banks .

as discussed in the last section , a safety and soundness focus on minimizing risk to the taxpayer , which was perceived to be independent of size , favored a unitary model of bank regulation .

governor tarullo highlighted the role of systemic risk in the crisis as a rationale for moving away from the unitary model , described in more detail next .

other possible rationales for moving away from the unitary model follow .

this report has explained how small and large banks are regulated and how that regulation can translate into regulatory burden .

quantifying the magnitude of regulatory burden for banks has been a challenge for researchers , including the fdic , gao , and cfpb .

the fdic's "community banking study" found , in an attempt to quantify the cost of regulatory compliance at their institution , interview participants were asked whether they tracked regulatory compliance costs within their internal cost structure .

all the interview participants indicated that they did not actively track the various costs associated with regulatory compliance , because it is too time - consuming , costly , and is so interwoven into their operations that it would be difficult to break out these specific costs .

in september 2012 , gao reported to congress that "[i]ndustry officials told us that it is difficult to know for sure which provisions [of the dodd - frank act] will impact community banks and credit unions , because the outcome largely depends on how agencies implement certain provisions through their rules , and many of the rules implementing the act have not been finalized. .

since then , gao has issued other reports on the dodd - frank act rulemaking but has not attempted to quantify the regulatory burden on small banks .

a november 2013 cfpb case study of the regulatory burden in the area of consumer protection looked at compliance costs at seven banks of varying size for four regulations .

it found that compliance costs for certain regulations as a percentage of retail operating expense at the two banks in the study with less than $1 billion in assets were 3.9% and 5.6% of retail deposit operating expense , respectively — more than double the percentage for the banks with more than $1 billion in assets .

it costs the smaller banks relatively more to comply than the larger banks .

as the cfpb notes , "seven case studies do not , however , justify broad generalizations — especially about scale effects…" the cfpb report also describes the challenges it faced in analyzing regulatory burden , including that banks "generally do not track their full costs of compliance , and the relevant information is often scattered across several departments and many employees. .

one reason that only incomplete information on regulatory burden exists is because no statute requires regulators to make quantitative estimates for all rules that they issue .

as discussed in the " special consideration in statute for small banks in the rulemaking process " section above , there are three types of statutory requirements that provide some information on regulatory burden: pursuant to 12 u.s.c .

§4802 , banking regulators are generally required to "consider costs" and benefits but do not necessarily have to perform a quantitative cost - benefit analysis .

table 3 summarizes how bank regulators reported costs and benefits for the 14 major rules pursuant to the dodd - frank act .

it shows that regulators did not quantify overall costs or benefits for any of these rules .

the prudential regulators quantified some costs ( while qualitatively discussing benefits ) for two rules , qualitatively discussed costs and benefits for three rules , and crs could not locate any cost - benefit analysis for the other four rules .

the cfpb quantified some costs ( while qualitatively discussing benefits ) for two rules and qualitatively discussed costs and benefits for three rules .

generally speaking , costs and benefits for small banks might be qualitatively discussed in these analyses , but quantitative estimates did not break out effects on small banks .

the regulatory flexibility act requires regulators to perform an assessment only for rules that are determined to have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities .

in their rfa analysis , the regulators use a lower threshold for small entities ( currently , $500 million or less in assets ) than the definition of small bank used by the fdic , fed , or occ .

table 3 summarizes whether the regulators found a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities for the 14 major rules pursuant to the dodd - frank act .

the prudential regulators found no significant impact on small entities for seven rules and could not determine whether there was a significant impact for one rule .

they found that one rule , the basel iii regulatory capital rule , may have a significant impact , estimating that 146 banks with less than $500 million in assets ( out of 5,638 overall ) faced a capital shortfall of $620 million , certain compliance costs of $43,000 per institution , and lost tax benefits totaling $3.4 million per year under the rule when fully phased in .

the cfpb could not rule out that any of the five rules it issued would not have a significant impact on small entities .

in one case , it did not know how many small entities would be affected , and in four other cases , it estimated that more than 3,700 banks or thrifts ( as well as credit unions and non - banks ) with less than $175 million in assets participated in the activity addressed by the rule , although it provided no quantitative estimate of the costs to those firms or how many would be covered by the exemptions or tailoring provided in the rules .

the paperwork reduction act ( p.l .

104-13 ) requires regulators to estimate the hours that banks spend complying with its requests for information .

agencies must report this information to the omb's office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) , which posts it on its website .

although the hours spent complying with regulators' requests for information is just one component of regulatory burden , agencies do not break the data out to distinguish between hours spent by small and large banks , further complicating the effort to estimate the magnitude of regulatory burden for small banks .

in summary , all three of these requirements result in the regulators estimating only partial — if any — costs associated with regulation .

estimates are made before rules are implemented and are generally not revisited after the fact to test their accuracy .

in any case , all of these statutory requirements apply only to the issuance of new rules , which are just one subset of the sources of overall regulatory burden ; there are no statutory requirements for regulators to estimates the costs associated with regulation ( rulemaking , supervision , and enforcement ) as a whole .

because estimates are typically made for individual rules in isolation , there is little understanding of what happens to overall burden when rules are aggregated .

although quantitative assessments may help policymakers understand the magnitude of the regulatory burden associated with new and existing regulations , there are reasonable arguments for why they should not be performed .

in their qualitative assessments , regulators often detail the multiple unknowns that would make a quantitative estimate subject to considerable uncertainty .

regulators issue hundreds of new rules annually , some of which involve relatively minor changes ; quantitative requirements could significantly increase the resources required for rulemaking or potentially slow down the rulemaking process .

regulators have noted the difficulty of performing accurate cost - benefit assessments for some complex rules .

for example , a fed official testified , the challenges ( sic ) is that it's easy to measure the cost because they fall to specific institutions .

it's much harder to measure the benefits because they really accrue to a very broad population .

things like safety and soundness of the banking system or confidence in the payment system .

analyses that include a high degree of uncertainty could potentially be misleading and do more harm than good .

furthermore , the requests for data and the additional information that could be necessary to perform more detailed studies could themselves result in more regulatory burden .

regulators do not regularly report data on the burden stemming from supervision .

sometimes they produce one - time studies , however .

in response to a congressional request , bank regulators' inspectors general conducted studies on the regulatory burden to small banks stemming from compliance with supervisory exams .

from 2007 to 2011 , occ community bank exams typically took 120 days or less ( as they are intended to ) , but sometimes took up to a year , and occasionally took over a year .

the length of exams was slightly longer from 2008 to 2010 , when the most banks were failing .

in 2011 , fdic community bank risk - management exams varied in length from an average of 335 hours to 1,820 hours based on the size of the bank and its supervisory rating .

from 2007 to 2011 , exams of banks with poor supervisory ratings became shorter over time and banks with good supervisory ratings took longer over time .

in addition , the fdic conducts thousands of compliance and a few cra exams annually .

in 2011 , the fdic spent an average of 24 days to 57 days on - site for risk management exams , based on supervisory rating .

fed exams ( not including state - led exams , which took longer ) , averaged 63 days to 79 days between 2007 and 2011 , peaking in 2009 .

although costs cannot be derived directly from hours spent on exams , this data may nevertheless give some indication of regulatory burden caused by meeting with examination staff and uncertainty created while waiting for exam results .

by statute ( 12 u.s.c .

§4806 ) , banks may appeal exam results to the agency ombudsman .

the frequency of appeals might give some indication of bank displeasure with the examination process .

the igs report that banks only formally appealed 22 occ exam results ( informally appealed 24 more ) , 23 fdic exams ( informally appealed 18 more ) , and 12 fed exams ( no informal appeal data ) out of the thousands of exams performed between 2007 and 2011 .

however , banks might not appeal an exam result they thought was unfair if they thought their appeal had no chance of succeeding .

as noted above , many disputes are resolved through the supervisory process , before an exam is completed .

there is no official data on the regulatory burden associated with call reports .

the independent community bankers of america ( icba ) , a trade association representing community banks , conducted a survey , however , which found that "[a]lmost three quarters of respondents stated that the number of hours required to complete the call report had increased over the last ten years .

over one third of respondents indicated a significant increase in hours over this period .

well over three quarters of respondents noted increased costs in call report preparation with almost one third noting that costs increased significantly. .

as noted above , regulators argue that the call reports are already tailored to reduce the burden on small banks .

studies have attempted to estimate the regulatory burden of specific policies , but there is a dearth of empirical evidence on the overall regulatory burden posed by bank regulation .

because there are no official quantitative estimates of — or data sources for — the absolute regulatory burden on the banking system as a whole , it is impossible to provide empirical evidence that gives an overall answer to the two the questions pertinent to this report: ( 1 ) what is the absolute regulatory burden on small banks and how has it changed ? .

and ( 2 ) what is the burden on small banks relative to large banks and how has it changed ? .

if governor tarullo is correct that recent rulemaking has resulted in a de facto shift away from the unitary model , congress may choose to consider what model would best achieve its policy priorities .

rather than discuss the many provisions of bank regulation or supervisory practices that could be modified to provide regulatory relief within the existing system , this section focuses on the different ways that the regulatory system could be structured to account for size , presenting the pros and cons of each approach .

the spectrum of options ranges from regulating banks in the same way regardless of size to a separate regulatory regime for small banks and large banks , with various approaches in between .

this report analyzed the relative burden of small versus large banks and finds that small banks have received accommodations in recent major rules and through various supervisory arrangements and outreach .

regulatory burden has increased for small banks in absolute terms since the recent financial crisis , but arguably not in relative terms compared with larger banks .

for example , 13 of the 14 "major" rules issued by banking regulators pursuant to the dodd - frank act either include an exemption for small banks or are tailored to reduce the cost for small banks to comply .

the remaining rule provided regulatory relief for securities backed by a type of capital frequently issued by small banks .

recent increases in regulatory burden on an absolute but not relative basis may affect the ability of small banks to compete with non - banks , but should not negatively affect their ability to compete with large banks .

this report did not analyze whether the absolute burden is too great because that depends on policymakers' judgments about balancing financial stability , credit availability , consumer protection , and other objectives .

an important distinction drawn by this report is between the concept of regulatory burden and the phrase unduly burdensome .

whereas regulatory burden is about the costs associated with a regulation , unduly burdensome refers to the balance between the benefits and costs of a regulation .

for example , some would consider a regulation to be unduly burdensome if costs are in excess of benefits or if the same benefits could be achieved at a lower cost .

but the mere presence of regulatory burden does not mean that a regulation is unduly burdensome .

overestimating regulatory burden can lead to policies that would repeal or change regulations that may have positive net benefits for consumers , banks , and the broader economy .

underestimating regulatory burden , however , could result in further consolidation in the banking industry , the migration of activity outside the banking system to the shadow banking system , and reduced access and higher cost of credit for rural and underserved areas and small businesses that are customers of small banks .

accurately assessing regulatory burden and determining whether the burden rises to the level of being unduly burdensome , therefore , is important for policymakers to make informed judgments .

quantifying the magnitude of regulatory burden has been a challenge for researchers , however , because banks do not track their compliance costs and regulators do not typically provide estimates of the costs of new rules .

much of the discussion about unduly burdensome regulation has focused on banks because banks bear much of the direct cost of regulation .

in considering regulatory relief proposals , however , policymakers may want to consider not just the benefits of providing relief to small banks , but also the potential positive or negative effects that relief would have on consumers , market stability , and the safety and soundness of the banking system .

in some cases , congressional action is not necessary for small bank relief to occur in the future because regulators often have the authority to establish exemptions and to adjust the tailoring of rules .

without congressional action , however , exemptions and tailoring are likely to continue to occur on an ad hoc and inconsistent basis , for better or worse .

