this program involves work directly on nuclear weapons in the stockpile , such as monitoring their condition ; maintaining them through repairs , refurbishment , life extension , and modifications ; conducting r&d in support of specific warheads ; and dismantlement .

the fy2016 request was $3,187.3 million ; the enacted amount , on a comparable basis , for fy2015 was $2,797.2 million .

the house appropriations committee recommended $3,354.3 million for fy2016 .

the house passed h.r .

2028 , energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 , by a vote of 240-177 , without amendments to the weapons activities section of the bill as reported from committee .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $3,039.5 million for fy2016 .

specific items under dsw include the following .

rdt&e includes five programs .

according to nnsa , they "[focus] on rdt&e efforts to develop and maintain critical capabilities , tools , and processes needed to support science based stockpile stewardship , refurbishment , and continued certification of the stockpile over the long - term in the absence of underground nuclear testing. .

many of these programs have significance for policy decisions .

for example , the science program's goals include improving the ability to assess warhead performance without nuclear testing , improving readiness to conduct nuclear tests should the need arise , and maintaining the scientific infrastructure of the nuclear weapons laboratories .

other programs fund large experimental facilities , such as the national ignition facility at lawrence livermore national laboratory .

rdt&e programs was formerly named campaigns .

the fy2016 request was $1,776.5 million .

h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house , provided $1,774.2 million .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $1,766.3 million .

the omnibus appropriations bill provides $1,818.5 million .

the programs are .

this program used to fund infrastructure and operations at nuclear weapons complex sites .

however , beginning in fy2016 , its main funding elements were material recycle and recovery , recapitalization of facilities , and construction of facilities .

the latter included two controversial and expensive projects , the uranium processing facility ( upf ) at the y - 12 national security complex ( tn ) and the chemistry and metallurgy research replacement ( cmrr ) project , which deals with plutonium , at los alamos national laboratory ( nm ) .

both have been significantly revised over the past several years due to cost growth and schedule slippage .

the fy2016 budget structure transferred certain functions from rtbf to infrastructure and safety , described below .

of the fy2015 appropriation , the amount comparable to fy2016 rtbf was $688.0 million ; the explanatory statement directed nnsa to provide "a ten - year strategic plan that would reduce the deferred maintenance backlog below fiscal year 2014 baseline levels and dispose of unneeded facilities. .

the fy2016 request was $1,054.5 million .

the house appropriations committee recommended consolidating funding for rtbf , infrastructure and safety , and site stewardship into a new category , infrastructure and operations ( i&o ) , for which it recommended $2,228.2 million .

its goal was to eliminate duplication .

it "does not support changing the budget structure each year to conform to internal organizational changes. .

i&o , as recommended by the committee , included , among other things , operation of facilities , maintenance and repair of facilities , and recapitalization .

h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house , provided the amount recommended by the house appropriations committee and did not amend the committee's recommendation on consolidation .

the house appropriations committee expressed its concern about requests for construction funding .

the committee is concerned that there is little accountability for advancing construction projects at the early design stages and that advance funds are being requested to initiate new construction without providing the cost and schedule projections for which the nnsa is accountable .

without this information , the committee cannot determine whether the projects requested are affordable and are being managed appropriately so that it may approve new start authority .

… the committee will consider a request to initiate a new construction start when the department is prepared to provide an accurate multi - year cost and schedule estimate with its budget request .

as part of construction funding , the committee recommended the amounts requested for upf and cmrr , $$430.0 million and $155.6 million , respectively .

h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house , provided the amounts recommended by the committee .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $1,021.1 billion for rtbf .

it recommended the requested amounts for upf and cmrr , in the latter case "to maximize the use of the newly constructed radiological laboratory utility office building [rluob] and reuse laboratory space in pf – 4 to transition plutonium capabilities out of the aging chemistry and metallurgy research [cmr] building by 2019. .

as was noted above , the omnibus appropriations bill adopts the budget structure outlined in the house version of the bill .

within the infrastructure and operations budget area , it provides $430 million for upf and $155.6 million for cmrr .

it also directs nnsa to submit the results of the department's independent cost review of the upf project and a multiyear funding profile with the fy2017 budget request .

infrastructure and safety ( i&s ) , a new program in the fy2016 budget request , included parts of rtbf and another program , site stewardship , described below .

"the mission is to maintain , operate , and modernize" nnsa's infrastructure .

it has five elements: operations of facilities , safety operations , maintenance , recapitalization , and line item construction .

according to nnsa , "together these elements provide a comprehensive approach to arresting the declining state of nnsa infrastructure. .

the fy2016 request was $1,466.1 million ; the comparable fy2015-enacted funding was $1,386.7 million .

while nnsa states that "construction investments will replace obsolete and unreliable facilities and infrastructure," nnsa requested the bulk of fy2016 construction funds , $660.2 million , under rtbf , compared with $42.9 million for i&s construction .

the house appropriations committee recommended $660.1 million for the funds requested under rtbf construction .

as noted in the previous paragraph , the committee recommended consolidating i&s into i&o .

h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house , provided the amount recommended by the committee and did not amend the consolidation provision .

the senate appropriations committee recommended the requested amount for i&s .

the omnibus appropriations bill followed the house lead and appropriated $2,279.1 million for infrastructure and operations .

weapons activities has several smaller programs , including the following .

this program provides for safe and secure transport of nuclear weapons , components , and materials .

it includes special vehicles for this purpose , communications and other supporting infrastructure , and threat response .

the fy2015 comparable enacted amount was $219.0 million ; the fy2016 request was $251.6 million .

the house appropriations committee recommended $232.0 million , and stated , "the budget request included a significant ramp up in the size of the federal workforce , but the nnsa has not provided any information to justify such an increase and reductions in the planned transport of mixed oxide feedstock will reduce requirements. .

h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house , provided the amount recommended by the committee .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $219.0 million .

like the house , it expressed concern over justification: "the budget request proposes a nearly 15% increase in funding for sta [secure transportation asset] , but does not provide adequate justification for the increase. .

the omnibus appropriations bill provides $237.1 million for this program area .

this program "responds to and mitigates nuclear and radiological incidents worldwide and has a lead role in defending the nation from the threat of nuclear terrorism. .

for fy2014 , nnsa proposed transferring this program to defense nuclear nonproliferation "to align all nnsa funding for reducing global nuclear dangers in one appropriation. .

congress rejected this approach ; p.l .

113-76 provided $228.2 million and retained the program in weapons activities .

for fy2015 , nnsa requested $173.4 million , and the house provided $202.9 million .

among other things , the bill provided $25.0 million for certain emergency response - related r&d that had been traditionally funded in weapons activities ; the administration requested no funds in the nuclear counterterrorism incident response program for this r&d .

the senate appropriations committee draft recommended providing the requested amount .

p.l .

113-235 provided $177.9 million , of which $142.6 million "is for emergency response activities to fully support the ninth stabilization city" — an additional city that would receive counterterrorism training and equipment .

the administration requested no funds for this program for fy2016 in weapons activities .

instead , nnsa proposed to "merge the nuclear counterterrorism incident response ( nctir ) and the counterterrorism and counterproliferation ( ctcp ) programs to eliminate confusion about nnsa nuclear counterterrorism programs and activities , change the nctir name to nuclear counterterrorism and incident response program , and move to the defense nuclear nonproliferation ( dnn ) appropriation. .

h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house , provided no funds for fy2016 for this program under weapons activities .

in contrast , the senate appropriations committee provided $234.4 million for nctir under weapons activities , the amount nnsa had requested for it in the dnn account .

the omnibus appropriations bill followed the budget structure of the request and funded this program under the dnn account .

this program "sustain[s] and exercise[s] the u.s. government's ability to understand nuclear terrorism and to counter nuclear device proliferation. .

it conducts "national and international outreach to strengthen nuclear counterterrorism capabilities" and is "a key nexus to coordinate and integrate other nuclear technical counterterrorism efforts existing within the federal government. .

fy2015 was the first year for which nnsa requested funding , $76.9 million , for this program in weapons activities .

the house appropriations committee recommended no funding for this program under weapons activities , maintaining that it and similar programs should be located in dnn instead of weapons activities .

the senate appropriations committee draft recommended providing $70.0 million .

p.l .

113-235 provided $46.1 million .

as just noted , nnsa , in its fy2016 request , proposed moving this and another program to dnn .

h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house , provided no funds for fy2016 for this program under weapons activities .

similarly , the senate appropriations committee recommended no funds for it under weapons activities .

this program has two subprograms .

nuclear materials integration funds "stabilization , consolidation , packaging and disposition of nuclear materials," and maintains a system to track and account for nuclear materials at doe sites and sites licensed by the nuclear regulatory commission .

the minority serving institution partnership "funds research and education enhancements at under - represented colleges and universities in order to increase the number of people with the needed skills and talent to support nnsa's enduring technical workforce. .

for fy2016 , nnsa proposed to move part of this program to infrastructure and safety .

the fy2016 request for the remaining site stewardship program was $36.6 million ; the comparable amount for fy2015 was $27.8 million .

the house appropriations committee recommended no funds for this program under site stewardship ; instead , as noted , it recommended including this program in infrastructure and operations .

h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house , provided no funds for this program under site stewardship and did not amend the committee's recommendation on consolidation .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $36.6 million , the amount requested , for site stewardship .

the omnibus appropriations bill followed the house budget structure and funded this program under the i&o account .

this program provides operations , maintenance , and construction funds for protective forces , physical security systems , personnel security , and the like .

its "core mission is to develop and implement security programs , including protection , control and accountability of materials , as well as the physical security of all nnsa facilities. .

the fy2016 request was $632.9 million ; the comparable amount for fy2015 was $636.1 million .

the house appropriations committee recommended $682.9 million , with the funding above the request intended "to replace security cameras and meet shortfalls anticipated in funding for protective forces at y - 12 and other nnsa sites. .

the committee also recommended $35.0 million to start a security improvements program "that is intended to address the backlog of security projects that must be performed over the next several years .

the nnsa has identified over $2,000,000,000 in security infrastructure upgrades that are needed , but the nnsa has not adequately prioritized these upgrades in its budget request. .

it also expressed concern that nnsa terminated a security improvements program at y - 12 before completing the planned work .

h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house , provided the amounts that the committee recommended .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $657.9 million , with the increase "to meet shortfalls anticipated for the protective forces at y – 12 and other nnsa sites , and the need to replace vital security infrastructure. .

further , "the committee is concerned that the nnsa terminated the y – 12 security improvements project without completing the full scope of work planned. .

the omnibus appropriations bill provides $682.9 million for defense nuclear security and directed that $30 million should be used for the security improvements program that will address the backlog of security projects , as directed in the house report .

this program "is focused on the development of a suite of it initiatives that provide a state - of - the - art technology infrastructure for enabling the nuclear security mission and future nuclear security enterprise shared services. .

elements include cybersecurity , enterprise secure computing , and federal unclassified information technology .

the latter will provide "commodity computing infrastructure" to support a "shift from a traditional , costly desktop support model to a cloud - provisioned virtualized desktop - based solution. .

the fy2016 request was $157.6 million ; the comparable amount for fy2015 was $179.6 million .

the omnibus appropriations bill provides the requested amount .

for many decades , the university of california ( uc ) operated los alamos and lawrence livermore national laboratories .

laboratory employees , as uc employees , could participate in the uc pension plan .

when the operation of the two labs was privatized , the contracts between doe and the new laboratory operators included provisions that mirrored the pension that lab staff who were uc employees when the labs were privatized would have received had the labs remained with uc .

these pensions were larger than those provided to employees hired after privatization .

to make up the difference , nnsa paid into the pension plan for the uc employees .

for weapons activities , the fy2016 request was $283.9 million ; the comparable enacted amount for fy2015 was $307.1 million .

for fy2016 , h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house , provided the requested amount .

 ( nnsa requested an additional amount for legacy contractor pensions under defense nuclear nonproliferation. ) .

the senate appropriations committee recommended the requested amount , and the omnibus appropriations bill provided this amount .

nnsa projects that requests for this program will decline , falling to $87.4 million in fy2019 and fy2020 .

