songwriters are legally entitled to get paid for reproductions and public performances of the notes and lyrics they create ( the musical works ) .

recording artists are entitled to get paid for reproductio ns , distributions , and certain digital performances of the recorded sound of their voices combined with instruments in some sort of medium , such as a digital file , record , or compact disc ( the sound recordings ) .

yet these copyright holders do not have total control over their music .

for example , although taylor swift and her record label , big machine , withdrew her music from the music streaming service spotify in 2014 , a cover version of her album 1989 recorded by the artist ryan adams could be heard on the service .

copyright law allows mr. adams to perform , reproduce , and distribute ms .

swift's musical works under certain conditions as long as he pays ms .

swift a royalty .

thus , as a singer who owns the rights to her sound recordings , ms .

swift can withdraw her own recorded music from spotify , but as a songwriter who owns the rights to her musical works , she cannot dictate how the music service uses other recorded versions of her musical works .

the amount ms .

swift gets paid for both her musical works and her sound recordings depends on market forces , contracts among a variety of private - sector entities , and federal laws governing copyright and competition policy .

congress wrote these laws , by and large , at a time when consumers primarily accessed music via radio broadcasts or physical media , such as sheet music and phonograph records , and when each medium offered consumers a distinct degree of control over which songs they could hear next .

with the emergence of music distribution on the internet , congress updated some copyright laws in the 1990s .

it attempted to strike a balance between combating unauthorized use of copyrighted content — a practice some refer to as "piracy" — and protecting the revenue sources of the various participants in the music industry .

it applied one set of copyright provisions to digital services it viewed as akin to radio broadcasts , and another set of laws to digital services it viewed as akin to physical media .

since that time , however , music distribution has continued to evolve .

in addition to streaming radio broadcasts ( "webcasting" ) and downloading recorded albums or songs , consumers can stream individual songs on demand via music streaming services .

the result , as the u.s .

copyright office has noted , has been a "blurring of the traditional lines of exploitation. .

figure 1 illustrates the evolution of music consumption over the last 40 years .

in 1999 , recording industry revenues reached their peak of $21.3 billion .

that same year , the free napster peer - to - peer file - sharing service was introduced .

in 2003 , after negotiating licensing agreements with all of the major record labels , apple launched the itunes music store to provide consumers a legal option for purchasing individual songs online .

the year 2012 marked the first time the recording industry earned more from retail sales of digital downloads ( $3.2 billion ) than from physical media such as compact discs , cassettes , and vinyl records ( $3.0 billion ) .

apple had approximately a 65% market share of digital music downloads .

after peaking in 2012 , however , sales from digital downloads began to decline , as streaming services such as spotify , which entered the u.s. market in 2011 , became more popular .

facing a mounting threat to its itunes store , apple launched its own subscription streaming music service , apple music , in 2015 .

the popularity of subscription music services has significantly altered music consumption patterns .

according to the recording industry association of america ( riaa ) , the proportion of total u.s. recording industry retail spending coming from webcasting , satellite digital audio radio services and cable services ( digital subscriptions ) , and streaming music services increased from about 9% in 2011 ( out of $7.6 billion total ) to about 67% in 2017 ( out of $8.5 billion total ) .

after 11 consecutive years of declining revenues , consumer spending on music was flat between 2014 and 2015 , grew 10% between 2015 and 2016 , and grew 14% between 2016 and 2017 .

nevertheless , annual spending on music by u.s. consumers , adjusted for inflation , is still nearly two - thirds below its 1999 peak .

these changing consumption patterns affect how much performers , songwriters , record companies , and music publishers get paid for the rights to their music .

under copyright law , creators of musical works and artists who record musical works have certain legal rights .

they typically license those rights to third parties , which , subject to contracts , may exercise the rights on behalf of the composer , songwriter , or performer .

the music industry comprises three distinct categories of interests: ( 1 ) songwriters and music publishers ; ( 2 ) recording artists and record labels ; and ( 3 ) the music licensees who obtain the right to reproduce , distribute , or publicly perform music .

some entities may fall into multiple categories .

in april 2018 , the house of representatives voted 415-0 to pass h.r .

5447 , the music modernization act , as amended .

this bill encompasses provisions of several other bills introduced in the house , including h.r .

4706 , h.r .

1836 , h.r .

3301 , and h.r .

881 .

the bill would create a new nonprofit "mechanical licensing collective," funded by online music services , that would offer and administer broad blanket mechanical licenses for online music services .

it also would change the process of suing for infringement of mechanical licenses , the standards used to set royalty rates for musical works used by preexisting subscription services ( music choice and muzak ) and satellite digital audio services ( siriusxm ) , and the process by which judges in the federal district court for the southern district of new york are assigned to oversee cases related to the ascap and bmi consent decrees .

the bill would extend limited federal copyright protection to sound recordings made prior to february 15 , 1972 , and would create procedures by which producers , mixers , and sound engineers can receive royalty payments for sound recordings , subject to contracts with the featured artists of those recordings .

pursuant to the bill , online music services could pay for a broad blanket mechanical license .

within nine months after enactment , the register of copyrights would be required to designate ( 1 ) a new nonprofit entity created by copyright owners as a "mechanical licensing collective" ( mlc ) and ( 2 ) a new nonprofit entity representing digital music services as a "digital licensee coordinator," subject to certain criteria .

every five years , the register would be required to solicit the views of copyright owners and licensees concerning whether the existing designations should continue .

the mlc would have a 17-member board of directors ( including 14 voting members and 3 nonvoting members ) .

online music services would fund the mlc by paying an assessment established by the crb .

crb would review assessment rates every five years .

among the authorized duties of the mlc would be the following: maintaining a musical works database ; offering and administering blanket licenses , including the collection of usage reports from online music services ; engaging in efforts to identify musical works embodied in particular sound recordings and locating the copyright owners of those works ; administering a process by which copyright owners can claim ownership of musical works ; and initiating and participating in proceedings before the copyright office and the crb .

the mlc would be authorized to provide administrative services with respect to voluntary licenses that include the right of public performance in musical works .

the mlc would be responsible for collecting and distributing royalties from online music services to rights holders .

songwriters would receive at least 50% of all royalties for unmatched works .

the mlc would be prohibited from negotiating royalty rates or royalty terms and conditions on behalf of any party , and would not be permitted to grant licenses for the right of public performances of musical works .

in addition , the mlc would be prohibited from engaging in government lobbying activities .

among the authorized duties of the digital licensing coordinator would be the following: establishing a governance structure , membership criteria , and any dues to be paid by its members ; engaging in efforts to enforce notice and payment obligations with respect to the administrative assessment ; initiating and participating in proceedings before the crb to establish the administrative assessment rates ; initiate and participate in proceedings before the copyright office with respect to the coordinators' activities ; maintain records of its activities .

the digital licensing collective would be prohibited from engaging in any government lobbying activities .

failure to provide monthly usage reports or royalties would put an online music service in default of the blanket license .

an online music service could seek review in federal district court , if the service believed the collective improperly terminated a blanket license .

a person could bring a claim in a federal district court for an issue not adequately resolved by the mlc's board of directors or an mlc committee .

copyright owners of musical works would be prohibited from suing an online music service that obtains and complies with the terms of a valid blanket license for infringing their reproduction and distribution rights .

if a musical works copyright owner filed a lawsuit filed after january 1 , 2018 , against an online music service that has allegedly engaged in unauthorized reproduction or distribution of a musical work prior to the blanket "license availability date" ( defined by the legislation as the next january 1 following the expiration of the two - year period beginning on the enactment date of the music modernization act ) , the copyright owner could recover only royalties owed under the new system .

the copyright owner could not recover damages or other remedies that are normally available for infringement , provided that the online music service could show that it has complied with certain specified requirements , such as the use of good - faith , commercially reasonable efforts to identify and locate the copyright owner of musical work ( s ) .

the crb would be required to use the "willing buyer / willing seller" standard rather than the section 801 ( b ) ( 1 ) factors in setting royalty rates for the reproduction and distribution of musical works and the public performance of sound recordings by preexisting subscription services ( music choice and muzak ) and satellite digital audio services ( siriusxm ) .

judges in the southern district of new york , when setting rates for public performances of musical works by online services , satellite digital audio services , and other digital subscription services ( eg , musicchoice and muzak ) , would be allowed to consider rates for public performances of sound recordings .

the inclusion of sound recording public performance rates would not apply , however , to the setting of rates for public performances of music works by broadcast radio stations .

the current system of assigning judges in the southern district of new york to oversee cases related to the ascap and bmi consent decrees would change .

currently , one judge is permanently assigned to all ascap cases , and another is assigned to all bmi cases .

in lieu of the current system , the district court would use a random process to determine which judge shall hear rate setting cases .

however , the original judge ( s ) who oversees the interpretation of consent decree ( s ) would not be permitted to oversee any rate proceedings .

according to the house judiciary committee report , this change is not a reflection of any past actions by the southern district of new york , but a reflection of the committee's belief that the rate decisions should be assigned on a random basis to judges not involved in the underlying consent decrees .

creators of sound recordings made prior to february 15 , 1972 , but on or after january 1 , 1923 , would be entitled to receive payments from digital music services that publicly perform those sound recordings , in addition to other legal remedies such as damages , injunctions , and attorney's fees .

this entitlement under federal law would be in addition to any remedies available under state copyright law protections for these recordings , which would remain unchanged .

in order to be entitled to receive statutory damages or attorney's fees for pre - 1972 sound recordings , rights owners must file certain information with the copyright office that identifies the sound recordings .

the copyright office must also issue regulations regarding the form , content , and procedures for the filing of ( 1 ) sound recording identification information by rights owners ( within 180 days after the bill's enactment ) and ( 2 ) contact information by licensees of sound recording public performance ( within 30 days of the bill's enactment ) .

this federal protection for pre - 1972 sound recordings would apply until february 15 , 2067 .

producers , mixers , and sound engineers would have statutory right to seek payment of their royalties via a nonprofit collective designated by the crb when they have a letter of direction from a featured artist .

the entity in charge of the distributions must be a nonprofit collective designated by the crb .

the collective must adopt and reasonably implement a policy that provides for such distributions .

it also modifies 17 u.s.c .

§114 ( g ) by striking "agent" and substituting "nonprofit collective designated by the [crb]. .

as discussed above , the crb in 2007 stated that a collective need not be formally recognized by the crb as a designated collective before it can have any involvement in the royalty distribution process .

the crb added that pursuant to sections 112 ( e ) and 114 ( e ) , copyright owners and performers may designate collectives for the receipt of royalties .

legislators have introduced several additional measures related to the music industry .

in january 2017 , senator john barrasso introduced s.con.res .

6 and representative michael conaway introduced h.con.res .

13 , supporting the local radio freedom act .

the resolutions declare that congress should not impose any new performance fee , tax , royalty , or other charge relating to the public performance of sound recordings on a local radio station for over - the - air transmissions , or on any business for such public performance of sound recordings .

in april 2017 , representative issa introduced the performance royalty owners of music opportunity to earn act of 2017 ( promote act of 2017 ) , h.r .

1914 .

the bill would give copyright owners of sound recordings the exclusive right to withdraw their music from broadcast radio stations .

broadcast radio stations may publicly perform sound recordings without copyright owners' permission if ( 1 ) they pay royalties identical to those paid under the statutory license rates determined by the crb for eligible nonsubscription transmission services that apply to radio streaming and webcasts ; ( 2 ) the broadcast is of a religious service , by an educational terrestrial radio station , or by a low - power fm radio station ; or ( 3 ) the broadcast is an incidental use .

also in july 2017 , representative jim sensenbrenner introduced the transparency in music licensing and ownership act , h.r .

3350 .

the bill would direct the register of copyrights to create and maintain a searchable database for musical works and sound recordings .

the bill would also restrict remedies available to copyright owners if they fail to provide or maintain the minimum information required in the database .

in october 2017 , representative hakeem jeffries introduced the copyright alternative in small - claims enforcement ( case ) act of 2017 , h.r .

3945 .

the bill would establish a copyright claims board , an alternative forum to u.s. district courts , for copyright owners to protect their work from infringement .

participation would be voluntary .

the board would be housed within the copyright office with jurisdiction limited to civil copyright cases capped at $30,000 in damages .

in may 2018 , senator ron wyden introduced the accessibility for curators , creators , educators , scholars , and society ( access ) to recordings act , s. 2933 .

the bill would provide federal copyright protection for sound recordings made prior to february 15 , 1972 , enabling rights holders to , among other things , receive payments from digital services that publicly perform their works , while preempting state copyright protection .

during a limited three - year window beginning on the effective date of the bill , in order to receive statutory damages or attorney's fees for infringement of their copyright , pre - 1972 sound recording copyright owners would have to provide timely notice to the alleged infringer of the sound recording's federal copyright registration and the alleged infringement of such copyright .

however , if the alleged infringement has ceased as of the date on which the copyright owners bring such action , the owners would not be entitled to receive statutory damages or attorney's fees .

similar to sound recordings created after february 15 , 1972 , sound recordings made prior to this date would enter the public domain either 95 years after they were released or 120 years after they were recorded , whichever comes first .

works recorded between 1923 and 1930 would be protected until december 31 , 2025 , only if "the copyright owner engages in normal commercial exploitation" of the sound recording , complies with certain regulations that the register of copyrights may issue , and notifies the register of such compliance and commercial exploitation ; if these requirements are not satisfied , such recordings enter the public domain .

