federal law requires the president to submit an annual budget request to congress no later than the first monday in february .

the budget informs congress of the president's overall federal fiscal policy based on proposed spending levels , revenues , and deficit ( or surplus ) levels .

the budget request lays out the president's relative priorities for federal programs , such as how much should be spent on defense , education , health , and other federal programs .

the president's budget also may include legislative proposals for spending and tax policy changes .

although the president is not required to propose legislative changes for those parts of the budget that are governed by permanent law ( i.e. , mandatory spending ) , such changes generally are included in the budget .

president obama submitted his fy2016 budget request to congress on february 2 , 2015 .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) is the division of the department of health & human services ( hhs ) responsible for administering medicare , medicaid , and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

cms also is responsible for administering the private health insurance programs established in the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

cms is the largest purchaser of health care in the united states , with medicare and federal medicaid expenditures accounting for almost 30% of the total national health expenditures in 2013 .

in fy2016 , cms estimates 126 million individuals will be covered by medicare , medicaid , or chip .

this report summarizes the president's budget request for each of the following sections of the cms budget: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , chip , state grants and demonstrations , private health insurance protections and programs , the center for medicare & medicaid innovation , and program management .

then , for each legislative proposal included in the president's budget , this report provides a description of current law and the president's proposal .

the president's budget includes legislative proposals for the following sections of cms: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , chip , state grants and demonstrations , and program management .

at the end of each of these sections , a table summarizes the administration's estimates of costs or savings associated with each legislative proposal .

the cms budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending .

however , a vast majority of cms spending is mandatory , such as medicare benefit spending and grants to states for medicaid .

table 1 shows the president's proposed fy2016 budget for cms .

current law: the president's budget projects that under current law cms mandatory and discretionary net outlays would total $957.4 billion in fy2016 , which is an increase of $70.6 billion , or 8.0% , over the estimated net outlays for fy2015 .

adjusted baseline: the president's fy2016 budget would increase baseline medicare spending by assuming medicare payments for physician services will remain at current levels rather than decrease significantly according to the sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) formula under current law .

the president's budget estimates this adjustment will increase cms's net outlays by $5.3 billion in fy2015 and $8.8 billion in fy2016 .

with this adjustment , cms's total net outlays are estimated to be $966.2 billion in fy2016 .

legislative proposals: the president's fy2016 budget includes a number of legislative proposals for medicare , medicaid , program integrity , chip , state grants and demonstrations , and program management .

the administration estimates that if these legislative proposals are implemented , cms's total net outlays would increase by $5.1 billion in fy2015 and a net of $5.4 billion in fy2016 .

total net outlays: with the medicare physician payment adjustment , the estimated impact of the legislative proposals , and the estimated savings from program integrity activities ( $0.9 billion ) , the president's budget estimates cms's net outlays would be $970.8 billion in fy2016 , which is an increase of $73.6 billion , or 8.2% , over the estimated net outlays for fy2015 .

the cms budget is divided into the following sections: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , chip , state grants and demonstrations , private health insurance protections and programs , the center for medicare & medicaid innovation , and program management .

a description of each of these sections appears below , along with a summary of the president's budget proposals for each section .

the president's fy2016 budget contains a number of proposals that would impact the cms budget .

some of these proposals are program expansions , and others are designed to reduce federal spending .

for each proposal , this report provides a description of current law and the president's proposal .

this report groups these legislative proposals by the following program areas: medicare , medicaid , program integrity , chip , state grants and demonstrations , and program management .

a table at the end of each of these sections summarizes the administration's estimates of costs or savings associated with each legislative proposal and classifies each proposal as new , modified from the president's fy2015 budget , or repeated from the president's fy2015 budget .

the appendix includes a list of acronyms that are used throughout the legislative proposal sections .

the program management portion of the cms budget includes funding for the administration of medicare , medicaid , chip , and other cms activities .

the program management activities include both discretionary and mandatory appropriations .

under current law , the mandatory program management funding ( $0.1 billion ) was established by the following five laws: the aca , arra , the medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ( mippa ; p.l .

110-275 ) , pama , and the improving medicare post - acute care transformation act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-185 ) .

the president's budget would increase mandatory funding for program management by $0.4 billion for implementation of the mandatory health care proposals in the president's budget .

cms plans to use this funding to implement systems changes and process improvements needed to generate additional savings , improve efficiency and enhance program integrity in a timely manner .

this proposal was included in the president's fy2015 budget .

in addition , the president's budget would increase mandatory funding for program management by $0.6 billion to implement the reform medicare physician payments and accelerate physician participation in high - quality and efficient health care delivery systems ( discussed in " medicare legislative proposals . .

this proposal was not included in the president's fy2015 budget .

the administration estimates these two proposals would cost $1.0 billion over the next 10 years .

under current law , two provisions authorize specified quality and performance measurement duties for a contracted consensus - based entity .

section 183 of mippa ( section 1890 of the social security act ) requires the secretary to have a contract with a consensus - based entity ( eg , the national quality forum ) to carry out specified performance - improvement and quality - measurement duties .

these duties include , among others , priority setting , measure endorsement , measure maintenance , convening multi - stakeholder groups to provide input on the selection of quality measures and national priorities , and annual reporting to congress .

section 3014 of the aca added new duties for the consensus - based entity and required the secretary to establish a pre - rulemaking process to select quality measures for use in federal health programs .

this process involves duties shared between the consensus - based entity and the secretary and includes gathering multi - stakeholder input ; making measures under consideration available to the public , transmitting the input of multi - stakeholder groups to the secretary , and publishing the rationale for the use of any quality measure in the federal register .

under current law , funding for these sections will expire on march 31 , 2015 .

the president's budget would extend funding for the consensus - based entity to carry out the duties established under both section 183 of mippa ( section 1890 of the social security act ) and section 3014 of the aca ( section 1890a of the social security act ) .

it would provide $30 million for each fiscal year from fy2016 through fy2018 , with funds available until expended .

the proposal does not specify the allocation of funding between the duties in the two sections .

this proposal was included in the president's fy2015 budget .

the administration estimates this proposal would cost $90 million over the next 10 years .

section 1891 of the social security act requires medicare hhas as a condition of participation to comply with certain requirements , such as quality of care and safety standards .

to verify an hha's compliance with medicare's conditions of participation , cms contracts with each state survey agency to conduct a recertification survey every three years .

hhas that are out of compliance can be cited for deficiencies and face intermediate sanctions , such as directed plans of correction and temporary management changes .

beginning july 1 , 2014 , intermediate sanctions for noncompliant hhas included suspension of medicare payments for new patient admissions and civil monetary penalties .

unless otherwise specified , medicare law requires that civil monetary penalties levied and collected are returned to the medicare trust funds .

however , section 6111 of the aca permitted the secretary to retain a portion of civil monetary penalties levied against noncompliant snfs to support initiatives that improve the quality of snf care .

the president's budget would allow civil monetary penalties collected from hhas to be retained and invested for activities to improve the quality of care of patients receiving home health services .

this proposal was included in the president ' s fy2015 budget .

the administration estimates these two proposals would cost $10 million over the next 10 years .

under the federal payment levy program , the internal revenue service and the department of the treasury collect overdue taxes and non - tax debts through a continuous levy on certain federal payments disbursed by the financial management service , including medicare fee - for - service payments .

cms may reduce federal payments subject to the levy by 15% , or by the exact amount of the tax owed if it is less than 15% of the payment .

cms also may reduce federal payments subject to the non - tax levy by 100% , or by the exact amount of the non - tax debt owed if it is less than 100% of the payment .

the president's budget would authorize cms to assess a fee to offset the administrative costs of the federal payment levy program .

the department of the treasury would continue to receive the full amount of the levy , and medicare providers would be required to pay cms fees to cover administrative costs for operating the federal payment levy program , which are estimated to be $2 million in fy2016 .

this proposal was included in the president ' s fy2015 budget .

the administration estimates this proposal would have no budgetary impact over the next 10 years .

if these program management proposals are implemented , the president's budget estimates that spending for program management would increase by $0.1 billion in fy2016 and by a cumulative $1.1 billion over the next 10 years .

table 8 shows the estimated cost / savings for each legislative proposal in program management .

aca: the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) aco: accountable care organizations als: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis amp: average manufacturers' price arra: the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) asp: average sales price bba97: balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-33 ) cah: critical access hospital chip: state children's health insurance program chipra: children's health insurance program reauthorization act ( p.l .

111-3 ) cms: centers for medicare & medicaid services ct: computed tomography dme: durable medical equipment dra: deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) dsh: disproportionate share hospital epsdt: early and periodic screening , diagnostic and treatment esrd: end - stage renal disease fda: food and drug administration fpl: federal poverty level gao: government accountability office gdp: gross domestic product hcbs: home - and community - based services hcfac: health care fraud and abuse control hha: home health agency hhs: u.s. department of health & human services ipab: independent payment advisory board ipia: improper payments information act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-300 ) irf: inpatient rehabilitation facility lis: low - income subsidy ltch: long - term care hospital ma: medicare advantage ma - pd: medicare advantage plans with a prescription drug component medpac: medicare payment advisory commission mfcu: medicaid fraud control unit mip: medicaid integrity program mippa: medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-275 ) mma: medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-173 ) mri: magnetic resonance imaging oig: department of health & human services office of inspector general pace: program of all - inclusive care for the elderly pama: protecting access to medicare act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-93 ) paygo: pay - as - you - go pdp: prescription drug plans pps: prospective payment system qi: qualified individuals rac: recovery audit contractors sgr: sustainable growth rate snf: skilled nursing facility ssi: supplemental security income tma: transitional medical assistanc .

