the federal government plays a role in the management of sex offenders .

in a law enforcement capacity , it enforces federal laws involving sexual abuse , online predatory offenses , or other related federal crimes .

in addition , congress has enacted legislation that encourages the development of state sex offender registries , urges states to punish recalcitrant sex offenders , and induces state and local law enforcement to make certain information on sex offenders public , and has taken other steps involving the registration of sex offenders and notification of the community .

federal legislation affecting sex offender policy has largely centered on sex offender registration and notification , and therefore they are the focus of this report .

this report begins with a brief background on sex offender crime and policy in the united states , followed by a description of the role of the federal government in sex offender registration and notification .

it concludes with a discussion of select issues on which congress may exercise additional oversight or address through legislation .

"sex offender" is a general term used to describe an individual who has been convicted of a crime involving a sexual act .

researchers have developed classifications of sex offenders based on offense patterns and types of victims and offenses ; these classifications include rapists , child abusers , internet offenders , and female sexual offenders , among others .

in the united states , sex offender policy refers to how the government handles sex offenders both pre - and post - conviction ; however , it is how jurisdictions manage sex offenders post - conviction , in particular after they have served sentences for crimes committed , that is a primary focus of policymakers and the public .

sex offenders are subject to a number of different management strategies including civil commitment , residence restrictions , registration and notification , and other policies aimed at preventing sexual offending .

as mentioned , federal legislation on this issue has largely focused on sex offender registration and notification .

while sex offense investigations and sex offender management are primarily state and local criminal justice issues , the federal government plays a significant role in sex offender registration and notification as well as other sex offender management issues not discussed in this report .

aside from its role in processing federal and military sex offenders ( see " issues with registration of sex offenders in the military " ) , the federal government addresses sex offender registration and notification in multiple ways .

the federal government ( 1 ) sets requirements and baseline standards for states for sex offender registration and notification , ( 2 ) provides assistance to states via grants and law enforcement support in tracking down noncompliant offenders , ( 3 ) maintains a public national website that provides information on registered sex offenders , ( 4 ) maintains a national sex offender registry for assisting law enforcement , and ( 5 ) receives and transmits information on the international travel of sex offenders .

congress may decide to address a number of issues currently associated with sex offender registration and notification in the united states .

these issues include notification of offenders' international travel , issues with registration of sex offenders in the military , states' noncompliance with requirements of sorna , and the effectiveness of sorna .

as mentioned , the usms , usncb , and ice work together to keep track of registered sex offenders' international travel .

a 2013 gao study points out that "none of these sources provides complete or comprehensive information on registered sex offenders leaving or returning to the united states. .

another issue is that foreign officials do not always keep track of when registered sex offenders return to the united states .

according to the gao study , the fbi is working to address international notification issues by developing a process to automatically inform u.s .

marshals and relevant jurisdictions ( where the offender is registered ) that the offender is traveling , so long as the offender's information is queried at the port of entry .

gao pointed out , however , that "because ice has not requested to receive the automated notifications , ice will not be notified of registered sex offenders who leave the country via a land port of entry whose biographical information is queried. .

congress may move to address this issue through additional oversight of these federal agencies or through legislative means .

of note , in january 2015 the house passed the international megan's law to prevent demand for child sex trafficking ( h.r .

515 ) ; if enacted , this bill would address some of the issues cited above .

among other things , it would direct the secretary of homeland security to establish "the angel watch center" within ice to receive and transmit information on travel by child - sex offenders and establish a system to maintain and archive all relevant information , including decisions not to transmit notification abroad and responses of destination countries to notifications .

these actions would be seemingly duplicative of what is underway at doj and dhs ; however , as gao notes in its 2013 report , the three agencies currently involved in notification of foreign travel do not consistently share information with each other , and as a result "usncb and ice were not able to notify their foreign counterparts about a large number of registered sex offenders traveling internationally from august to september 2012 , and some of the notifications were not as comprehensive as possible. .

military sex offense convictions trigger registration requirements as well ; however , there is not a separate registry for federal and military sex offenders .

individuals convicted of military sex offenses must register in the jurisdictions where they reside , work , and / or attend school following their release from incarceration or within three days of sentencing if they are not incarcerated .

under federal law , federal and military correctional authorities are required to notify relevant jurisdictions of the release of these offenders into their communities .

a recent media investigation that involved the review of over 1,300 military sex offenders' cases revealed that 242 failed to register .

in some cases , it appears the military did not notify jurisdictions about offenders being released into their communities .

congress may choose to address this issue through additional oversight over the department of defense ( dod ) or through legislative means .

one option may be to create a separate registry for military offenders .

of note , a bill has been introduced in the 114 th congress ( h.r .

956 ) that would require dod to create and maintain a sex offender registry for members of the military .

as mentioned , the majority of states have not complied with requirements of sorna .

some states have officially stated their reasons for not complying ; these include , but are not limited to , the projected cost to implement sorna , disagreement with the sorna requirement to register juveniles , and a belief that the state's registration and notification system is better than the sorna design .

as mentioned , several states have opted to forego 10% of their jag funds due to unwillingness to comply with sorna .

for example , texas cited a host of reasons for declining to comply with the law , including "sorna's oversimplified registration and publication requirements , which apply based solely on the particular criminal offense , fail to accommodate for texas's more appropriately tailored future risk assessments," and an estimation that "implementation of all sorna's requirements would cost texas more than 30 times the amount of the federal funds that the federal government has threatened to withhold from texas if it fails to comply. .

texas , new york , and other states object to sorna's requirement to register juveniles as sex offenders absent of a judge's exercise of discretion to do so .

the state of new york's division of criminal justice services stated that "new york has a long standing public policy of treating juvenile offenders differently from adult offenders so that juveniles have the best opportunity of rehabilitation and re - integration .

the federal requirement that juveniles be placed on the sex offender registry under sorna is in direct conflict with that public policy. .

of note , while texas has chosen to forego a percentage of its jag funds , new york and multiple other noncompliant states have not lost a percentage of their jag funds and instead apply each year for reallocation of the funding penalty "to work solely towards furthering sorna implementation activities and efforts. .

in considering states' noncompliance and objections to sorna , congress may consider the utility of standardizing registration and notification across the states and the effectiveness of sorna policy .

some researchers have questioned whether the sorna classification scheme is the best option for states .

one four - state study of sex offenders indicated that sorna's tier classification "is likely to result in a system that is less effective in protecting the public than the classification systems currently implemented in the states studied" and encouraged broader inclusion of "evidence - based models of sex offender risk assessment and management. .

another study points out that enactment of sorna "would not only cost states more money than they would lose if they were not to enact it , but also that such enactment would unlikely increase public safety. .

gao identified mixed results: it found that jurisdictions reported both positive and negative effects of sorna implementation .

some stakeholders reported enhanced information sharing on registered sex offenders , while others reported that implementation increased workloads and caused difficulties for offenders in their reintegration to the community .

gao also noted that no study has evaluated the effect of sorna implementation on public safety .

congress may address these issues through changes to sorna .

for example , congress may opt to remove the penalty for noncompliance with sorna , leave it as is , or increase the penalty for noncompliance .

alternatively , congress may decide that standardization of registration and notification systems among the states is not necessary to public safety .

in making this decision , lawmakers may wish to require a scientific evaluation of how sorna implementation has impacted public safety .

congress may address any of the issues cited in this report through reauthorization of the adam walsh act .

authorization for appropriations under this act expired in 2009 .

should congress wish to reauthorize certain programs under the adam walsh act and / or amend it ( and sorna ) , it may elect to do so through reauthorizing the act or via other legislative means .

