t he manner in which staff are deployed within an organization may reflect the mission and priorities of that organization .

in the house of representatives , employing authorities hire staff to carry out duties in member - office , committee , leadership , and other settings .

the extent to which staff in those settings change may lend insight into the work of the house over time .

some of the insights that might be taken from staff levels include an understanding of the division of congressional work between members working individually through their personal offices , or collectively , through committee activities ; the relationship between committee leaders and chamber leaders , which could have implications for the development and consideration of legislation , the use of congressional oversight , or deployment of staff ; and the extent to which specialized chamber administrative operations have grown over time .

this report provides staffing levels in house member , committee , leadership , and other offices since 1977 .

no house publication appears to officially and authoritatively track the actual number of staff working in the chambers by office or entity .

data presented here are based on staff listed by chamber entity ( offices of members , committees , leaders , officers , officials , and other entities ) in telephone directories published by the house .

table 1 in the " data tables " section below provides data for staff listed in house directories through 2016 .

data for house staff listed as joint committee employees on panels that met in the 114 th congress ( 2015-2016 ) are provided in table 7 .

this report provides data based on a count of staff listed in house telephone directories published since 1977 .

like most sources of data , telephone directory listings have potential benefits and potential drawbacks .

telephone directories were chosen for a number of reasons , including the following: telephone directories published by the house are an official source of information about that institution , and are widely available ; presumably , the number of directory listings closely approximates the number of staff working for the house ; while arguably not their intended purpose , the directories provide a consistent breakdown of house staff by internal organization at a particular moment in time ; and the directories afford the opportunity to compare staff levels at similar moments across a period of decades .

at the same time , however , data presented below should be interpreted with care for a number of reasons , including the following: there is no way to determine whether all staff working for the house are listed in the chamber's telephone directories .

if some staff are not listed , relying on telephone directories is likely to lead to an undercount of staff .

it is not possible to determine if those staff who are listed were actually employed by the house at the time the directories were published .

if the directories list individuals who are no longer employed by the house , then relying on them is likely to lead to an overcount of staff .

the extent to which the criteria for inclusion in the directories for the house have changed over time cannot be fully determined .

some editions of the house's directories do not always list staff in various entities the same way .

this may raise questions regarding the reliability of telephone directory data as a means for identifying congressional staff levels within the house over time .

some house staff may have more than one telephone number , or be listed in the directory under more than one entity .

as a consequence , they might be counted more than once .

this could lead to a more accurate count of staff in specific entities within the house , but multiple listings may also lead to an overcount of staff working in the chamber .

chamber directories may reflect different organizational arrangements over time for some entities .

this could lead to counting staff doing similar work in both years in different categories , or in different offices .

a random sample of house member offices used to develop an estimate of member office staff working in washington , dc , and discussed in greater detail below , may or may not be representative of the entire population of house member offices .

the extent to which the sample is representative of the population from which it is drawn will determine the accuracy of the estimated data for house member offices .

while it is unlikely that a full count would yield significantly different results , it is a possibility .

since 1977 , the number of staff working for the house has grown , though there has been a decrease in recent years .

overall , there have been increases in the number of staff working in chamber leadership offices , and larger increases in the staffing of chamber officers and officials .

staff have shifted from committee settings to leadership settings or the personal offices of members .

some of these changes may be indicative of the growth of the house as an institution , or the value the chamber places on its various activities .

one example that may be an indication of institutional development arguably is found in the growth of the number and percentage of staff working in leadership and officers and officials offices , even though that growth has slowed recently .

a potential explanation for these changes may be found in what some might characterize as an ongoing professionalization and institutionalization of congressional management and administration .

some note that as organizations such as governing institutions develop , they identify needs for expertise and develop specialized practices and processes .

in congress , some of those areas of specialization arguably include supporting the legislative process through the drafting of measures , oversight and support of floor activities , and the management of legislation in a bicameral , partisan environment .

another potential explanation related to a more institutionalized , professionalized congress could be the demands for professional management and support .

this could arise as a result of congressional use of communications technologies , and the deployment of systematic , professionalized human resources processes , business operations , and financial management .

consequently , increased specialized support of congressional legislative and administrative activities may explain increases among staff working for chamber leaders , and officers and officials .

in another example , the distribution of staff working directly for members has shifted from committee settings to personal office settings .

house committee staff has decreased .

this may represent a shift from collective congressional activities typically carried out in committees ( including legislative , oversight , and investigative work ) to individualized activities typically carried out in members' personal offices ( including direct representational activities , constituent service and education , and political activity ) .

