i n united states v. windsor , the u.s. supreme court held that section 3 of the defense of marriage act ( doma ) was unconstitutional , finding , in part , that it violated the constitution's equal protection and substantive due process guarantees .

section 3 had required that marriage be defined as the union of one man and one woman for the purpose of federal enactments .

in windsor , the plaintiff and her late spouse had legally married in canada but resided in new york , a state that did not legally recognize same - sex marriage at the time of her suit .

under doma , the estate of the plaintiff's late spouse could not claim the unlimited marital deduction for the purposes of the federal estate tax , requiring the estate to pay the $363,053 owed in taxes .

the supreme court relied on the principles of federalism , equal protection , and substantive due process to strike down section 3 of doma , stating: no legitimate purpose overcomes the purpose and effect to disparage and to injure those whom the state , by its marriage laws , sought to protect in personhood and dignity .

by seeking to displace this protection and treating those persons as living in marriages less respected than others , the federal statute is in violation of the fifth amendment .

therefore , according to the court , federal statutes that refer to a marriage for federal purposes should be interpreted as applying equally to legally married same - sex couples .

the court did not address section 2 of doma , which allows individual states to refuse recognition of same - sex marriages .

in response to the windsor decision , the social security administration ( ssa ) has started processing old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) applications for some claimants in a same - sex marriage .

oasdi is commonly known as social security .

eligibility for spousal benefits depends on marital status as defined by the state .

however , the definition of marriage for the purposes of social security determinations remains in flux as state legislatures and courts continue to change and interpret these laws .

it has been reported that ssa is currently working with the department of justice on interpreting the windsor decision and state laws regarding same - sex marriage .

this report addresses a number of frequently asked questions regarding the eligibility of same - sex couples for social security benefits and the interpretation of state marriage laws .

these questions include those relating to general eligibility and the application process for same - sex couples and those in other types of legal relationships .

this report begins with an overview of social security and the basic eligibility requirements for benefits .

the report then addresses current ssa policy with regards to same - sex couples .

the report then discusses various legal and policy issues relating to social security and same - sex couples in a question - and - answer format .

this report will be updated as necessary to reflect major changes in law and policy .

ssa is currently processing social security benefit claims in which entitlement depends on a same - sex marriage or nonmarital legal relationship , such as a civil union or domestic partnership .

claimants whose familial connection to the number holder has been established via a recognized same - sex marriage or nonmarital legal relationship and who meet all other requirements are eligible to receive family benefits .

as noted earlier , section 216 ( h ) of the social security act allows ssa to approve family benefit claims only if the determination of family status is deemed valid under state law .

because of differences in marriage and inheritance laws across states , ssa is currently unable to approve all claims in which entitlement or eligibility is affected by a same - sex marriage or nonmarital legal relationship .

ssa determines which same - sex marriage claims can be approved based on guidance provided by the department of justice ( doj ) in conjunction with the agency's own counsel .

table 1 lists the states that ssa recognizes as having laws that allow same - sex marriage ( as of march 20 , 2015 ) .

ssa processes benefit claims from individuals in these states based on the date ( s ) that these states permitted or recognized same - sex marriage .

similarly , table 2 lists the states with nonmarital legal relationships that ssa recognizes as meeting the family status requirements under section 216 ( h ) of the social security act ( as of january 26 , 2015 ) .ssa processes benefit claims from individuals in these states based on the date ( s ) that these states permitted or recognized certain nonmarital legal relationships .

this section answers common questions regarding same - sex couples and social security .

specifically , it discusses questions about same - sex marriage and ( 1 ) the basic eligibility criteria for social security family benefits ; ( 2 ) how different jurisdictions and legal relationships affect eligibility ; and ( 3 ) ssa's application process .

this section is not intended to address every eligibility contingency concerning same - sex marriage .

yes , if the applicant meets all of the other requirements for entitlement to social security benefits .

in order for ssa to recognize a same - sex couple as married , the couple must have a valid marriage and the number holder must be domiciled in a state that recognizes such marriage at the time of the application .

for example , lauren ( the applicant ) and allison ( the number holder ) marry in washington ( wa ) after wa recognizes same - sex marriage .

while they are domiciled in wa , lauren files for spousal benefits on allison's record .

if they meet all other factors of entitlement , ssa would likely find that lauren is eligible for social security benefits .

yes , if the state in which the number holder is domiciled at the time of the application would recognize the same - sex marriage .

the same - sex couple does not need to live in the same state in which they were married for benefit eligibility .

according to the social security act , the same - sex couple is married if the "courts of the state in which such insured individual [number holder] is domiciled at the time such applicant files [an] application ... would find that such applicant and such insured individual were validly married. .

therefore , the state where the number holder lives at the time of the application must recognize that out - of - state same - sex marriage , in order for ssa to consider the same - sex couple validly married for benefit eligibility .

for example , david ( the applicant ) and michael ( the number holder ) marry in wa after wa recognizes same - sex marriage .

after the marriage ceremony , the couple then moves to california ( ca ) , which recognizes out - of - state same - sex marriages .

additionally , michael is living in california at the time david files the application for spousal benefits .

because michael is domiciled in a state that recognizes out - of - state same - sex marriages at the time david files the application , david would be eligible for spousal benefits on michael's record , if all other requirements were met .

yes , if the state in which the number holder is domiciled at the time of the application would recognize the same - sex marriage .

the social security act does not require couples to be domiciled in the same state to meet the marital relationship eligibility requirements .

ssa's determination of marital status for social security benefits depends on whether the state where the number holder is domiciled would recognize her marriage with the applicant .

if , at the time of the application , the applicant lives in a state that does recognize same - sex marriage but the number holder is domiciled in a state that does not recognize such marriages , ssa would not consider the applicant and number holder validly married for the purposes of benefit eligibility .

for example , carolyn ( the applicant ) and barbara ( the number holder ) marry in wa after wa recognizes same - sex marriage .

at the time of the application , carolyn is domiciled in wa , but barbara is domiciled in kentucky ( ky ) , which does not recognize same - sex marriages .

therefore , carolyn would not be eligible for spousal benefits on barbara's wage record .

the social security act directs ssa to look at whether the courts of the state where the number holder is domiciled "at the time such applicant files [an] application" would consider the couple as validly married .

thus , if the state in which the number holder was domiciled at the time the spouse filed the application would recognize the marriage , ssa would consider the couple as married for the purposes of benefit entitlement , even if the couple moves to another state after the application is filed .

for example , david ( the applicant ) and michael ( the number holder ) are domiciled and marry in wa after wa recognizes same - sex marriage .

david files for spousal benefits on michael's record while domiciled in wa .

while the application is pending , david and michael move to and establish their domicile in oregon ( or ) , which recognizes same - sex marriage .

they meet all other factors of entitlement .

ssa would recognize the couple as married because when the claim was filed , david and michael were domiciled in a state that recognizes same - sex marriage .

generally , an applicant in a same - sex marriage is not eligible for spousal benefits if the number holder lives in a state that does not recognize same - sex marriage .

for an applicant to receive benefits based on the work record of his spouse ( referred to as number holder ) , the applicant and the number holder must qualify as married under the social security act and state law .

under ssa's current interpretation of the social security act's definition of family status found in section 216 ( h ) , the agency would not recognize the same - sex marriage because the state where the number holder is domiciled does not recognize same - sex marriage .

generally , an applicant in a same - sex marriage is not eligible for survivors' benefits if the number holder has died in a state that does not recognize same - sex marriage .

for an applicant to receive benefits based on the work record of his spouse ( referred to as number holder ) , the applicant and the number holder must qualify as married under the social security act and state law .

under ssa's current interpretation of the social security act's definition of family status found in section 216 ( h ) , the agency would not recognize the same - sex marriage because the state where the number holder has died does not recognize same - sex marriage .

the duration - of - marriage requirement for spousal benefits is one continuous year before the day on which the application is filed .

for widow ( er ) 's benefits , the duration requirement is nine months immediately prior to the day in which the number holder died ( certain exceptions apply ) .

ssa considers the date the couple was married in determining the duration of the marriage ; it does not rely on the date of the windsor decision .

generally , biological or adoptive children of number holders are considered children for purposes of entitlement to child's benefits under the social security act .

stepchildren are typically entitled to benefits on a number holder's record if their relationship to the number holder was created by the number holder's marriage to the child's biological or adoptive parent .

stepchildren must also be dependent on the number holder and meet other eligibility requirements .

for a stepchild to qualify for benefits on a number holder's record based on a same - sex marriage , the number holder's state of domicile must recognize the same - sex marriage or nonmarital legal relationship between the number holder and the child's biological or adoptive parent .

however , due to variation in state laws , ssa may need to obtain a legal opinion on a case - by - case basis to process some child claims in which entitlement depends on a same - sex marriage .

the ssa determines the state in which a claimant lives by looking at the person's "true and fixed home...to which a person intends to return whenever he or she is absent. .

the state of the claimant's domicile determines which state law to apply when determining "family status" as part of benefits eligibility .

for a claimant to change his domicile , the claimant must be physically present in the new place and intend to make a home in that new place permanently or for an indefinite period .

no , marital status is not relevant to a claim for retirement or disability benefits filed by a number holder in a same - sex marriage because the entitlement to these benefits is based on the number holder's own record of work history and contributions to social security and not based on marital status .

a civil union is a nonreligious partnership , with certain rights and benefits granted to the partners , depending on the laws of the state .

some states grant same - sex couples in a civil union the same rights as married couples , including the right to inherit property after the death of one partner .

section 216 ( h ) of the social security act permits the agency to recognize an applicant , who is in a civil union with the number holder , as the number holder's spouse if the state of the number holder's domicile would allow the applicant to inherit under intestate law .

therefore , if the state's civil union laws grant inheritance rights to same - sex couples in a civil union , then ssa will generally treat the couple's civil union as a marital relationship .

when considering these types of relationships , ssa first determines whether the nonmarital legal relationship was valid in the place it was established and whether the relationship qualifies as a marital relationship under the laws of the state of the number holder's domicile .

ssa determines whether a nonmarital legal relationship qualifies as a marital relationship using the intestate laws of the number holder's domicile .

if under such a state's intestate laws , an applicant could inherit a spouse's share of the number holder's personal property if the number holder died without a will , then ssa will consider the same - sex couple's relationship as a marital relationship for the purposes of determining entitlement to social security benefits .

if the number holder's domicile - state at the time of application does not recognize the nonmarital legal relationship for same - sex couples or does not grant that type of relationship with the rights to inherit under intestate law , then ssa would not consider that marriage as valid for the purposes of determining entitlement to benefits .

for example , colorado's "civil union act" grants parties to a civil union the rights and benefits granted to spouses in a legal marriage .

these rights include those relating to the acquisition , ownership , or transfer of real or personal property at death .

because colorado's civil union law allows same - sex couples in a civil union to inherit as each other's spouse , ssa would treat such a couple as spouses for the purposes of determining their entitlement to spousal benefits .

a domestic partnership is generally a relationship between two individuals who share a common domestic life but are not married .

often a domestic partnership is established when both individuals file a legal declaration with the appropriate state government office .

some states grant same - sex couples in a domestic partnership the same rights as married couples , including the right to inherit property after the death of one partner .

section 216 ( h ) of the social security act permits the agency to recognize an applicant who is in a domestic partnership with the number holder as the number holder's spouse if the state of the number holder's domicile would allow the applicant to inherit under intestate law .

therefore , if the state's domestic partnership laws grant inheritance rights to same - sex couples in a domestic partnership , then the ssa will generally treat the couple's domestic partnership as a marital relationship .

when considering these types of relationships , ssa first determines whether the nonmarital legal relationship was valid in the place it was established and whether the relationship qualifies as a marital relationship under the laws of the state of the number holder's domicile .

ssa determines whether a nonmarital legal relationship qualifies as a marital relationship using the intestate laws of the number holder's domicile .

if under such a state's intestate laws , an applicant could inherit a spouse's share of the number holder's personal property if the number holder died without a will , then ssa will consider the same - sex couple's relationship as a marital relationship for the purposes of determining entitlement to social security benefits .

if the number holder's domicile state at the time of application does not recognize the nonmarital legal relationship for same - sex couples or does not grant that type of relationship with the rights to inherit under intestate law , then ssa would not consider that marriage as valid for the purposes of determining entitlement to spousal benefits .

for example , under washington state law , a state - registered domestic partner can inherit the decedent partner's estate in the absence of a will .

due to these inheritance rights , a washington state - registered domestic partnership would meet ssa's requirements for a marital relationship .

ssa defines a foreign marriage as a "ceremonial marriage that was celebrated somewhere other than in a state. .

for the purposes of determining marital status , a state is either one of the 50 united states , the district of columbia , the u.s. virgin islands , puerto rico , guam , american samoa , or the northern mariana islands .

when determining benefits eligibility , ssa would consider an applicant married if the same - sex marriage is valid in the jurisdiction in which it was celebrated and the courts of the state of the number holder's domicile would recognize the foreign same - sex marriage as valid .

if the number holder is domiciled in a foreign jurisdiction , then ssa considers whether the courts in the district of columbia would recognize the foreign same - sex marriage as valid .

for nonmarital legal relationships , ssa uses state intestate law to determine marital status for the purposes of social security benefits .

specifically , ssa considers whether the courts of the state of the number holder's domicile would allow the applicant to inherit as the spouse of the number holder , if the number holder were to die without leaving a will .

if the number holder is domiciled in a foreign jurisdiction , then ssa considers whether the courts in the district of columbia would permit the applicant to inherit as the spouse of the number holder , if the number holder were to die without leaving a will .

in both cases , the nonmarital legal relationship must be valid in the foreign jurisdiction where it was celebrated or established .

ssa may consider a same - sex marriage as valid if the domicile state recognizes same - sex marriages from other states and the marriage were celebrated during the period in which that state recognized same - sex marriages .

for the purposes of social security , ssa does not recognize same - sex marriages that were celebrated outside of the period that the laws of the state permitted same - sex marriage .

even if the applicant filed for the claim at the time when the state of domicile permitted same - sex marriage , ssa has determined that the number holder and the applicant cannot be recognized as married for these purposes if the ceremony occurred before the state recognized same - sex marriage .

similarly , ssa does not recognize a same - sex couple as married , for the purposes of determining entitlement to social security benefits , if the number holder died before the state in which the number holder and applicant were domiciled at the time of death recognized same - sex marriages .

when processing an application for social security benefits , ssa looks to the current laws of the state when the application is open .

this is state in which number holder was domiciled at the time of the spouse files the application .

an application remains open during the appeals process .

the application is closed after the administrative law judge has made a final determination .

section 216 ( h ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of the social security act directs ssa to determine marital status based on whether the "courts of the state in which such insured individual is domiciled ... would find that such applicant and such insured individual were validly married at the time such applicant files such application. .

therefore , subsequent to a court overturning a same - sex marriage ban , ssa may consider the couple validly married , if a same - sex couple married in that state and then filed for social security benefits while domiciled in that state .

ssa will not approve applications for social security benefits if the applicant is in a marriage that ssa has determined cannot be recognized for purposes of determining entitlement under title ii .

ssa may hold certain applications depending on the department of justice's guidance regarding the interpretation of state laws .

if dissatisfied with the initial determination or decision , an applicant may request further review through ssa's administrative review process .

the applicant , or appointed representative , must request a review within 60 days from the date the applicant received notice of the decision .

at the first step of the review process , an applicant may ask for a reconsideration of the initial determination by ssa about the applicant's entitlement to benefits .

after such reconsideration , the applicant may request a hearing before an administrative law judge .

the applicant may appeal a decision by an administrative law judge to the appeals council .

after this review process , ssa would have made a final decision .

only with this final decision can the applicant file an action in a federal court for judicial review of ssa's final decision .

a federal court would conduct the review using the "substantial evidence" standard , which includes such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion .

yes , the place - of - domicile rule has been used since the creation of family benefits under the social security amendments of 1939 ( p.l .

76-379 ) .

as part of the legislation , congress added language to the social security act specifying that determinations of family status would be made according to the law of the state where the number holder was located or died using the state's law on devolution of intestate personal property .

specifically , congress established section 209 ( m ) , which stated , in determining whether an applicant is the wife , widow , child , or parent of a fully insured or currently insured individual for purposes of this title , the board shall apply such law as would be applied in determining the devolution of intestate personal property by the courts of the state in which such insured individual is domiciled at the time such applicant files application , or , if such insured individual is dead , by the courts of the state in which he was domiciled at the time of his death , or if such insured individual is or was not so domiciled in any state , by the courts of the district of columbia .

applicants who according to such law would have the same status relative to taking intestate personal property as a wife , widow , child , or parent shall be deemed such .

none of the reports accompanying the 1939 amendments gave any indication of why this provision was enacted .

congress later moved the text of section 209 ( m ) to section 216 ( h ) of the social security act under the social security act amendments of 1950 ( p.l .

81-734 ) .

the reports accompanying these amendments did not comment on the changes .

although it made subsequent changes to the formatting and language of section 216 ( h ) , congress maintained the basic principle of the place - of - domicile rule .

benefits payable to family members are equal to a specified percentage of the worker's pia , subject to a maximum family benefit ; other benefit adjustments may apply .

table a - 1 provides a summary of social security benefits payable to family members , including the basic eligibility requirements and the basic benefit amount before any applicable adjustments .

