under the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) statute , fy2017 is the last year federal chip funding is provided , even though the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) child maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement is in place through fy2019 .

the aca moe provision requires states to maintain income eligibility levels for chip children through september 30 , 2019 , as a condition for receiving federal medicaid payments ( notwithstanding the lack of corresponding federal chip appropriations for fy2018 and fy2019 ) .

this report discusses the aca moe requirement for children if federal chip funding expires .

it begins with a brief background of chip , including information regarding program design and financing .

the report then describes the aca child moe requirements for chip medicaid expansion programs and for separate chip programs and discusses potential coverage implications .

chip is a federal - state program that provides health coverage to certain uninsured , low - income children and pregnant women in families that have annual income above medicaid eligibility levels but do not have health insurance .

chip is jointly financed by the federal government and the states and is administered by the states .

participation in chip is voluntary , and all states and the district of columbia participate .

the federal government sets basic requirements for chip , but states have the flexibility to design their own version of chip within the federal government's basic framework .

as a result , there is significant variation across chip programs .

in fy2015 , chip enrollment totaled 5.9 million and federal and state chip expenditures totaled $13.7 billion .

chip was established as part of the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-33 ) under a new title xxi of the social security act .

since that time , other federal laws have provided additional funding and made significant changes to chip .

most notably , the children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-3 ) increased appropriation levels for chip , changed the formula for distributing chip funding among states , and altered the eligibility and benefit requirements .

the aca largely maintains the current chip structure through fy2019 and requires states to maintain their medicaid and chip child eligibility levels through fy2019 as a condition for receiving federal medicaid matching funds .

the aca provided federal chip funding for fy2014 and fy2015 , then the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ; p.l .

114-10 ) extended federal chip funding for another two years ( i.e. , through fy2017 ) .

the aca extended and expanded the moe provisions in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

the aca moe provisions contain separate requirements for medicaid and chip and were designed to ensure that individuals eligible for these programs did not lose coverage between the date of enactment of the aca ( march 23 , 2010 ) and the implementation of the health insurance exchanges ( for adults ) and september 30 , 2019 ( for children ) .

under the aca moe provisions , states are required to maintain their medicaid programs with the same eligibility standards , methodologies , and procedures in place on the date of enactment of the aca until january 1 , 2014 , for adults and through september 30 , 2019 , for children up to the age of 19 .

the aca also requires states to maintain income eligibility levels for chip children through september 30 , 2019 , as a condition for receiving payments under medicaid .

the penalty to states for not complying with either the medicaid or the chip moe requirements would be the loss of all federal medicaid matching funds .

together , these moe requirements for medicaid and chip impact chip medicaid expansion programs and separate chip programs differently .

fy2017 is the last year in which federal chip funding is provided in the chip statute .

if no additional federal funding is provided for the program , once federal chip funding is exhausted , chip children in chip medicaid expansion programs would continue to receive coverage under medicaid through at least fy2019 , due to the aca moe requirement .

however , when chip funding is exhausted , chip children in separate chip programs could obtain coverage through the exchanges or employer - sponsored insurance , but some of the children likely would become uninsured .

according to a medicaid and chip payment and access commission estimate of what would happen if separate chip coverage ended in fy2018 ( which is when federal chip funding is expected to be exhausted under current law ) , 36% of the children with separate chip coverage would become uninsured .

