the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) was last amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) .

the authorization of appropriations for most programs authorized by the esea extended through fy2007 .

as congress has not reauthorized the esea , there is currently no explicit authorization of appropriations for esea programs .

however , because the programs continue to receive annual appropriations , appropriations are considered implicitly authorized .

during the 114 th congress , the house education and the workforce committee considered and on february 20 , 2015 , reported the student success act ( h.r .

5 ) , a bill that would reauthorize the esea .

h.r .

5 would make several changes to current law , but one issue that has attracted substantial congressional interest is a new option that would be available to states for distributing funds available under title i - a of the esea to local educational agencies ( leas ) and schools .

in h.r .

5 , this option is referred to as "title i portability" and "title i funds follow the low - income child state option. .

hereinafter , this option will be referred to as the "state option. .

under current law , title i , part a , of the esea authorizes federal aid to leas for the education of disadvantaged children .

title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending pre - kindergarten through grade 12 schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families .

title i - a has also become a vehicle to which a number of requirements affecting broad aspects of public k - 12 education for all students have been attached as a condition for receiving title i - a grants .

it is the largest program authorized under the esea , and is funded at $14.4 billion for fy2015 .

under the state option , title i - a lea grants would be calculated by ed using the four formulas prescribed by current statute .

however , once the grants were calculated , each state would have the option to reallocate the total amount of title i - a funds that were "earned" by the leas in the state using a new formula .

states would be permitted to redistribute all of the title i - a funds received to leas based on each lea's share of enrolled eligible children .

an eligible child would be defined as a child from a family with an income below 100% of the poverty level based on the most recent data available from the department of commerce .

leas would , in turn , distribute the funds received to individual public schools in the lea based on each school's share of enrolled eligible children .

thus , under the state option title i - a funding would follow a low - income child to any public school he or she attended .

however , the state option's reliance on only a child poverty count to distribute grants to leas / schools eliminates a variety of factors used under current law to determine lea grants .

particularly , it eliminates provisions focused on targeting funds to leas where there are concentrations of formula children and hold harmless provisions that cap the amount of funds an lea can lose from one year to the next , assuming the lea remains eligible to receive a grant .

this section of the report examines estimated grants under the state option .

it begins with a discussion of the methodology used to conduct this analysis .

this is followed by an examination of how grants would be concentrated by poverty under the state option compared with current law .

next , estimated grant amounts per child in poverty under current law and the state option are examined for selected states .

the section concludes with an examination of estimated lea grants for leas with either a high number or percentage of formula children under both current law and the state option .

if a state chose to implement the state option , there would be substantial changes in grant amounts at the lea level for the reasons previously discussed .

however , if the state continued to use the state option in subsequent years , the changes in lea grant amounts would probably not be as substantial across - the - board .

there could still be more fluctuations than are currently possible , as the hold harmless provisions under current law prevent an lea from losing more than 15% of its prior - year grant amount , assuming the lea remains eligible to receive title i - a funds under a given formula .

however , if a state implemented the state option one year and then decided not to use it in a subsequent year , there could be substantial changes in lea grant amounts as a result of changing back to the current law provisions .

this could be disruptive to the budgeting processes used by leas , especially if a state goes back and forth between current law and the state option multiple times .

unlike current law , as long as an lea or school continued to enroll at least one eligible child , the lea or school would continue to receive title i - a funds under the state option .

under current law , it is possible for an lea to meet the eligibility requirements for a specific title i - a grant one year and then not meet the requirements the next year , creating some uncertainty from year - to - year .

schools may also meet the requirements for receiving title i - a funding one year but not the next .

in this instance , an lea has the discretion to provide title i - a funding to the school for one additional fiscal year .

as there are no provisions to indicate that ed should do differently , presumably it would continue to calculate grants as it does under current law and not take into account the actual grant amounts received by leas .

under current law , ed uses the prior - year grant amount it calculated to determine the current - year grants without taking into account adjustments to the grant amount made by the states .

