investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) provisions in international investment agreements ( iia ) enable an aggrieved investor , with an investment located in the territory of a foreign host government , to bring a claim against that government for breach of an investment agreement before an international arbitration panel .

the united states has negotiated a number of bilateral investment treaties ( bit ) and free trade agreements ( fta ) that contain isds arbitration procedures for resolving investors' claims that a host country has violated substantive obligations intended to protect foreign investors and investments from discriminatory , unfair , or arbitrary treatment by the host government .

although an investor submitting a claim under a u.s. iia must typically consent to the mandatory procedural rules contained therein , the parties to an investment dispute generally may jointly choose the forum as well as many of the procedural rules under which the tribunal conducts the arbitration .

the primary forum for investment arbitration is the international centre for settlement of investment disputes ( icsid ) , which is affiliated with the world bank .

the centre was established by the 1965 convention on the settlement of investment disputes between states and nationals of other states ( icsid convention ) .

under most iias , the investor and respondent country may agree that the tribunal will conduct the proceedings according to certain procedural rules , such as the icsid rules of procedure for arbitration proceedings ; the united nations commission on international trade law ( uncitral ) arbitration rules ; or the icsid additional facility rules for disputes in which either the investor's home country or the host country , but not both , is a member of icsid .

ongoing trade negotiations among the united states and several pacific rim countries regarding the proposed trans pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement — and between the united states and the european union with respect to the proposed transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) agreement — have rekindled debate over the value of including isds provisions in bits and trade agreements .

some commentators have argued that isds arbitration procedures , along with substantive protections for investors and investments in iias , facilitate foreign direct investment ( fdi ) by depoliticizing investment disputes and providing stability and predictability to investors seeking to conduct business in a foreign nation .

other observers have raised questions about the extent to which isds may affect a government's ability to regulate in the public interest .

this report focuses on the legal implications of isds provisions in u.s. iias .

among other things , it discusses who may bring a claim under an iia ; how arbitrators conduct such proceedings ; the remedies available to the disputing parties ; and how tribunals have interpreted certain substantive obligations contained in u.s. iias .

furthermore , the report will discuss the interplay between iias containing isds provisions , investment arbitration decisions , and domestic law within the united states , as well as recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards against countries in u.s. courts .

notably , the isds provisions within one iia may differ from the isds provisions in other agreements .

this report will focus on the provisions contained in the investment chapter of nafta because nearly all isds cases brought by investors against the united states have been brought under that agreement .

it will also focus on the investment provisions contained in the united states' 2012 model bit , which is the document that u.s. officials use to negotiate u.s .

bits , and the korea - u.s. free trade agreement ( korus ) , which has the most recent congressionally approved fta investment chapter , to show the types of provisions u.s. diplomats may seek to include in the tpp and t - tip .

congress plays an important role in the approval and implementation of u.s. iias , and , therefore , in the approval of isds provisions within those agreements .

bits are ratified through the treaty process established in the constitution — that is , the senate must provide its advice and consent to ratification of any agreement reached between the executive branch and negotiators from a foreign country .

furthermore , ftas , which typically will contain an investment chapter , are often approved as congressional - executive agreements .

such agreements require approval from both houses of congress prior to being signed into law by the president .

beyond voting on the approval of a negotiated agreement between the u.s. and foreign states , congress may seek to influence the negotiating objectives of the executive branch through statute , by informal agreements with the executive branch , and through the traditional oversight powers enjoyed by the legislative branch .

to hear and decide an isds case , a tribunal must have jurisdiction over the dispute between the investor and the respondent state .

although several requirements in iias could be considered "jurisdictional," this section focuses on the requirement that the claimant qualify as an "investor" with an "investment" in the respondent host country , as u.s. iias define these terms .

this section also analyzes whether , and , if so , under what circumstances , investment agreements require a claimant to exhaust available administrative and judicial remedies in the host country prior to bringing an isds claim against that country .

in addition , this section examines isds provisions potentially relevant to the investor practices of "forum shopping" ( eg , pursuing an isds case after losing in the host country's domestic courts ) and "treaty shopping" ( eg , reincorporating in another country to take advantage of favorable isds provisions in that country's iias ) .

in addition to jurisdictional issues , isds proceedings have raised questions about the rules governing: ( 1 ) the independence and impartiality of arbitrators , including rules addressing their selection and disqualification ; ( 2 ) the transparency of arbitral proceedings , including access to documents and hearings ; ( 3 ) early dismissal of frivolous claims ; and ( 4 ) participation of third parties as amicus curiae ( "friends of the court" ) .

this section addresses these questions , as well as whether investment arbitration decisions establish legally binding precedent and whether a party may appeal such decisions .

in addition to establishing some of the procedural rules governing isds proceedings , iias also set forth substantive obligations that a host country has agreed to undertake with respect to foreign investors and investments within the country's territory .

these obligations include ( 1 ) according foreign investors a "minimum standard of treatment" under customary international law ; ( 2 ) expropriating an investment only in limited circumstances and upon payment of adequate compensation ; and ( 3 ) refraining from discrimination against foreign party investors or investments as compared to domestic investors or investments ( or non - party investors or investments ) .

this section discusses how tribunals deciding cases under u.s. iias have interpreted these obligations , which account for most of the claims brought against the united states under u.s. iias ( see table 1 ) .

notably , u.s. iias typically contain other obligations for a host country such as limitations on trade - distorting performance requirements and rules regarding transfer of funds into and out of the host country .

in addition , recent u.s. iias may also contain obligations pertaining to labor and the environment , as well as exceptions for prudential financial measures, taxation measures , and national security .

the constitution governs how federal statutes may be enacted , amended , or repealed .

therefore , in order to amend a duly enacted statute , congress must follow the processes established in article i of the constitution .

because the constitution is superior to isds provisions in bits and investment chapters in ftas , such isds provisions cannot alter federal law .

although , to date , the united states has yet to lose a claim brought against it under an iia , if it were to lose a claim in the future , the arbitration panel would not be able to amend , void the application of , or repeal the laws of the united states .

moreover , the united states has negotiated agreements that limit the remedies that an arbitration tribunal may award .

for example , in both nafta and the 2012 model bit , the isds provisions state that a tribunal may award only monetary damages and / or restitution of property .

furthermore , if a tribunal elects to award restitution of property , the respondent state has the option of paying monetary damages in lieu of such restitution .

nafta and the 2012 model bit also provide that an arbitration panel cannot award punitive damages .

in addition , by limiting the available remedies , these provisions preclude an arbitration tribunal from requiring amendment , repeal , or passage of any statute or regulation in u.s. law .

however , a tribunal's inability to change the laws or regulations of the united states directly does not mean that arbitration awards cannot be substantial .

for example , in occidental petroleum corp. v. ecuador , the tribunal ordered ecuador to pay occidental $1,769,625,000 — over 1 billion dollars — in damages .

the tribunal rendered that award , which is one of the largest awards in favor of a claimant under isds arbitration , after finding that ecuador violated an investment agreement by expropriating occidental's property in response to occidental transferring some of its economic interests under an oil production contract in contravention of ecuador law .

therefore , although a tribunal lacks authority to alter a u.s. statute directly , some commentators believe that the possibility for such large monetary damages potentially could influence lawmakers and regulators when they consider proposed laws or regulations that may run afoul of iia obligations .

however , other commentators counter that the federal government faces potential monetary damages under its own domestic legal system for claims filed against the government and that most would not consider this practice a threat to democratic principles .

because the costs and fees associated with investment arbitration may amount to millions of dollars , the manner in which a tribunal apportions costs and fees among the disputing parties can have a significant impact on them .

icsid and uncitral rules provide different methods for the apportionment of the tribunal's costs and the parties' fees .

under the icsid convention , the tribunal and secretary - general of icsid determine the apportionment of the fees and costs borne by the arbitrators , icsid secretariat , and disputing parties .

the tribunal sets forth in the award the proportion of costs and fees that each party will bear .

the icsid rules do not express a preference for requiring the losing party to bear more of the costs and fees .

by contrast , the uncitral rules establish a more detailed framework for apportionment of arbitration costs and attorneys' fees .

article 40 provides an exhaustive list of the types of expenses that may be eligible for apportionment .

article 41 sets out the rules for determining the fees and expenses of the arbitrators .

attorneys' fees must be "reasonable. .

with respect to allocation of costs , the uncitral arbitration rules appear to leave the tribunal with a large amount of discretion in apportioning the costs of the arbitration .

article 42 of the uncitral rules states the following: ( 1 ) the costs of the arbitration shall in principle be borne by the unsuccessful party or parties .

however , the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable , taking into account the circumstances of the case .

 ( 2 ) the arbitral tribunal shall in the final award or , if it deems appropriate , in any other award , determine any amount that a party may have to pay to another party as a result of the decision on allocation of costs .

tribunals apportioning costs under icsid rules have indicated an inclination to award half of the costs of arbitration to each party when the case presented complex and novel questions .

once an investment tribunal has rendered an award in an isds case , a respondent state may decide to compensate the investor voluntarily .

however , if the state does not do so , an investor may seek to enforce the award against the respondent state in a court with jurisdiction over the state's assets .

this section analyzes international treaties and u.s. laws pertaining to the recognition , enforcement , and execution of investment arbitration awards against foreign countries and the united states in u.s. courts .

for purposes of this section , "recognition" of an arbitral award rendered by an investment tribunal under a u.s. iaa involves a u.s. court's domestication of the award so that it is equivalent to a judgment of the courts of the united states .

"enforcement" of an award refers to a court "converting the [award] into a judicial judgment that orders an award debtor to comply with the award , including paying any monetary sum due. .

"execution" of a judgment refers to measures taken by the investor when the host country declines to pay compensation in accordance with the judgment .

the icsid convention would appear to limit the ability significantly of an icsid - member country , such as the united states , to refuse to recognize and enforce an award rendered under the icsid convention ( i.e. , when the investor's home state and the host country are both members of the icsid convention and the dispute falls under that convention ) .

under icsid convention article 54: each contracting state shall recognize an award rendered pursuant to this convention as binding and enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by that award within its territories as if it were a final judgment of a court in that state .

a contracting state with a federal constitution may enforce such an award in or through its federal courts and may provide that such courts shall treat the award as if it were a final judgment of the courts of a constituent state .

furthermore , article 53 of the icsid convention states that the award binds the parties and "shall not be subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this convention" ( eg , interpretation , revision , or annulment ) .

when implementing the icsid convention in federal law , congress provided that the award of a tribunal under chapter iv of the icsid convention "shall create a right arising under a treaty of the united states. .

any requirement that a party pay compensation under an award "shall be enforced and shall be given the same full faith and credit as if the award were a final judgment of a court of general jurisdiction of one of the several states. .

as commentators have noted , this would appear to establish a limited role for a u.s. court to review an icsid convention award .

for those arbitrations that do not take place under the icsid convention ( i.e. , either the investor's home country , the host country , or both , is not a party to the icsid convention ) , an investor might be able to pursue recognition and enforcement of an award under the new york convention on the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards ( new york convention ) in states party to the convention .

there are 154 countries party to this convention , according to uncitral .

the new york convention , which congress has implemented in the federal arbitration act ( faa ) , applies only to recognition and enforcement of awards: ( 1 ) "made in the territory of a state" different from the one in which a party seeks recognition and enforcement of the award ; or ( 2 ) that are considered to be "foreign" awards in the state in which recognition and enforcement is sought .

the new york convention provides that contracting states shall recognize the awards "as binding and enforce them in accordance with the rules of procedure of the territory where the award is relied upon," subject to certain conditions .

the new york convention supplies somewhat broader means of challenging recognition and enforcement of an award on the grounds that the party seeking to prevent enforcement can show that , for example , the arbitrator exceeded its powers , the responding party was unable to present its case , or recognition or enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of the country where enforcement is sought .

although the icsid and new york conventions , as implemented in federal law , would appear to limit the grounds on which a u.s. court may refuse to recognize and enforce an arbitral award , neither convention purports to affect contracting states' laws regarding the execution of judgments .

with respect to execution of a judgment ( resulting from recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award ) on the assets of a country located in the united states , the icsid convention defers to each member - country's laws , which may provide sovereign immunity from execution on certain assets of a foreign country located in the united states .

the icsid convention provides that "[e]xecution of the award shall be governed by the laws concerning the execution of judgments in force in the state in whose territories such execution is sought. .

moreover , article 55 of the icsid convention provides that "[n]othing in article 54 shall be construed as derogating from the law in force in any contracting state relating to immunity of that state or of any foreign state from execution. .

thus , in the case of parties seeking to obtain execution of a judgment on a foreign country's assets in the united states , the protections of the foreign sovereign immunities act of 1976 ( fsia ) could potentially apply .

fsia places limits on the types of property that a federal or state court may order to be seized in satisfaction of a judgment against a foreign country .

it also may require the entity seeking execution of a judgment to serve notice on the foreign country prior to execution and to wait until a certain amount of time has elapsed before execution on the country's assets .

generally , enforcement of an arbitral award by execution against u.s. assets of a foreign country is limited to assets of the country used for a "commercial activity in the united states. .

in addition , certain foreign military and central bank or monetary authority property may retain immunity from execution .

as noted above , an isds tribunal has never ordered the united states to pay compensation to an investor in an isds case .

if the united states lost a case , it seems unlikely that it would refuse to compensate a foreign investor .

however , in the unlikely event that it did refuse to pay , an investor could potentially seek recognition of an investment arbitration award rendered against the united states in federal court on the grounds that the united states has waived its sovereign immunity from suit under the tucker act and the relevant investment treaty .

assuming that the award qualified for recognition and enforcement under the icsid convention , new york convention , or other relevant treaty , then , as discussed above , it appears that the court would have limited grounds on which to refuse recognition and enforcement of the award .

however , even if the investor obtained recognition and enforcement of an award , the united states has not waived its sovereign immunity from execution of the award ( now a judgment ) under the tucker act , and thus the investor would appear to be unable to collect on the judgment if congress has not appropriated funds for payment of the judgment .

however , the united states would still have an international obligation to comply with the judgment .

