the advanced research projects agency – energy , or arpa - e , was established to "overcome the long - term and high - risk technological barriers in the development of energy technologies" ( p.l .

110-69 , §5012 ) .

this budget and appropriations tracking report summarizes the administration's fy2016 budget request for arpa - e and tracks legislative action on fy2016 appropriations .

it also provides selected ( proposed ) appropriations authorizations under consideration in the 114 th congress , historical funding data , and an overview of selected policy debates about the agency .

table 1 summarizes authorized funding levels for arpa - e under certain proposed , but not yet enacted , reauthorization measures under consideration in the 114 th congress .

table 2 shows fy2014 current funding , fy2015 enacted funding , the fy2016 request , and fy2016 house - passed and senate committee - reported funding levels for arpa - e .

this table will be updated to include fy2016 senate - passed amounts , as well as final enacted appropriations , when those numbers become available .

for a longer perspective , table 3 provides arpa - e authorizations , budget requests , and appropriations from fy2008 through the fy2016 request .

appropriations to arpa - e , which is part of the department of energy ( doe ) , are typically included in annual energy and water development and related agencies appropriations acts .

 ( the congressional research service tracks these acts each fiscal year .

see the "appropriations status table" on crs.gov , at http: / / www.crs.gov / pages / appropriationsstatustable.aspx . ) .

arpa - e's budget justifications are published on the agency's website at http: / / arpa - e.energy.gov / ? q=arpa - e - site - page / arpa - e - budget .

patterned after the widely lauded defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) — which played a key role in the development of critical technologies such as satellite navigation and the internet — arpa - e was established by the america competes act ( p.l .

110-69 ) in fy2008 .

the agency received its first appropriations in fy2009: $15 million in regular appropriations and $400 million in american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) funding .

the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-358 ) amended and reauthorized arpa - e's statutory authority , which is codified primarily at 42 u.s.c .

16538 , and authorized appropriations to the agency through fy2013 .

although arpa - e is relatively young by federal science agency standards , the agency asserts that its awardees already have produced significant scientific and technological gains .

arpa - e states that its awardees have developed a 1 megawatt silicon carbide transistor the size of a fingernail ; engineered microbes that use hydrogen and carbon dioxide to make liquid transportation fuel ; [and] pioneered a near - isothermal compressed air energy storage system .

at the february 2015 annual arpa - e energy innovation summit , the agency announced that [a]t least 30 arpa - e project teams have formed new companies to advance their technologies and more than 37 arpa - e projects have partnered with other government agencies for further development .

additionally , 34 arpa - e projects have attracted more than $850 million in private - sector follow - on funding after arpa - e's investment of approximately $135 million and several technologies have already been incorporated into products that are being sold in the market .

to date , arpa - e has invested approximately $1.1 billion across more than 400 projects through 23 focused programs and two open funding solicitations ( open 2009 and open 2012 ) .

news reports indicate that arpa - e also has cancelled 21 projects — an expected outcome for this type of agency , which is designed to support high - risk , high - reward research that sometimes produces unanticipated ( positive and negative ) results .

monitoring progress and recommending termination of research projects are express statutory responsibilities of arpa - e program directors .

the obama administration has requested $325 million for arpa - e in fy2016 , a $45 million ( 16% ) increase over the fy2015 enacted level of $280 million .

in keeping with its historical practice , the agency expects to use its fy2016 appropriations to support between 7 and 10 focused funding opportunity announcements ( foas ) .

each fy2016 foa would provide approximately $10 million to $40 million in funding for programs that focus on specific technical barriers in a specific energy area .

arpa - e groups its projects into two broad categories: transportation systems and stationary power systems .

project types can vary widely within these categories .

in general , arpa - e anticipates that the focus in fy2016 will be on transportation fuels and feedstocks ; energy materials and processes ; dispatchable energy ; and sensors , information , and integration .

the annual arpa - e budget justification also contains a line item for program direction , which includes salaries and benefits , travel , support services , and related expenses .

as passed by the house on may 1 , 2015 , the energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 ( h.r .

2028 ) would provide $280 million to arpa - e in fy2016 .

this amount is $45 million ( - 14% ) less than the fy2016 request .

h.rept .

114-91 accompanied h.r .

2028 when it was reported by the house committee on appropriations .

the white house office of management and budget ( omb ) has indicated that the president's senior advisors will recommend a veto if the president is presented with h.r .

2028 , as passed by the house .

the "statement of administration policy" cites insufficient funding for arpa - e as one of several reasons behind the administration's opposition .

as reported by the senate committee on appropriations , h.r .

2028 would provide $291 million to arpa - e in fy2016 .

this amount is $11 million more than both the fy2015 enacted and house - passed levels , but $33 million less than the administration request .

s.rept .

114-54 accompanied h.r .

2028 when it was reported by the senate committee on appropriations .

 table 3 shows arpa - e authorizations of appropriations , budget requests , and appropriations since the agency was first authorized in 2008 .

congress has funded arpa - e at approximately $280 million since fy2012 — with the exception of fy2013 , when the process commonly known as sequestration ( as well as enacted rescissions ) reduced the agency's funding level to about $250 million .

arpa - e is a comparatively new addition to the federal research and development ( r&d ) portfolio .

given the nature of r&d , which can take decades to produce widely recognized or transformative results , it may be many years before arpa - e's ultimate impact is fully understood .

some early concerns about the agency focused on perceived differences between arpa - e and the darpa model .

these include differences in the markets for defense and energy - related products .

darpa , for example , has a built - in customer ( the u.s. military ) , which arpa - e does not have .

further , some analysts have argued that industrial relationships and characteristics of the energy sector ( including powerful incumbent firms and the wide array of energy - dependent products ) have the potential to stop the dissemination of disruptive innovations .

it is not clear whether these early concerns have become actual challenges for arpa - e , or whether arpa - e has been able to adjust and respond to its unique position .

it is also possible that factors perceived ( rightly or wrongly ) as key to the success of darpa may not be as important to the success of arpa - e. other early congressional concerns focused on whether arpa - e would compete with , duplicate , or otherwise undermine other doe research units , such as the office of science , and on whether the agency would focus too closely on late - stage technology development and commercialization activities that some policymakers perceive as best left to the private sector .

the government accountability office investigated such concerns in 2012 and found that arpa - e had taken steps to avoid duplication with other doe offices and that "most arpa - e projects could not have been funded solely by the private sector. .

