united states agriculture has been touted as a model for production and a leader of innovation .

the nation's intense agricultural production , however , can lead to adverse impacts to the surrounding environment .

in some cases , it is the excess of basic nutrients required for plant and animal growth that can cause this degradation .

ongoing research aims to improve understanding of nutrients used and released in agricultural production , including how they interact in the environment , the damages the y can cause , and ways to prevent or correct the damage .

federal policies concerning agricultural nutrients have changed over time .

currently , few federal regulations govern the environmental impacts of nutrients from agriculture .

some environmental laws specifically exempt agriculture from regulatory requirements , and others are structured so that agriculture is not addressed by most , if not all , of the regulations .

the major federal response continues to be through research , education , outreach , and voluntary technical and financial incentives to producers .

recent events involving degraded water quality have raised questions as to whether the current federal response to agricultural nutrients is adequate or should be altered .

this has prompted both administrative and congressional action .

this report discusses the types and sources of nutrient pollution from agricultural production ; possible environmental effects of nutrient pollution ; examples of current control measures ; the federal response to excess nutrients , including regulatory and incentive - based programs ; and future considerations for nutrient management policy at the federal level .

nutrients are elements essential to plant growth .

plant roots absorb nutrients – – including water , oxygen , and others – – from the soil .

as crops grow and are harvested , they gradually remove the existing nutrients from the soil .

over time , most soils will require additional nutrients to maintain or increase crop yield .

when nutrients are added in excess of the plants' ability to utilize them , there is an increased risk that the nutrients will enter the surrounding environment ( water or air ) and create problems such as algal blooms ( discussed below ) .

plants utilize nutrients in different ways , and each plant has a different set of nutrient requirements .

how , where , and when plants utilize nutrients can greatly affect the overall yield and plant production .

for a farmer seeking to maximize crop yields and lower input costs , it can be critical to understand a crop's nutrient requirements .

basic nutrients – – carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen – – are the most abundant elements in plants .

in addition , plants utilize other nutrients commonly referred to as macronutrients and micronutrients ( see figure 1 ) .

in agricultural production , the focus generally rests on the three primary macronutrients – – nitrogen ( n ) , phosphorus ( p ) , and potassium ( k ) — because of their relative abundance in plants .

micronutrients , while not commonly discussed , may have just as much of an effect on plant growth as macronutrients when levels are too high ( toxic ) or too low ( deficient ) .

this report focuses on two of the three primary macronutrients ( nitrogen and phosphorus ) , because of the volume used in agricultural production and the relative potential for environmental harm if they are overused .

this is not meant to indicate that other nutrients do not also pose an environmental harm if overapplied .

plants use nutrients in an ionic form rather than as raw elements ( see figure 2 ) .

nutrients are taken up by plants in three forms: interception — by direct contact with the nutrient ; mass flow — when nutrients move with water as the plant transpires ; and diffusion — when nutrients move from high to low concentration .

interception accounts for a very low percentage of nutrients taken up by plants .

mass flow , on the other hand , is the most substantial method of nutrient movement toward a plant's roots .

this is particularly important for more "mobile" nutrients ( eg , nitrogen ) and less important for relatively "immobile" nutrients ( eg , phosphorus ) .

diffusion is most important for nutrients that are relatively immobile , have low solution concentrations , and are needed in large amounts ( eg , phosphorus and potassium ) .

plants use nutrients at different times and at different rates throughout the growing cycle .

for example , for corn , phosphorus is important early in the growing season , but not necessarily later in the season .

nitrogen is important in both the beginning and later in the growing season , before the plant begins the stem - extension phase .

various nutrients are also applied differently by farmers , based on knowledge about nutrient mobility in soils .

for example , nitrogen can be applied using a broadcast method ( discussed further under " best management practices " ) because of its mobility in the soil .

phosphorus , on the other hand , is most effective when placed below the soil surface near the root system because it is generally immobile .

as nutrients cycle through the soil - plant - atmosphere continuum , some are recovered by plant uptake , some incorporated into the soil organic matter ( som ) , and some precipitated as solid minerals .

the remainder can be transported to surface water , groundwater , and the atmosphere .

the increased use of nutrients in agricultural production has increased the potential for nutrient excess and associated environmental and health impairments .

recent water and air quality concerns have brought attention to excessive nutrients in the environment and the damage they can create .

the nutrients of primary environmental concern in agriculture are nitrogen and phosphorus .

water quality concerns are present across the united states for a number of reasons , including pollution from excess nutrients , heavy metals , and toxic substances , to name a few .

overall , data reported by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) and states indicate that 44% of river and stream miles assessed by states and 64% of assessed lake acres do not meet applicable water quality standards and are impaired for one or more desired uses .

in 2006 , epa issued an assessment of streams and small rivers and reported that 67% of u.s. stream miles are in poor or fair condition and that nutrients and streambed sediments have the largest adverse impact on the aquatic species in these waters .

agricultural production can contribute both nutrient and sediment loading to waterways if not properly managed .

nutrient management is a practice whereby nutrient cycles are kept in balance with the surrounding ecosystem .

as most crop production is not considered to be a naturally occurring part of an ecosystem , how production is managed is increasingly important for the overall health of the surrounding environment and sustainability of production .

over time , through research and technological advancements , nutrient management has become increasingly sophisticated .

an advanced understanding of how crops utilize nutrients and how nutrients move in the environment has led to the development of a number of best management practices ( bmps ) for nutrient use .

primarily , nutrient bmps focus on preventing or reducing the ways in which excess nutrients can enter the environment – – erosion , runoff , leaching , volatilization , denitrification , and nitrification .

in many cases , the success of a bmp depends on how and where it is applied .

not all bmps will work in every location , and more than one bmp may be required to correct a nutrient imbalance .

for example , a bmp may help reduce one nutrient but do little to reduce another .

additionally , not all bmps are fail - safe , and they can require a significant amount of time and investment to achieve a successful balance .

this section discusses select examples of nutrient bmps that can lessen the potential harm to water quality .

these examples should not be considered a comprehensive list .

usda's natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) maintains national practice standards for many of these bmps ( table a - 1 ) ; however , state and local regulations may affect how the standards apply locally .

currently , few federal regulations govern the environmental impacts from agriculture .

some environmental laws specifically exempt agriculture from regulatory requirements , and others are structured so that agriculture is not addressed by most , if not all , of the regulatory impact .

the major federal response continues to be through research , education , outreach , and voluntary technical and financial incentives .

despite advancements made through research , education , and funding , environmental problems with excess nutrients from agriculture remain throughout the united states .

as policymakers consider these issues , additional questions may be asked .

regulatory - voluntary balance : currently , few environmental regulations govern nutrients from agriculture ; instead , a more voluntary incentive - based approach is used .

what benefits are achieved through the voluntary approach , and how could they be strengthened ? .

could additional benefits be achieved through regulation , and at what cost ? .

what is an acceptable balance between the two ? .

federal - state - local balance : in many cases , the enforcement of federal laws that address environmental pollution is delegated to the states .

does this model work ? .

should more or less oversight or action occur , and at what level ? .

how can regional and watershed planning impact the overall effectiveness of the current environmental laws ? .

use of current resources : congress authorizes and appropriates billions of dollars for federal conservation efforts each year .

demand for these resources continues to outpace supply .

how are current federal resources for conservation being utilized ? .

how effective are they , and how can they be improved ? .

are federal leveraging programs — such as the regional conservation partnership program , which leverages federal funds with private funds — an effective way to extend the federal dollar ? .

agencies and stakeholders have suggested "targeting" limited resources to areas of greatest need .

to what extent is targeting effective , and what barriers to targeting exist ? .

the source of the problem : the exact sources and causes of nutrient pollution can vary greatly by location .

case study analysis and modeling can assist with identifying sources at the local level but provide little in the way of nationwide conclusions .

what additional research or monitoring efforts are required to identify sources of nutrient pollution ? .

at what level should these efforts occur – – field level , state level , nationally ? .

effectiveness of the solution : conservation bmps are frequently held up as being the solution to agricultural nutrient pollution .

what scientific evidence supports the use of these bmps ? .

can additional research and innovation provide other "tools" in the response "toolbox" ? .

value versus cost of conservation : agricultural producers seek to maximize profit , while simultaneously minimizing cost .

does the value of conservation bmps outweigh the cost ? .

are savings and efficiencies ( if any ) adequately communicated to producers to increase adoption ? .

consequences of actions : nutrient pollution may or may not directly impact the polluters themselves .

according to ers , the cost of removing nitrates from u.s. drinking water supplies is over $4.8 billion per year .

the bulk of this cost is borne by large water utilities and then passed on to consumers .

it is estimated that if the agricultural industry were required to pay based on its contribution to nitrate loading , agriculture's share would be about $1.7 billion per year .

who should bear the cost of nutrient loading ? .

can education and outreach connect on - farm actions to potential off - farm results ? .

increased demand to feed a growing population is frequently cited as the reason for additional agricultural output .

applying additional nutrients for increased yields and managing nutrients from animal production will likely continue if these demands are realized .

this will only elevate the importance of managing these additional nutrients correctly or potentially repeating and exacerbating the environmental degradation that has occurred in the past .

agriculture is one of a number of industries that produces , uses , or releases nutrients that may adversely affect the environment .

the exact source of water impairments is frequently not identified until major ecological events prompt additional research .

even then , the nature of how nutrients move through the environment can make their origin difficult to track .

it is agriculture's use of nutrients and large land - use presence across the united states that have brought attention to how the industry utilizes and manages nutrients .

and while best management practices exist to eliminate or reduce nutrients from entering waterways , they are not required , they may not be effective or affordable in all locations , and the success will depend on how and where they are applied .

some advocate for the additional regulation of agricultural nutrient activities , while others seek to expand incentive - based resources .

the track record of success and failure for both options varies , making the likely solution a balance of the two .

it is this exact balance that congress continues debate through the oversight of current federal activities and consideration of new or modified initiatives .

research , data , and monitoring continue to impact the debate , but perhaps not as much as larger water impairments that affect public health and safety .

