in the united states , it is generally taken for granted that the electricity needed to power the u.s. economy is available on demand and will always be available to power our machines and devices .

however , in recent years , new threats have materialized as new vulnerabilities have come to light , and a number of major concerns have emerged about the resilience and security of the nation's electric power system .

in particular , the cybersecurity of the electricity grid has been a focus of recent efforts to protect the integrity of the electric power system .

power flows on the nation's electricity grid are remotely controlled by a combination of older , legacy systems and newer control technologies .

many of these legacy technologies are analog in design and were not originally connected to the internet ( although many are equipped with radio or other communications capabilities ) .

but as the grid is modernized , the new "intelligent" technologies replacing them use advanced two - way communications and other digital advantages that likely will be optimized by internet connectivity .

while these advances will improve the efficiency and performance of the grid , they also potentially increase the vulnerability of the grid to cyberattacks .

cybersecurity is today , and will continue to be , a major issue and focus area for the electric power sector .

the energy sector ( i.e. , electricity , natural gas , and petroleum ) is one of 16 critical infrastructure sectors designated by the department of homeland security .

incidents of reported cyber intrusions and attacks aimed at undermining the u.s. grid appear to be increasing .

while parts of the electric power subsector have mandatory and enforceable cyber and physical security standards , some have argued that minimum , consensus - based standards are not enough to secure the system .

further , the electric grid is not isolated from attacks on other critical infrastructure sectors on which it depends ( i.e. , the natural gas subsector , water , and transportation ) , and mandatory and enforceable cybersecurity standards apply to only a few of the 16 critical infrastructure sectors .

this report will discuss the current state of electric sector cybersecurity , surveying existing regulations and proposed efforts to improve cybersecurity in the wake of recently reported threats and potential vulnerabilities .

the report will focus on the bulk power system under authority of the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) , which congress directed to establish mandatory and enforceable reliability standards .

many cybersecurity standards and actions are in response to cyber events .

as such , basic compliance with standards by electric utility companies may not be enough to achieve effective cybersecurity protections .

areas for possible further congressional consideration or action will be highlighted in this report .

the electric utility business encompasses the process of generating electricity and sending power to the ultimate user .

the electrical grid is the name given to the machinery and power lines that enable power to be sent from the power plant to the ultimate user of electricity .

as seen in figure 1 , this generally requires an infrastructure made up of generating stations ( where the power is produced ) , step - up transformers and transmission lines ( whereby transformers increase the voltage so that the electricity can be sent over very long distances ) , and step - down transformers and distribution lines ( whereby the voltage can be lowered allowing the electricity to be sent to businesses and homes to power machinery and devices ) .

depending on the regulatory regime in place , these system elements may be controlled by companies under state jurisdiction or entities under federal jurisdiction ( such as regional transmission organizations or federal power marketing administrations ) .

controlling and monitoring the various parts of the grid are industrial control ( ic ) systems , some of which are connected to the internet .

other ic systems are not internet - connected , and still rely on local area networks ( lans ) or similar systems for control and reporting .

the following paragraphs discuss these ic systems and potential vulnerabilities to intrusion and cyberattack .

the increasing frequency of cyber intrusions on industrial control systems of critical infrastructure is a trend of concern to the electric utility industry .

the national security agency reported that it has seen intrusions into ic systems by entities with the apparent technical capability "to take down control systems that operate u.s. power grids , water systems and other critical infrastructure. .

these intrusions , while they have not manifested in cyberattacks capable of inhibiting or disrupting electric system operations , still have reportedly occurred with cip mandatory standards in place .

some have asserted that consensus - based standards are not strong enough , or are not developed quickly enough , to address cybersecurity needs , while others believe the cost of meeting the standards goes beyond the perceived risks .

the following paragraphs describe several recently reported incidents of cyber intrusions and examples of malware found on ic systems that are commonly used to control energy flows on the electric grid .

the bulk electric power system has mandatory and enforceable standards for cybersecurity .

the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact ) ( p.l .

109-58 ) gave the federal energy regulatory commission authority over the reliability of the grid , with the power to approve mandatory cybersecurity standards proposed by the electric reliability organization ( ero ) .

currently , the north american electric reliability corporation ( nerc ) serves as the ero .

nerc therefore proposes reliability standards for critical infrastructure protection ( cip ) which are updated considering the status of reliability and cybersecurity concerns for the grid .

ferc views grid security as a high priority , and separately established the office of energy infrastructure security ( oeis ) to deal with cyber and physical security .

oeis has a mission to provide expertise to the commission to "identify , communicate and seek comprehensive solutions to potential risks to ferc - jurisdictional facilities from cyberattacks and such physical threats as electromagnetic pulses. .

however , ferc still asserts that it does not have the authority to act quickly in the event of a major cyber event .

cooperation between the federal government and the electric power sector now extends beyond mandatory and enforceable industry standards for the bulk electric system .

however , such cooperation has not always been typical .

companies apparently were not aware of other government efforts .

reports began to emerge in 2010 that the federal government has been developing the capability to detect cyber intrusions on private critical infrastructure company networks .

the program dubbed perfect citizen reportedly was designed to detect cyber intrusions using sensors in computer networks that would be activated by "unusual activity. .

while a number of voluntary structures now exist for information sharing and cybersecurity strategies , the degree of adoption by electric utilities and the overall effectiveness of these programs is unknown .

the fy2016 budget proposes $14 billion in cybersecurity funding for "critical initiatives and research" across the federal government .

several of the key organizations and their missions with regard to electric power sector cybersecurity are profiled below .

as noted above , the bulk electric system has mandatory standards for critical infrastructure cybersecurity that nerc proposes , and ferc approves ( or may modify and remand back to nerc ) .

industry compliance with these standards may be enough to prevent fines , but the question is whether existing mandatory standards result in a cybersecure grid .

the grid has reportedly experienced intrusions to scada systems , which could possibly compromise systems operations .

while the exact details and location have not been revealed , the cyberattacks demonstrate potential threats to grid reliability .

although some may believe the risks of a major cyberattack on the grid are small , ferc is obligated to consider cip and cybersecurity as part of its reliability mandate .

this section will summarize current concepts for evaluating and improving electricity subsector cybersecurity .

the electric utility industry is composed of many different companies of various sizes and various ownership and financial structures .

many utilities seem at present to view the potential for a major cybersecurity event as a low probability concern and to want to balance cybersecurity efforts and expenditures with the perceived risks .

nerc's cip version 5 seeks to address that thinking by shifting the focus of utilities to provide the necessary levels of security for bes assets with low , medium , or high system impacts .

however , many other joint federal and industry cybersecurity activities are cooperative , with voluntary adoption of the measures and metrics developed .

the effectiveness of strategies developed and the levels of adoption of recommendations may require congressional evaluation .

even with mandatory standards , the six failure scenario domains identified by nesco illustrate the continuing potential vulnerability of the grid to cyber and physical attacks , or a combination of both .

while improved cyber intrusion detection measures are a high priority , these are more likely to come from government - industry partnerships than from the utility industry's efforts alone .

however , the advice of several initiatives and observers is essentially for electric utilities to embrace cybersecurity as part of their strategic business planning and operations .

cyber intrusions of the grid are believed to be happening , which may be seen as an indication that that more needs to be done by electric utilities to make the system secure .

whether electric utilities can make the investment financially ( and recruit staff ) for such a mission is also an issue .

the threats facing the grid are evolving , and with each new intrusion or cyberattack , priorities to protect the system can shift .

but that does not mean previous attacks can be considered past issues .

scada and other control systems infected by worms such as havex are also vulnerable to other actors who may take advantage of such incursions , using or modifying them for their own purposes .

this can be a particular concern if , for example , a worm originated from a nation - state .

the threat of retaliation would likely be a deterrent from its use by a nation - state , but a terrorist or similar organization would likely be undeterred by such a consequence , and may use the worm for its own purposes .

given the potential for damage to the nation's economy from a major cyberattack on the grid , some might suggest a greater focus on recovery is needed and should become as much a part of a cybersecurity strategy as are efforts to secure the system .

the bulk electric system is subject to mandatory and enforceable critical infrastructure protection rules for cyber and physical security under the ferc's reliability mandate .

however , the energy sector is only one of 16 critical infrastructure sectors identified by dhs .

given that the grid relies on several of the others ( for example , for water and fuel transportation ) , the question of whether these other sectors should also have similar , mandatory standards focused on support of the electric power sector may be an issue for congress to consider .

additionally , ferc still asserts that it does not have the ability to react to a "fast moving or imminent" cyberattack .

congress may want to consider whether ferc should have more authority to deal with cybersecurity threats in real time .

congress enacted provisions in epact giving the federal energy regulatory commission responsibility for the reliability of the grid .

epact specifically restricted ferc from exercising its reliability authority over distribution systems .

even with the recent redefinition of the bes , there are many points to access the grid beyond those covered by cip standards from which a potential cyberattack could be launched .

congress may want to consider whether further protection of the grid is necessary , especially along the seams between the newly revised bes and distribution systems beyond ferc's reliability authority .

such actions may include standards ( voluntary or mandatory ) or defined best practices for facilities connecting to the grid at , for example , a specified voltage level below the bright - line threshold of 120 kv .

congress may want to consider ways to help companies deal with the costs of critical infrastructure protection .

all bes designated facilities ( whether these are low , medium or high risk ) under cip version 5 will be covered by some level of the new requirements .

since the regulatory jurisdictions and financial structures of companies in the electric power industry can differ considerably , congress may want to look at ways to lessen possible financial strains on electric utility systems with legitimate cost - compliance burden concerns .

congress may also want to consider liability protection for electric utilities in the event of a major cyberattack .

the coverage extended by insurance company products currently available may not extend to damage caused by a cyberattack .

the following bills are related to cybersecurity issues presented in this report .

while not specific to electric utilities , they address information sharing generally between federal and private sector companies .

electric utility companies would argue that the protections and two - way information sharing of the types proposed by these bills would likely promote disclosure of cyber incidents , thus potentially improving cybersecurity for all participants .

h.r .

1731 among other actions would amend the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) to enhance multidirectional sharing of information related to cybersecurity risks and strengthen privacy and civil liberties protections .

the bill would allow for sharing of cyber threat indicators and other information related to cybersecurity risks and incidents with federal and nonfederal entities , including across sectors of critical infrastructure .

the national cybersecurity and communications integration center ( nccic ) may enter into a voluntary information - sharing relationship with any consenting nonfederal entity for the purpose of sharing of cyber threat indicators and defensive measures .

a nonfederal entity , not including a state , local , or tribal government that shares cyber threat indicators or defensive measures through the nccic , shall be deemed to have voluntarily shared such information .

h.r .

234 among other actions would direct the federal government to provide for the real - time sharing of actionable , situational cyber threat information between all designated federal cyber operations centers to enable integrated actions to protect , prevent , mitigate , respond to , and recover from cyber incidents .

the bill also would allow the federal intelligence community to share cyber threat intelligence with private - sector entities and utilities possessing appropriate certifications or security clearances .

h.r .

85 among other actions would direct dhs to ( 1 ) work with critical infrastructure owners and operators and other state and local authorities to take proactive steps to manage risk and strengthen the security and resilience of the nation's critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks ; ( 2 ) establish terrorism prevention policy to engage with international partners to strengthen the security and resilience of domestic critical infrastructure and critical infrastructure located outside of the united states ; ( 3 ) establish a task force to conduct research into the best means to address the security and resilience of critical infrastructure in an integrated , holistic manner to reflect critical infrastructure's interconnectedness and interdependency ; ( 4 ) establish the strategic research imperatives program to lead dhs's federal civilian agency approach to strengthen critical infrastructure security and resilience ; and ( 5 ) make available research findings and guidance to federal civilian agencies for the identification , prioritization , assessment , remediation , and security of their internal critical infrastructure to assist in the prevention , mediation , and recovery from terrorism events .

the bill also directs dhs to facilitate the timely exchange of terrorism threat and vulnerability information as well as information that allows for the development of a situational awareness capability for federal civilian agencies during terrorist incidents .

s. 456 among other actions would permit private entities to ( 1 ) disclose lawfully obtained cyber threat indicators to a private information sharing and analysis organization and the nccic ; and ( 2 ) receive indicators disclosed by private entities , the federal government , or state or local governments .

liability protection would be given to entities that voluntarily share lawfully obtained indicators with nccic or a private information sharing and analysis organization if the organization self - certifies that it has adopted the best practices identified by the dhs - selected private entity .

