the freedom of information act ( foia ) , originally enacted in 1966 , provides the public presumed access to federal government information ( 5 u.s.c .

§552 ) .

this access is available to any person , regardless of citizenship , and does not require justification on the part of the requestor .

this presumptive right to access is limited only when the requested information falls within the scope of nine statutory exemptions , which are established by law: 1 .

information properly classified for national defense or foreign policy purposes as secret under criteria established by an executive order ; 2 .

information relating solely to agency internal personnel rules and practices ; 3 .

data specifically exempted from disclosure by a statute other than foia if that statute requires that the data be withheld from the public in such a manner as to leave no discretion on the issue ; establishes particular criteria for withholding information or refers to particular types of matters to be withheld ; or specifically cites to this exemption ( if the statute is enacted after october 28 , 2009 , the date of enactment of the open foia act of 2009 ) ; 4 .

trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from a person that is privileged or confidential ; 5 .

inter - or intra - agency memoranda or letters that would not be available by law except to an agency in litigation ; 6 .

personnel , medical , or similar files , the disclosure of which would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy ; 7 .

certain kinds of records compiled for law enforcement purposes ; 8 .

certain information relating to the regulation of financial institutions ; and 9 .

geological and geophysical information and data .

these exemptions are intended to prevent the disclosure of certain types of records , with examples including those related to law enforcement proceedings , personally identifiable information , or records pertaining to national security .

foia has been subsequently amended multiple times , most recently by the open foia act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-83 ) .

in march of 2009 , attorney general eric holder distributed a memorandum related to foia to the heads of all executive departments and agencies .

the memorandum built upon a previous memorandum from president obama , which stated that foia "should be administered with a clear presumption: in the face of doubt , openness prevails. .

to reinforce this point , the memorandum from the attorney general instructed agencies to preemptively disclose information prior to a public request , partially disclose information in the event that some aspect of a record must be withheld , and not withhold information simply because it falls within the strict legal parameters of an exemption .

further , the memorandum stated that the department of justice will defend a denial of a foia request only if ( 1 ) the agency reasonably foresees that disclosure would harm an interest protected by one of the statutory exemptions , or ( 2 ) the disclosure is prohibited by law .

the new policy established by this memorandum is often referred to as "the presumption of openness. .

this guidance from the obama administration departed from the previous administration's position on foia implementation , in which the department of justice stated that it would defend any decision to withhold information under a foia exemption if the decision had a "sound legal basis" and did not "present an unwarranted risk of adverse impact on the ability of other agencies to protect other important records. .

in recent years , some members of congress have expressed interest in further amending foia to address both the presumption of openness and other issues , especially the electronic accessibility of agency records .

during the 113 th and 114 th congresses , legislation to amend foia was considered in both the house and the senate .

in both chambers , the currently proposed foia amendments address many of the same issues , often with similar language .

the bills , however , also contain substantive differences .

this report provides an overview of two foia bills in the 114 th congress , s. 337 and h.r .

653 , and provides analysis of certain foia - related provisions within each .

while the legislation proposed in both the house and senate seeks to address many of the same aspects of foia — often through very similar language — there are substantive differences between the bills .

for example , while h.r .

653 , as referred in the senate , would authorize inspectors general to review agencies' foia compliance and potentially recommend adverse action , the senate bill does not .

furthermore , the house legislation , as referred in the senate , would limit the scope of exemption 5 , preventing the withholding of "opinions that are controlling interpretations of law," "final reports or memoranda created by an entity other than the agency ... [that are] used to make a final policy decision," and "guidance documents used by the agency to respond to the public. .

s. 337 has no similar articulation of specific information outside of the scope of exemption 5 .

additionally , h.r .

653 , as referred in the senate , includes provisions that prescribe a particular process a federal agency is to follow when it is required to contact another agency or a nongovernmental entity to determine whether to release a requested record .

h.r .

653 also contains provisions requiring annual training for employees on their foia - related responsibilities .

s. 337 , as amended , does not contain the new process or the training requirement provisions .

in some areas , the amendments to the house and senate bills made the bills more similar .

for example , an amendment to h.r .

653 brought the process for determining foia - related search or duplication fees assessed after statutory deadlines have passed more in line with the provisions in s. 337 .

as amended , both bills seek to place more requirements and standards on federal agencies — including a 10-day extension for providing records in particular cases , and a notice requirement for agencies to tell requesters when such particular circumstances apply .

senator john cornyn introduced the foia improvement act of 2015 ( s. 337 ) on february 2 , 2015 , and the judiciary committee reported the bill on february 9 , 2015 .

this legislation was primarily built on similar legislation from the 113 th congress ( s. 2520 ) , which is discussed in greater detail below .

in the house , representative darrell e. issa introduced the foia act ( h.r .

653 ) on february 2 , 2015 , which was referred to the committee on oversight and government reform .

this bill is based in large part on h.r .

1211 , proposed in the 113 th congress .

both s. 337 and h.r .

653 address many of the same topics , with important similarities and differences in their approaches .

since their introductions , both bills have been amended , including s. 337 having its title amended to reflect the date change to 2016 .

on january 11 , 2016 , h.r .

653 was passed on a motion to suspend the rules and pass the bill .

on january 12 , 2016 , the bill was received in the senate and referred to the senate committee on the judiciary .

on march 15 , 2016 , s. 337 passed the senate by unanimous consent .

since march 16 , 2016 , the bill has been held at the desk in the house .

no further action has been taken on either bill .

table 1 below provides a side - by - side comparison of s. 337 and h.r .

653 , using the version of s. 337 passed by the senate and the version of h.r .

653 that was referred to the senate's committee on the judiciary .

in most cases , footnotes indicate amendments made to the bill from its introduced version .

when applicable , the footnote includes current foia requirements and practices , providing context to the amending language .

the substantive components of the bills have been grouped into four categories: 1 .

presumption of openness: provisions related to the overall standards by which agencies make determinations regarding the withholding or disclosure of information .

2 .

foia administration and exemption use: provisions that would alter the process or policy by which agencies administer foia , manage appeals , or disclose records .

3 .

oversight and reporting: provisions regarding the role of oversight entities , including congress and the government accountability office ( gao ) , and new reporting requirements put in place by the legislation .

4 .

new roles and responsibilities: provisions amending or clarifying the functions of the office of government information services ( ogis ) , a component of the national archives and records administration ( nara ) , or the chief foia officer designated at each agency .

the legislation currently being considered by the 114 th congress is based in substantial part on bills that were advanced in the 113 th congress .

in the senate , the foia improvement act of 2014 ( s. 2520 ) was introduced by senator leahy on june 24 , 2014 .

this legislation was reported by the judiciary committee on november 20 , 2014 , and passed the senate by unanimous consent on december 8 , 2014 .

this legislation was nearly identical to the foia improvement act of 2015 , introduced in the 114 th congress .

in the house , the foia act ( h.r .

1211 ) was introduced by representative darrell issa on march 15 , 2013 .

also in march of 2013 , the house oversight and government reform committee held a hearing entitled , "addressing transparency in the federal bureaucracy: moving toward a more open government. .

during this hearing , members expressed their support for the "presumption of openness" established by the president and asked questions of those who provided testimony on many of the issues that were addressed by the foia act , including a single portal for foia requests government - wide and a more independent role for ogis in foia implementation .

the foia act was reported by the house oversight and government reform committee on july 16 , 2013 , and passed the full house unanimously on february 25 , 2014 , by a vote of 410-0 .

this legislation differed from h.r .

653 in two substantive ways .

first , h.r .

1211 did not include any provisions altering the use of exemption 5 .

second , section 3 of h.r .

1211 would have required omb to establish a three - year pilot program to review the centralized portal for requests .

this review would have required omb to select agencies with differing levels of foia request traffic , assess the benefits of the centralized portal , and provide a report to congress on the success of the pilot .

the legislation currently being considered by the 114 th congress includes the creation of a consolidated portal , but no pilot program for review .

in regard to both the use of exemption 5 and the consolidated portal , h.r .

653 is closer to its senate counterpart than h.r .

1211 was during the 113 th congress .

