the national science and technology policy , organization , and priorities act of 1976 ( p.l .

94-282 ) established the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) , including the position of its director , within the executive office of the president ( eop ) to provide scientific and technological analysis and advice to the president .

the act also codified a presidential science advice function that previously existed at each president's discretion .

this report provides background on eop science and technology ( s&t ) advice to the president and discusses selected issues and options for congress regarding ostp's director , ostp management and operations , the president's council of advisors on science and technology ( pcast ) , and the national science and technology council ( nstc ) .

for additional information on ostp , including historical information regarding funding and provision of scientific advice , see crs report r43935 , office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) : history and overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed .

congress established the office of science and technology policy as an office within the eop to , among other things , "serve as a source of scientific and technological analysis and judgment for the president with respect to major policies , plans , and programs of the federal government. .

within the context of its organic statute , ostp currently defines its mission as having three components: provide the president and his senior staff with accurate , relevant , and timely scientific and technical advice on all matters of consequence .

ensure that the policies of the executive branch are informed by sound science .

ensure that the scientific and technical work of the executive branch is properly coordinated so as to provide the greatest benefit to society .

to this end , ostp has established the following strategic goals and objectives: ensure that federal investments in science and technology are making the greatest possible contribution to economic prosperity , public health , environmental quality , and national security .

energize and nurture the processes by which government programs in science and technology are resourced , evaluated , and coordinated .

sustain the core professional and scientific relationships with government officials , academics , and industry representatives that are required to understand the depth and breadth of the nation's scientific and technical enterprise , evaluate scientific advances , and identify potential policy proposals .

generate a core workforce of world - class expertise capable of providing policy - relevant advice , analysis , and judgment for the president and his senior staff regarding the scientific and technical aspects of the major policies , plans , and programs of the federal government .

ostp also has several roles not articulated in these formal statements .

these include serving as a sounding board and conduit of information for agency executives seeking to understand , clarify , and help shape science and technology - related policy objectives and priorities and helping to resolve interagency conflicts over areas of s&t responsibility and leadership .

ostp also plays a managerial and executive role with respect to other white house science and technology entities .

ostp manages the nstc and exercises policy and programmatic oversight of pcast .

congressional oversight of ostp and influence over its activities are ongoing processes .

the 114 th congress may opt to consider a variety of issues and legislative options related to ostp .

these include: the compliance of ostp with statutory restrictions on its use of appropriated funds for certain activities involving china ; the reporting structure of the office of the u.s. chief technology officer ; the role of ostp in ensuring scientific integrity in federally funded and supported research , including the communication of scientific and technical information by federal scientists and engineers ; efforts by ostp to effect change in federal policies regarding public access to the results of federally funded research and development ( r&d ) ; and efforts by ostp to consolidate federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education initiatives and activities .

the following sections address each of these issues , along with obama administration efforts and policy options for congress .

the 114 th congress is considering a number of bills that would directly affect the operations or priorities of ostp or nstc , and they are described below .

a number of these bills contain common or similar provisions .

congress has expressed an abiding interest in the health of the federal science and technology ( s&t ) enterprise and the roles that it plays in meeting federal mission needs , expanding the frontiers of human knowledge , addressing societal needs , developing the u.s. science and engineering workforce , and promoting u.s. technological leadership , innovation , and competitiveness .

for more than half a century , presidential science advisors have played a central role in u.s. s&t policy — informing presidents on s&t issues , serving as liaisons to the s&t community , and articulating presidential priorities to federal s&t agencies and to the public .

in addition , since 1976 , presidential science advisors have directed and managed the office of science and technology policy .

ostp plays an important role in coordinating and integrating the activities of federal s&t enterprise , acquiring scientific and technical advice and information from the private sector , and advising the president on related matters .

congress provides oversight of ostp in the execution of its statutory authorities .

in addition to the legislation currently under consideration , the 114 th congress may explore issues and legislative options related to the structure of ostp , its authorities , its relationships with the nstc and pcast , and the portfolio of policy issues identified in this report .

