although the cra offers a number of advantages to congress , as discussed above , congress also has a number of other tools available to conduct oversight of federal agency rulemaking .

these tools include general legislative powers , oversight hearings , meetings with agency officials , and appropriations language .

each of these is briefly discussed below .

every rule issued by a federal agency must be based upon a grant of authority given to that agency by congress in statute , and it is congress's prerogative to ensure that agencies issue rules in a manner consistent with congressional intent .

as such , congress can use its legislative power to oversee the issuance and implementation of rules , or even require that an agency repeal a rule .

for example , congress can make a change to the underlying statute authorizing a rule or enact legislation that simply overrides the rule .

such a change could remove or change the agency's authority to issue the rule , or it could prescribe more specifically in law what the rule should contain .

the advantage of using the cra is that the procedures it provides for , particularly in the senate , can make it easier to pass a joint resolution of disapproval than to pass a regular bill .

however , as discussed in detail below , members must submit and act on a cra resolution within a particular time period following issuance of a rule , whereas congress can use its general legislative power to act on a rule at any time .

hearings are another method of conducting oversight of federal rules .

congressional committees can hold oversight hearings at any time that focus on the development or implementation of a particular rule or set of rules that fall under their jurisdiction .

oversight hearings can give members a chance to ask agency officials questions about rules and communicate their views to agency officials .

a member of congress also can request a meeting with the rulemaking agency while a rule is under development to communicate his or her views to the agency .

in addition , a member can request to meet with the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) , the entity within omb that reviews most agency regulations prior to their publication .

such meetings are sometimes referred to as "12866 meetings," a reference to executive order 12866 , which governs oira review of agency rulemaking .

during the review process , oira can play a significant role in the content of a proposed or final rule .

therefore , members may want to make their views known to oira while the rule is under review .

finally , congress has frequently used appropriations legislation to restrict an agency's use of funds to promulgate or implement particular regulations .

however , unlike cra joint resolutions of disapproval , provisions of this type do not nullify an existing regulation , nor do they remove the agency's underlying statutory authority to issue a regulation .

therefore , any final rule that has taken effect will continue to be binding law — even if an appropriations restriction prohibits the agency from using funds to enforce the rule .

in addition , restrictions on the use of funds in appropriations acts , unless otherwise specified , are binding only for the period of time covered by the measure ( i.e. , a fiscal year or a portion of a fiscal year ) .

in these instances , any restriction that is not repeated in the next relevant appropriations act or enacted as part of another measure no longer binds the relevant agency or agencies .

the regulations from the executive in need of scrutiny ( reins ) act ( h.r .

427 and s. 226 in the 114 th congress ) is one legislative proposal that would amend the cra .

the reins act would keep the current requirements of the cra in place for non - major rules , but for any rule deemed to be major , it would require congress to vote to approve the rule before it can take effect .

as is currently the case under the cra for a resolution of disapproval , the reins act provides a certain set of procedures under which a resolution of approval would be considered in each chamber .

earlier versions of the reins act passed the house in the 113 th and the 112 th congresses ( h.r .

367 and h.r .

10 , respectively ) .

another legislative proposal that would amend the cra is h.r .

5982 , the midnight rules relief act .

if enacted , h.r .

5982 would make it easier for a new congress to disapprove multiple rules issued in the final months of an outgoing president's administration .

currently , as described above , congress can overturn a single final rule through enactment of a joint resolution of disapproval — a disapproval resolution cannot be used to overturn more than one rule .

in addition , if a rule is submitted late enough in a session of congress , there may be additional time periods for consideration available in the next session .

h.r .

5982 would amend the cra to allow a disapproval resolution to contain more than one rule for those late - issued rules finalized by an outgoing administration — that is , for rules submitted to congress during the final 60 days of session in the senate or 60 legislative days in the house of representatives before sine die adjournment .

