s ecuring the international borders of the united states has been an issue of perennial interest and importance to the federal government .

federal law authorizes the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to construct barriers along the u.s. borders to deter illegal crossings .

dhs is also required to construct reinforced fencing along at least 700 miles of the land border with mexico , though fencing is not required to be deployed at any "particular location" alon g that border .

responsibility for carrying out these functions , and more generally securing the u.s. land borders between ports of entry , primarily falls to u.s. border patrol within dhs's customs and border protection ( cbp ) .

although congressional interest in the legal framework governing fence deployment has , in recent years , tended to focus on the stringency of the statutory mandate to deploy fencing along at least 700 miles of the southern border , attention has now shifted to those provisions in current law which allow , but do not require , the deployment of fencing and other barriers along additional portions of the u.s. land borders .

within days of taking office , president donald j. trump issued an executive order instructing the secretary of homeland security , acting under existing legal authorities , to "take all appropriate steps to immediately plan , design , and construct a physical wall along the southern border ... to most effectively achieve complete operational control" of the u.s. - mexico border .

the order defines a "wall" to mean "a contiguous , physical wall or other similarly secure , contiguous , and impassable physical barrier. .

the order does not identify the contemplated mileage of the wall to be constructed .

the primary statute authorizing dhs to deploy barriers along the international borders is section 102 of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ) .

congress made significant amendments to iirira section 102 through three enactments — the real id act of 2005 , the secure fence act of 2006 , and the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 .

these amendments established a mandate upon dhs to construct hundreds of miles of new fencing along the u.s. - mexico border , and also provided the secretary of homeland security with broad authority to waive "all legal requirements" that may impede construction of barriers and roads under iirira section 102 .

these statutory modifications , along with increased funding for border projects , resulted in the deployment of several hundred miles of fencing and other barriers along the southwest land border between 2005 and 2011 .

a portion of this infrastructure is fencing that is primarily intended to prevent illegal border crossings by foot ( referred to by dhs as "pedestrian fencing" ) .

other types of barriers have been installed to impede vehicles from smuggling persons or contraband into the united states ( referred to by dhs as "vehicle fencing" ) , but do not stop crossings by persons traveling on foot .

in some instances , an additional layer of fencing ( secondary fencing ) may also be installed behind primary pedestrian fencing to further impede illegal crossings .

the efficacy of deploying additional fencing along the border has been the subject of debate among many policymakers , particularly regarding the cost , environmental impact , and effectiveness of border fencing in comparison to alternative means of deterring illegal crossings .

largely on account of changes in dhs's border enforcement strategy and prioritization of resources during the obama administration , the construction of additional fencing along the land border with mexico has largely halted .

in october 2014 , dhs indicated that it had constructed a total of 352.7 miles of pedestrian fence ( in addition 36.3 miles of secondary fencing ) , and 299 miles of vehicle fencing along the southwest border .

the total amount of pedestrian and vehicle fencing identified by dhs was slightly less than the 653 miles that u.s. border patrol had reportedly identified as appropriate for fencing and other barriers .

however , it appears that further fencing would need to be deployed in order for dhs to satisfy the statutory requirement that the agency construct fencing "along not less than 700 miles of the southwest border. .

proposals were introduced or considered by congress in recent years to modify statutory authorities governing dhs's deployment of fencing and other infrastructure along or near the border , including by calling for the deployment of additional fencing , but such legislation has not been enacted .

dhs's policy not to deploy a substantial amount of additional fencing , beyond what is expressly required by law , appeared to be premised primarily on policy considerations and funding constraints , rather than significant legal impediments .

indeed , nothing in current statute would appear to bar dhs from installing hundreds of miles of additional physical barriers along the u.s. - mexico border , even beyond the 700 miles required by law , so long as the action was determined appropriate to deter illegal crossings in areas of high illegal entry or was deemed warranted to achieve "operational control" of the southern border .

this report provides an overview of the key statutory authorities and requirements governing dhs's construction of barriers along the international borders of the united states .

it also includes appendixes listing federal laws that have been waived by dhs in furtherance of border construction projects .

the report , however , does not discuss proposals to modify this framework or fund an expansion of border fencing .

prior to 1996 , federal immigration statutes did not expressly authorize or require the construction of barriers along the u.s. international borders .

in the preceding years , authority to deploy any such barriers appears to have primarily derived from the general statutory responsibility of the attorney general ( and now the secretary of homeland security ) to "guard the boundaries and borders of the united states against the illegal entry of aliens. .

perhaps the most prominent example of this general authority being employed to construct barriers occurred in the early 1990s , when the u.s. border patrol ( with the assistance of the department of defense's army corps of engineers ) installed 10-foot - high , welded - steel fencing along roughly 14 miles of the border near san diego .

in 1996 , congress passed iirira , which expressly instructed immigration authorities to construct barriers along the international land borders to deter unauthorized migration .

this requirement , contained in iirira section 102 , has been amended on three occasions , and its current language can be viewed at appendix a .

among other things , iirira section 102 in its current form generally authorizes dhs to construct barriers and roads along the international borders in order to deter illegal crossings at locations of high illegal entry ; requires the construction of reinforced fencing covering at least 700 miles along the southwest border , though the secretary is not required to install fencing at any particular location ; authorizes for the installation of additional physical barriers and infrastructure to gain operational control of the southwest border ; requires a specified amount of fencing in priority areas along the southwest border , which dhs was instructed to have completed by december 31 , 2008 ; and provides the secretary of homeland security with authority to waive any legal requirements which may impede construction of barriers and roads under section 102 .

the following sections discuss each of these requirements , including how they have been modified over the years .

pursuant to iirira section 102 , congress has conferred dhs with clear authority to construct barriers and roads along the international land borders to deter illegal crossings in areas of high illegal entry .

more specifically , it has required fencing to be constructed along specified mileage of the southwest border .

in recent years , legislative attention has primarily focused upon the fencing requirements contained in iirira section 102 ( b ) .

prior versions of section 102 ( b ) imposed specific requirements as to the location where fencing was to be installed and the layers of fencing to be constructed .

the current provision affords dhs with significantly greater discretion to determine the appropriate location , layers , and types of fencing to be installed along the southwest border .

whether dhs has discretion to construct less fencing than the amount specified under iirira section 102 ( b ) , on account of a proviso that posits that the agency is not required to construct fencing at any "particular location" where it deems fencing to be inappropriate , has been the subject of disagreement ( and apparently inconsistent views by dhs itself ) .

while there appears to be stronger support for construing section 102 ( b ) to establish a firm mandate for the deployment of fencing along 700 miles of the border , with the agency retaining discretion as to the locations along the border where fencing should be installed , it is not clear whether a court would have the ability to compel dhs to install additional fencing ( or that a plaintiff would have standing to bring such a claim ) .

if congress disagrees with dhs's implementation of the fencing mandate under section 102 ( b ) , it would likely need to enact legislation to modify or clarify the fencing requirements found in current statute .

but even assuming that dhs satisfies the fencing requirements under section 102 ( b ) , the general authority conferred to the agency under section 102 ( a ) permits it to construct additional fencing or other barriers along the u.s. land borders .

moreover , section 102 ( b ) authorizes dhs to deploy additional physical barriers — beyond the mandated fencing along 700 miles of the southwest border — in order to obtain operational control of the southwest border .

there is nothing in current statute that would appear to bar dhs from potentially installing hundreds of miles of additional fencing or other physical barriers along the border , at least so long as the action was determined appropriate to deter illegal crossings in areas of high illegal entry .

in addition , iirira section 102 ( c ) grants dhs authority to waive any legal requirement that would impede the expeditious construction of additional barriers and roads .

dhs's decision not to deploy a substantial amount of additional fencing , beyond what is required under iirira section 102 ( b ) , appears primarily premised on policy considerations and funding constraints , rather than significant legal impediments .

accordingly , policymakers may deem it appropriate to review and assess the scope of dhs's authority to construct barriers , and the manner in which such authority is exercised , even after any requirements under iirira section 102 ( b ) are satisfied .

appendix a. iirira section 102 , as amended ( text ) sec .

102 - improvement of barriers at border ( a ) in general. - the secretary of homeland security shall take such actions as may be necessary to install additional physical barriers and roads ( including the removal of obstacles to detection of illegal entrants ) in the vicinity of the united states border to deter illegal crossings in areas of high illegal entry into the united states .

 ( b ) construction of fencing and road improvements along the border. - ( 1 ) additional fencing along southwest border. - ( a ) reinforced fencing. - in carrying out subsection ( a ) , the secretary of homeland security shall construct reinforced fencing along not less than 700 miles of the southwest border where fencing would be most practical and effective and provide for the installation of additional physical barriers , roads , lighting , cameras , and sensors to gain operational control of the southwest border .

 ( b ) priority areas. - in carrying out this section [amending this section] , the secretary of homeland security shall - ( i ) identify the 370 miles , or other mileage determined by the secretary , whose authority to determine other mileage shall expire on december 31 , 2008 , along the southwest border where fencing would be most practical and effective in deterring smugglers and aliens attempting to gain illegal entry into the united states ; and ( ii ) not later than december 31 , 2008 , complete construction of reinforced fencing along the miles identified under clause ( i ) .

 ( c ) consultation. - ( i ) in general. - in carrying out this section , the secretary of homeland security shall consult with the secretary of the interior , the secretary of agriculture , states , local governments , indian tribes , and property owners in the united states to minimize the impact on the environment , culture , commerce , and quality of life for the communities and residents located near the sites at which such fencing is to be constructed .

 ( ii ) savings provision. - nothing in this subparagraph may be construed to - ( i ) create or negate any right of action for a state , local government , or other person or entity affected by this subsection ; or ( ii ) affect the eminent domain laws of the united states or of any state .

 ( d ) limitation on requirements. - notwithstanding subparagraph ( a ) , nothing in this paragraph shall require the secretary of homeland security to install fencing , physical barriers , roads , lighting , cameras , and sensors in a particular location along an international border of the united states , if the secretary determines that the use or placement of such resources is not the most appropriate means to achieve and maintain operational control over the international border at such location .

 ( 2 ) prompt acquisition of necessary easements. - the attorney general , acting under the authority conferred in section 103 ( b ) of the immigration and nationality act [8 u.s.c .

1103 ( b ) ] ( as inserted by subsection ( d ) ) , shall promptly acquire such easements as may be necessary to carry out this subsection and shall commence construction of fences immediately following such acquisition ( or conclusion of portions thereof ) .

 ( 3 ) safety features. - the attorney general , while constructing the additional fencing under this subsection , shall incorporate such safety features into the design of the fence system as are necessary to ensure the well - being of border patrol agents deployed within or in near proximity to the system .

 ( 4 ) authorization of appropriations. - there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this subsection .

amounts appropriated under this paragraph are authorized to remain available until expended .

 ( c ) waiver. - ( 1 ) in general. - notwithstanding any other provision of law , the secretary of homeland security shall have the authority to waive all legal requirements such secretary , in such secretary's sole discretion , determines necessary to ensure expeditious construction of the barriers and roads under this section [amending this section] .

any such decision by the secretary shall be effective upon being published in the federal register .

 ( 2 ) federal court review. - ( a ) in general. - the district courts of the united states shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear all causes or claims arising from any action undertaken , or any decision made , by the secretary of homeland security pursuant to paragraph ( 1 ) .

a cause of action or claim may only be brought alleging a violation of the constitution of the united states .

the court shall not have jurisdiction to hear any claim not specified in this subparagraph .

 ( b ) time for filing of complaint. - any cause or claim brought pursuant to subparagraph ( a ) shall be filed not later than 60 days after the date of the action or decision made by the secretary of homeland security .

a claim shall be barred unless it is filed within the time specified .

 ( c ) ability to seek appellate review. - an interlocutory or final judgment , decree , or order of the district court may be reviewed only upon petition for a writ of certiorari to the supreme court of the united states .

appendix b .

legal requirements waived by dhs for the construction of the san diego border fence appendix c. legal requirements waived by dhs for the construction of physical barriers and roads in the vicinity of the barry m. goldwater range in southwest arizona appendix d. legal requirements waived by dhs for the construction of physical barriers and roads in the vicinity of the san pedro riparian national conservation area in southeast arizona appendix e. legal requirements waived by dhs for the construction of physical barriers and roads in hidalgo county , texas appendix f. legal requirements waived by dhs for the construction of physical barriers and roads at various project areas located in california , arizona , new mexico , and texa .

