the 114 th congress has made fighting trafficking in persons ( tip ) within the united states a legislative priority .

tip is of significant interest to the united states as a serious human rights concern and a prolific area of contemporary criminal activity .

tip is both an international and domestic crime that involves violations of labor , public health , and human rights standards , as well as criminal law .

the united states is a source , transit , and destination country for men , women , and children subject to trafficking in persons .

human trafficking occurs in every state , and it victimizes both u.s. citizens and noncitizens .

there are no current , reliable data on the number of individuals trafficked in the united states .

however , some have suggested as many as 17,500 may be trafficked into the country each year , and perhaps 100,000 u.s. citizen children may be victims of trafficking within the united states .

the trafficking of individuals within u.s. borders is commonly referred to as domestic human trafficking ; it occurs primarily for labor , most often in domestic service , agriculture , manufacturing , janitorial services , hotel services , construction , health and elder care , hair and nail salons , and strip club dancing .

however , more investigations and prosecutions have taken place for sex trafficking offenses than for labor trafficking offenses .

noncitizens are more susceptible than u.s. citizens to labor trafficking , and more foreign victims are found in labor trafficking than in sex trafficking .

migrant labor camps tend to be common settings for labor exploitation and domestic trafficking .

although labor trafficking can happen to u.s. citizens , significantly more u.s. citizens are found in sex trafficking than in labor trafficking .

research indicates that most of the victims of sex trafficking into and within the united states are women and children .

domestically , anti - tip efforts include protection for victims , education of the public , and the investigation and prosecution of trafficking offenses .

the departments of justice ( doj ) , health and human services ( hhs ) , and labor ( dol ) have programs or administer grants to other entities to provide assistance specific to the needs of trafficking victims .

this includes temporary housing , independent living skills , cultural orientation , transportation , job training , mental health counseling , and legal assistance .

a number of federal agencies administer public awareness campaigns on recognizing human trafficking victims .

the majority of cases investigated at the federal level are handled by agents in doj's federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and the department of homeland security's ( dhs' ) u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , among others , who coordinate as appropriate .

these cases are prosecuted by doj .

for more than a decade , congress has been actively legislating to counter domestic human trafficking .

through the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( tvpa , division a of p.l .

106-386 ) and its four reauthorizations ( tvpras ) , congress has aimed to eliminate human trafficking within the united states by creating domestic grant programs for both victims and law enforcement , enhancing criminal laws , and conducting oversight on the effectiveness and implications of u.s. anti - tip policy .

the most recent reauthorization of the tvpa was in the violence against women reauthorization act of 2013 ( title xii of p.l .

113-4 ) .

in addition to making other changes to the act , congress reauthorized the grant programs through fy2017 .

this report discusses domestic human trafficking - related issues that have received legislative action or are of significant interest in the 114 th congress .

it accompanies crs report rl34317 , trafficking in persons: u.s. policy and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r41878 , sex trafficking of children in the united states: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

federal statutes do not formally define human trafficking or trafficking in persons .

instead , the tvpa defines "severe forms of trafficking in persons" to mean ( a ) sex trafficking in which a commercial sex act is induced by force , fraud , or coercion , or in which the person induced to perform such act has not attained 18 years of age ; or ( b ) the recruitment , harboring , transportation , provision , or obtaining of a person for labor or services , through the use of force , fraud , or coercion for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude , peonage , debt bondage , or slavery .

there appears to be a consensus among experts that the prostitution of minors fits the definition of "severe forms of trafficking in persons" as defined under the tvpa .

this report examines the trafficking - related provisions in legislation that has at least been reported out of committee in the 114 th congress .

where applicable , it discusses companion legislation that may not have been considered in committee and related legislation in the 113 th congress .

the legislation includes the following: stop exploitation through trafficking act of 2015 ( h.r .

159 ) , as passed by the house on january 27 , 2015 .

justice for victims of trafficking act of 2015 ( h.r .

181 ) , as passed by the house on january 27 , 2015 .

to improve the response to victims of child sex trafficking ( h.r .

246 ) , as passed by the house on january 27 , 2015 .

stop advertising victims of exploitation act of 2015 ( save act , h.r .

285 ) , as passed by the house on january 27 , 2015 .

human trafficking prevention , intervention , and recovery act of 2015 ( h.r .

350 ) , as passed by the house on january 27 , 2015 .

human trafficking prevention act ( h.r .

357 ) , as passed by the house on january 26 , 2015 .

trafficking awareness training for health care act of 2015 ( h.r .

398 ; s. 205 ) , as passed by the house on january 27 , 2015 .

human trafficking detection act of 2015 ( h.r .

460 ) , as passed by the house on january 27 , 2015 .

enhancing services for runaway and homeless victims of youth trafficking act of 2015 ( h.r .

468 ) , as passed by the house on january 26 , 2015 .

strengthening child welfare response to trafficking act of 2015 ( h.r .

469 ) , as passed by the house on january 27 , 2015 .

human trafficking prioritization act ( h.r .

514 ) , as passed by the house on january 26 , 2015. international megan's law to prevent demand for child sex trafficking ( h.r .

515 ) , as passed by the house on january 26 , 2015 .

stop exploitation through trafficking act of 2015 ( s. 166 ) , as reported by the senate judiciary committee on february 26 , 2015 .

justice for victims of trafficking act of 2015 ( s. 178 ) , as reported by the senate committee on the judiciary on february 26 , 2015 .

the sections that follow discuss issues raised in the bills .

the issues are grouped under the following themes: ( 1 ) restoring victims through services and benefits , ( 2 ) criminal justice , ( 3 ) domestic sex trafficking of children , and ( 4 ) other issues that include inter - agency coordination , training , and sex offender registry and notification .

in general , the trafficking business feeds on continuing demand and conditions of vulnerability , such as youth , gender , poverty , and social exclusion .

actors engaged in human trafficking range from family - run organizations to sophisticated transnational organized crime syndicates .

trafficking victims are often subjected to mental and physical abuse in order to control them .

abuses may include debt bondage , social isolation , removal of identification cards and travel documents , violence , and threat of reprisals against them or their families .

a major aspect of u.s. anti - trafficking efforts is victim assistance: providing immediate services when victims are identified and helping them recover from the victimization and reclaim their lives .

pending legislation ( h.r .

181 , h.r .

159 , h.r .

350 , s. 166 , and s. 178 ) seeks to improve services to victims .

while the united states has a number of statutes that can and have been used to combat human trafficking , law enforcement and policymakers remain interested in ways to enhance investigations and prosecutions of individuals who commit trafficking offenses .

in general , federal law enforcement has targeted criminal networks that may involve individuals operating in a number of capacities .

in an effort to help law enforcement combat the advertising side of commercial sexual exploitation , h.r .

285 aims to permit the prosecution of entities ( including websites ) that advertise a person "knowing" , or in reckless disregard of the fact , that force or fraud has been used to cause the person to engage in a commercial sex act or that the victim is a minor .

for entities that have not advertised but "benefit" from participating in a venture that has engaged in such advertising , reckless disregard of the fact that force or fraud has been used or that a minor was involved would not be enough ; they would have to know either fact exists .

h.r .

181 and s. 178 would expand the ability of federal , state , and local prosecutors to obtain wiretap orders from courts for certain investigations by including additional trafficking - related offenses as allowable investigations .

h.r .

181 and s. 178 would also expand law enforcement's "toolbox" for prosecuting individuals who transport minors for illegal sexual activity by requiring prosecutors to show "clear and convincing evidence" rather than a "preponderance of evidence" that the defendants knew that the individual with whom they had engaged in sexual activity had not attained 18 years of age .

h.r .

159 and s. 166 would clarify that the u.s .

marshals service has the authority to help ( upon request ) federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies in locating and recovering missing children .

domestic sex trafficking of children is trafficking within the united states involving a commercial sex act in which the person induced to perform such act has not attained 18 years of age .

regardless of whether a child is believed to have consented to sex or whether the child represents himself / herself as an adult , the child is considered a trafficking victim under federal law .

the exact number of child victims of sex trafficking in the united states is unknown because of challenges in defining the population and varying methodologies used to arrive at estimates .

most of the victims are u.s. citizens and lprs .

commercial sexual exploitation of children appears to be fueled by a variety of individual ( eg , homelessness or history of child abuse ) , relationship ( eg , family conflict or dysfunction ) , community ( eg , peer pressure or gang involvement ) , and societal ( eg , sexualization of children ) variables .

these factors may interact in ways that can increase the risk of exploitation .

as part of its 2013 report on child sex trafficking , the national academy of sciences recommended that multiple stakeholders — such as the federal government , state and local governments , academic and research institutions , foundations and nongovernmental organizations , and the commercial sector — collaborate to address this issue .

the 113 th congress passed legislation to address sex trafficking of children , including the e. clay shaw , jr .

missing children's assistance reauthorization act ( p.l .

113-38 ) and the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) .

p.l .

113-38 directs doj's missing and exploited children's program to provide assistance to responders that assist child sex trafficking victims , and p.l .

113-183 requires child welfare agencies to identify and determine appropriate services for certain children who are victims of sex trafficking , or are at risk of victimization .

in addition , the 2013 tvpa reauthorization act ( p.l .

113-4 ) created a new discretionary grant program for child sex trafficking victims .

the new grant program authorizes doj , in consultation with hhs , to award one - year grants to six grantees to combat sex trafficking of children in the united states , with a focus on providing direct services to victims .

the 114 th congress continues to consider legislation on sex trafficking of children .

many of these bills touch on a variety of policy areas , including missing and runaway youth , the child welfare system , and juvenile justice .

for instance , the house has passed three bills that seek to strengthen the federal and state responses to trafficking through a variety of service systems .

h.r .

246 would ensure that reports to a federally funded tipline of sexually exploited children can include children who are victims of sex trafficking .

h.r .

468 would require the runaway and homeless youth program to prioritize staff training on sexual exploitation and sex trafficking and target certain services to youth who are vulnerable to sex and labor trafficking .

h.r .

469 would reinforce the type of requirements enacted under p.l .

113-183 for state child welfare agencies to respond to child sex trafficking and would further specify that these agencies can respond to child victims of labor trafficking .

there have been concerns about possible duplication of efforts and a lack of coordination among the agencies that conduct anti - trafficking activities , and whether the fact that so many agencies are involved with anti - trafficking policy leads to duplication or funds not being used in the most efficient manner .

the tvpa , as amended , established both the president's interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking ( pitf ) and the senior policy operating group ( spog ) in part to facilitate coordination on anti - trafficking policy across u.s. government agencies to ensure that there is not a duplication of efforts .

in addition , the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) requires hhs to establish , by september 2016 , the national advisory committee on sex trafficking of children and youth in the united states to improve the nation's response to sex trafficking and develop best practices and recommendations for states to combat sex trafficking of children , among other duties .

the federal government does not currently have a national strategy broadly directed at combating human trafficking .

h.r .

350 and s. 178 would direct the president's interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking to conduct a review of human trafficking within the united states .

the report would include ( 1 ) cataloging the u.s. government's efforts to prevent individuals from committing trafficking offenses and prevent children from becoming victims ; ( 2 ) surveying the literature related to deterring individuals from trafficking , and preventing children from becoming victims ; ( 3 ) identifying best practices related to preventing human trafficking of children ; and ( 4 ) identifying gaps in research and data that would be helpful in formulating strategies to prevent child trafficking .

h.r .

350 and s. 178 would also require a government accountability office ( gao ) report to congress that would include information on federal and state law enforcement agencies' efforts to combat human trafficking , and information on each federal grant program that has an anti - trafficking purpose .

s. 178 would create the united states advisory council on human trafficking ( council ) which would be comprised of between 8 and 14 human trafficking survivors .

the council would serve as an advisory body to the senior policy operating group on trafficking in persons , reviewing federal anti - trafficking policy and programs .

in addition , the group would serve as the point of contact for federal agencies seeking input of trafficking survivors on programs and policies .

the group would also formulate assessments and recommendations to ensure that policies of the federal government conform , to the extent practicable , to the best practices in the field of human trafficking prevention .

the council would also be required to produce an annual report regarding its review of anti - trafficking policies and programs .

council members would be eligible for travel expenses and a per diem but would not be federal employees .

the council would terminate at the end of fy2020 .

the stop exploitation through trafficking act of 2015 ( s. 166 ) would direct the attorney general to implement and maintain a national strategy for combating human trafficking that includes ( 1 ) integrating federal , state , local , and tribal efforts to investigate and prosecute human trafficking cases ; ( 2 ) coordinating cases within the department of justice ; ( 3 ) addressing annual budget priorities and federal efforts dedicated to preventing and combating human trafficking ; ( 4 ) continually assessing future trends , challenges , and opportunities to enhance federal , state , local , and tribal efforts to combat human trafficking ; and ( 5 ) encouraging the cooperation , coordination , and mutual support between the private sector and federal agencies to combat human trafficking .

among other things , the human trafficking prioritization act ( h.r .

514 ) would change the status of the office to monitor and combat trafficking within the department of state ( dos ) to that of the bureau to combat trafficking in persons .

the bill would also require that dos report to the house committee on foreign affairs and the senate committee on foreign relations on whether dos intends to designate one of the assistant secretary of state positions as the assistant secretary of state to combat trafficking in persons , and the reasons for that decision .

according to the bill's sense of congress statement , changing the status of the office "would be more effective in carrying out the duties mandated by congress in the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 if the bureau were headed by an assistant secretary with direct access to the secretary of state , rather than an ambassador - at - large. .

while u.s .

inspections and customs enforcement is one of the two lead agencies responsible for human trafficking investigations , personnel from several agencies within dhs may encounter instances and victims of trafficking during the course of their regular duties .

for example , agents from the transportation security administration ( tsa ) may encounter trafficking victims at airports as traffickers attempt to move the victims around the country .

the human trafficking detection act of 2015 ( h.r .

460 ) would direct the secretary of dhs , within 180 days , to implement a training program on deterring , detecting , and disrupting human trafficking during the course of their primary roles and responsibilities for personnel from tsa , customs and border protection ( cbp ) , and any other agency that the secretary deems appropriate .

the bill would also require the secretary to ensure that such personnel regularly receive current information related to the detection of human trafficking .

the secretary would be required to certify to the appropriate congressional committees no later than one year after enactment that the training has been completed .

the bill would also require the secretary to submit an annual report to the committees on the effectiveness of the training program required under the bill , including the number of cases in which dhs personnel suspected human trafficking , and the number of confirmed cases of human trafficking .

the bill would allow the secretary to provide the training curricula to any state , local or private government , or any private organization to assist such entities in creating their own programs to identify human trafficking .

s. 178 would require the attorney general to assure that each doj anti - trafficking program , including training programs for federal , state , or local law enforcement include technical training on effective measures for: ( 1 ) investigating and prosecuting an individual who obtains , patronizes , or solicits a commercial sex act involving a trafficking victim ; and ( 2 ) facilitating the provision of physical and mental health services to trafficking victims .

it would also require that any doj anti - trafficking program for u.s .

attorneys or other federal prosecutors include training on seeking restitution for trafficking offenses .

s. 178 would also require that the federal judicial center provide training to judges related to ordering restitution for trafficking offenses .

h.r .

357 , the human trafficking prevention act , would amend the tvpa to include members of the foreign service as persons who are required to be trained on how to identify and protect trafficking victims .

the bill would also specify minimum requirements for the training .

for example , the bill would require that all ambassadors and deputy chiefs of mission receive a briefing on trafficking issues prior to departing for their posts .

separately , the trafficking awareness training for health care act of 2015 ( h.r .

398 ) would require hhs' agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) to competitively award a grant to one medical or nursing school for developing best practices for health care professionals to recognize and appropriately respond to victims of severe forms of human trafficking .

this entity would be required to analyze and evaluate , in consultation with others , existing best practices for interprofessional collaboration , and develop trainings for health care professionals on such best practices .

further , the grantee would make a subgrant to one entity near an established anti - human trafficking task force initiative in each of the 10 administrative regions of hhs to establish a pilot program that uses the best practices and training , and to analyze the results of the pilot programs .

the bill would further require ahrq to post and disseminate the best practices identified by the medical or nursing school .

as noted previously , the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) amended federal child welfare law to require state child welfare agencies to develop procedures needed to ensure relevant training for caseworkers .

these procedures must be developed in consultation with state and local law enforcement , juvenile justice systems , health care providers , education agencies , and organizations with experience in dealing with at - risk children and youth .

h.r .

469 would similarly amend a separate child welfare law to ensure that state child welfare agencies develop provisions and procedures for training child protective services ( cps ) workers about identifying and assessing children who are victims of sex trafficking ( and may develop such procedures with regard to victims of labor trafficking ) .

the sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) provides a set of minimum standards for sex offender registration and notification in the united states .

sorna defines sex offenders according to three tiers .

tier iii is the highest classification and includes those individuals convicted of the most egregious crimes ( predicate offenses for sex offender registration and notification ) .

the sorna requirements involve tier iii offenders being subject to the strictest registration and notification requirements .

tier i: predicate offenses include whatever offenses do not support a higher classification , such as misdemeanor registration offenses and child pornography possession .

tier ii: predicate offenses include most felonious sexual abuse or sexual exploitation crimes involving victims who are minors , including distribution and production of child pornography .

tier iii: predicate offenses generally encompass sexual assaults involving sexual acts regardless of victim age , sexual contact offenses against children below the age of 13 , nonparental kidnapping of minors , and attempts or conspiracies to commit such offenses .

h.r .

515 would direct the secretary of dhs to establish a center in ice , to be known as the "angel watch center. .

the angel watch center would receive information on travel by child - sex offenders , and would establish procedures for notifying or making the decision not to notify a destination country of current or impending travel by a child - sex offender .

h.r .

515 would also express a sense of congress that the president should negotiate bilateral agreements with foreign governments to transmit and receive information on international travel by child - sex offenders , including u.s. citizens who are arrested or convicted for child - sex offenses in a foreign country .

