the u.s. sugar program is singular among major agricultural commodity programs in that it combines a price support guarantee with a supply management structure that encompasses both domestic production for human use and sugar imports .

the sugar program provides a price guarantee to the processors of sugarcane and sugar beets , and by extension , to the producers of both crops .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) is directed to administer the program at no budgetary cost to the federal government by limiting the amount of sugar supplied for food use in the u.s. market .

to achieve both objectives , usda uses four tools to keep domestic market prices above guaranteed levels .

measures one through three below were reauthorized through crop year 2018 without change by the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) .

the fourth measure is found in long - standing trade law .

the four are: 1. price support loans at specified levels — the basis for the price guarantee ; 2. marketing allotments to limit the amount of sugar that each processor can sell ; 3. a sugar - to - ethanol ( feedstock flexibility ) backstop — available if marketing allotments and import quotas fail to prevent a price - depressing surplus of sugar from developing ( i.e. , fail to keep market prices above guaranteed levels ) ; 4. import quotas to control the amount of sugar entering the u.s. market .

in addition to the foregoing policy tools , two agreements signed by the u.s. department of commerce ( doc ) in late 2014 — one with the government of mexico and another with mexican sugar producers and exporters — impose annual limits on mexican sugar exports to the united states and establish minimum prices for imported mexican sugar .

the current sugar program has its roots in the agriculture and food act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-98 ) , according to the usda .

the sugar program that congress enacted in the 1981 farm bill required the secretary of agriculture to support prices of u.s. sugarcane and sugar beets at minimum levels — initially through purchases of processed sugar , and subsequently by offering nonrecourse loans .

the legislation also encouraged the president to impose duties , fees or quotas on foreign sugar to prevent domestic prices from moving below established support levels to avoid imposing budgetary costs on the government .

in its report on the 1981 farm bill , the senate committee on agriculture , nutrition and forestry cited the importance of sugar imports to u.s. sugar supplies , pointing out that volatile world market prices of sugar contributed to sharp fluctuations in u.s. sugar prices , while adding that the united states was alone among sugar producing nations in being without an effective government price support program .

the sugar program has long been a source of political controversy over the degree of government support and market intervention it involves with sharply differing perspectives on the balance of benefits and drawbacks to the program .

critics of the program , including the coalition for sugar reform , which represents consumer , trade and commerce groups , manufacturing associations and food and beverage companies that use sugar , argue the sugar program acts to keep domestic prices far above world sugar prices .

in so doing , the coalition contends the sugar program imposes a hidden tax on consumers and has led to the loss of jobs in the food manufacturing sector by encouraging imports of sugar - containing products and by providing manufacturers with an incentive to move facilities abroad to gain access to lower priced sugar .

the american sugar alliance , consisting of sugarcane and sugar beet producers , including farmers , processors , refiners , suppliers and sugar workers , is a leading advocate for the u.s. sugar program .

it points out that the price support feature of the sugar program fosters a reliable supply of sugar at reasonable prices at no cost to the government .

the sugar program , it argues , is necessary to shield the domestic sugar industry from unfair competition from sugar imports at world market prices that it contends are distorted by heavily subsidized foreign sugar that is dumped on the world market at prices that are below production costs ( see " sugar program draws sharply differing views " below ) .

for background on sugar policy debate , see crs report r42551 , sugar provisions of the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) , by mark a. mcminimy .

nonrecourse loans taken out by a processor of a sugar crop , not producers themselves , provide a source of short - term , low - cost financing until a raw cane sugar mill or beet sugar refiner sells sugar .

the "nonrecourse" feature means that processors — to meet their loan repayment obligation — can exercise the legal right to forfeit sugar offered as collateral to usda to secure the loan , if the market price is below the effective support level when the loan comes due .

figure 1 and figure 2 illustrate the repayment options available to raw cane sugar mills and beet sugar refiners , respectively , and show loan rates and effective support levels for fy2016 .

the price levels at which processors can take out loans are referred to as "loan rates. .

the 2014 farm bill made no changes in the sugar program , so the current rates date from the 2008 farm bill , p.l .

110-246 .

the raw cane sugar loan rate ( 18.75¢ / lb ) is lower than the refined beet sugar loan rate ( 24.09¢ / lb ) to reflect its unprocessed state .

the raw sugar loan rate is lower because raw sugarcane must be further processed by a cane refinery to have the same value and characteristics as refined beet sugar for food use .

these loan rates are national averages .

actual loan rates are adjusted by region to reflect marketing cost differentials .

the minimum market price that a processor wants to receive in order to remove the incentive to forfeit sugar and instead repay a price support loan , though , is higher than the loan rate .

this "effective support level," also called the loan forfeiture level , represents all of the costs that processors need to offset to make it economically viable to repay the loan .

these costs equal the loan rate , plus interest accrued over the nine - month term of the loan , plus certain marketing costs .

the effective support level for 2015-crop ( fy2016 ) of raw cane sugar is 20.87¢ / lb ; for refined beet sugar , it ranges from 24.4¢ to 26.04¢ / lb , depending on the region .

if market prices are below these loan forfeiture levels when a price support loan usually comes due ( i.e. , july to september ) , and a processor hands over sugar earlier pledged to obtain this loan rather than repaying it , usda records a budgetary expense ( i.e. , an outlay ) .

if this occurs , usda gains title to the sugar and is responsible for disposing of this asset .

two suspension agreements the doc signed in december 2014 — one with the government of mexico and another with mexican sugar producers and exporters — have substantially modified the terms for importing sugar from mexico and may have the practical effect of raising the effective support level .

for one , mexican sugar is an important source of the u.s. sugar supply , with imports of mexican sugar averaging 15% of the sum of u.s. production plus imports during the three marketing years prior to the onset of the suspension agreements from 2011 / 2012 to 2013 / 2014 .

imports of sugar from mexico in 2014 / 2015 , the year the suspension agreements took effect , represented 11% of the total of u.s. production plus imports .

the agreements ( see "suspension agreements recast sugar trade with mexico" below ) establish minimum prices for mexican sugar imports that are at , or above , effective u.s. support levels .

these minimum prices are calculated at mexican plants , so transportation costs to the u.s. processor or end user would add several cents per pound to the delivered cost of mexican sugar .

as a result , prices of imported mexican sugar should track well above levels that would encourage u.s. loan forfeitures .

market prices for raw cane sugar and refined beet sugar since the 2008 farm bill provisions took effect were higher than loan forfeiture levels until mid - year 2013 ( figure 3 and figure 4 , respectively ) .

toward the end of fy2013 , market prices that were below these effective support levels prompted processors to forfeit , or hand over , to usda 381,875 tons of sugar ( 4.3% of fy2013 u.s. sugar output valued at almost $172 million ) .

usda actions taken to avert these forfeitures , and then to dispose of sugar acquired as a result of these forfeitures , are detailed below in "sugar purchases and exchanges for import rights" and "feedstock flexibility program for bioenergy producers. .

the government sets annual limits on the quantity of domestically produced sugar that can be sold for human use .

it also restricts the level of imports that may enter the domestic market through tariff - rate quotas and via an import limitation agreement with mexico .

this is done to avoid costs during times when an imbalance between sugar supplies and demand could lead to low prices and sugar forfeitures under the loan program .

in addition to domestic marketing allotments and import quotas and limits , usda has two policy mechanisms to help prevent prices from slipping below effective loan forfeiture levels , thereby limiting program costs that might otherwise accrue to the government as a result of substantial loan forfeitures .

these include offering ccc sugar to processors in exchange for surrendering rights to import tariff - rate quota sugar ; purchasing sugar from processors in exchange for surrendering tariff - rate quota sugar ; and removing sugar from the human food market by purchasing sugar from processors for resale to ethanol producers for fuel ethanol production .

the sugar program has long been the subject of controversy , both among lawmakers and among competing interests within the sugar market .

in part , disagreement over the sugar program has centered on whether it strikes the right balance between government support for the domestic sugar industry in the face of subsidized foreign sugar and the cost this support may impose on sugar users and consumers in the form of marketplace distortions and potentially higher sugar prices than might otherwise prevail .

from one side of this controversy , the american sugar alliance ( asa ) , representing u.s. sugar industry interests , asserts that even though u.s. sugar producers are among the most efficient in the world , they cannot compete with foreign subsidies that encourage the production of surpluses that are dumped onto the world market at prices that are often below the cost of production .

as to the competitiveness of u.s. sugar prices , asa issued the results of a study from 2015 that indicated that u.s. retail prices of sugar in 2014 were below the average for developed countries and also below the average retail price in some major exporting countries , including brazil and australia .

the sugar users association , representing companies that use sweeteners in their business operations , has a very different perspective on this issue , contending that the sugar program is poorly designed .

in particular , it argues that trq allocations are dated and that this has the effect of restricting export quotas to certain countries that in some cases either cannot fill their entire quotas or may not ship any sugar to the united states .

as such , it asserts the trq program tends to distort and destabilize the u.s. sugar market , which it argues has led to job losses in sugar - using food industries .

as to whether the sugar program harms consumers through higher sugar prices , an analysis issued in 2013 by the center for agricultural and rural development at iowa state university concluded that eliminating the u.s. sugar program — including marketing allotments and import quotas and tariffs that restrict the availability of sugar for domestic human use — would increase u.s. consumers' welfare by between $2.9 billion and $3.5 billion each year while also supporting a modest increase in employment in the u.s. food processing industry .

the paper was commissioned by the sweetener users association .

the itc took a narrower approach to this question in a report from 2013 that analyzed the potential effects of removing only the existing restrictions on u.s. sugar imports .

the itc concluded that removing sugar import restrictions would result in a meaningful decline in u.s. sugar production and employment within the sugar production and processing sectors in tandem with a substantial expansion in total u.s. sugar imports .

as for sugar prices , the report projected that the elimination of import restrictions would produce welfare gains for u.s. consumers amounting to $1.66 billion over the period 2012-2017 , equating to a yearly benefit of $277 million .

the text box below sets out specific dates , and calendar windows , for undertaking key administrative actions that are integral to managing the u.s. sugar program .

