on may 27 , 2015 , the army corps of engineers ( the corps ) and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) finalized a rule revising regulations that define the scope of waters protected under the clean water act ( cwa ) .

discharges to waters under cwa jurisdiction , such as the addition of pollutants from factories or sewage treatment plants and the dredging and filling of spoil material through mining or excavation , require a cwa permit .

the rule was proposed in 2014 in light of supreme court rulings that created uncertainty about the geographic limits of waters that are and are not protected by the cwa .

the revised rule became effective on august 28 , 2015 , 60 days after publication in the federal register , to allow time for review under the congressional review act .

however , multiple legal challenges to the rule were filed in federal district and appeals courts around the country .

on october 9 , 2015 , a federal appeals court in cincinnati issued an order granting a request by 18 states to stay the new rule nationwide , pending further developments .

on june 14 , 2016 , this court set the briefing schedule in the litigation ; the court's schedule likely would lead to oral arguments in february 2017 or later .

as a result of these judicial actions , until legal proceedings are concluded , the new rule is not in effect , and prior regulations and agency guidance will govern determinations of cwa jurisdiction .

according to epa and the corps , the agencies' intent was to clarify cwa jurisdiction , not expand it .

nevertheless , the rule has been extremely controversial , especially with groups representing property owners , land developers , and the agriculture sector , who contend that it represents a massive federal overreach beyond the agencies' statutory authority .

most state and local officials are supportive of clarifying the extent of cwa - regulated waters , but some are concerned that the rule could impose costs on states and localities as their own actions ( eg , transportation or public infrastructure projects ) become subject to new requirements .

most environmental advocacy groups welcomed the intent of the proposal to more clearly define u.s. waters that are subject to cwa protections , but beyond that general support , some favored even a stronger rule .

many critics in congress and elsewhere urged that the proposed rule be withdrawn , but epa and the corps pointed out that doing so would leave in place the status quo — with determinations of cwa jurisdiction being made pursuant to existing regulations , coupled with non - binding agency guidance , and many of these determinations involving time - consuming case - specific evaluation .

still , even though the 2015 rule has been stayed by a federal court , some in congress favor halting the agencies' approach to defining "waters of the united states" and leaving the status quo in place or giving epa and the corps new directions on defining cwa jurisdiction .

this report discusses several options that congress has considered that were reflected in bills in the 114 th congress .

the cwa protects "navigable waters," a term defined in the act to mean "the waters of the united states , including the territorial seas. .

waters need not be truly navigable to be subject to cwa jurisdiction .

the act's single definition of "navigable waters" applies to the entire law , including the federal prohibition on pollutant discharges except in compliance with the act ( §301 ) , permit requirements ( §§402 and 404 ) , water quality standards and measures to attain them ( §303 ) , oil spill liability and oil spill prevention and control measures ( §311 ) , and enforcement ( §309 ) .

the cwa gave the agencies the authority to define the term "waters of the united states" more fully in regulations , which epa and the corps have done several times , most recently in 1986 .

while epa is primarily responsible for implementing the cwa , epa and the corps share implementation of the dredge and fill permitting program in section 404 .

the courts , including the supreme court , generally upheld the agencies' implementation until supreme court rulings in 2001 and 2006 ( solid waste agency of northern cook county v. u.s. army corps of engineers , ( swancc ) 531 u.s. 159 ( 2001 ) ; and rapanos v. united states , 547 u.s. 716 ( 2006 ) , respectively ) .

those rulings interpreted the regulatory scope of the cwa more narrowly than the agencies and lower courts were then doing , and created uncertainty about the appropriate scope of waters protected under the cwa .

in 2003 and 2008 , the agencies issued guidance intended to lessen confusion over the court's rulings .

the non - binding guidance sought to identify , in light of those rulings , categories of waters that remain jurisdictional , categories not jurisdictional , and categories that require a case - specific analysis to determine if cwa jurisdiction applies .

the obama administration proposed revised guidance in 2011 ; it was not finalized , but it was the substantive basis for the 2014 proposed rule .

in proposing to amend the regulatory definition of "waters of the united states" rather than issue another guidance document , epa and the corps were not only acting to reduce the confusion created by swancc and rapanos .

they also appeared to be picking up on the suggestion of several of the justices in rapanos that an amended rule would be helpful .

the 2015 final rule retains much of the structure of the agencies' existing definition of "waters of the united states. .

it focuses particularly on clarifying the regulatory status of surface waters located in isolated places in a landscape and streams that flow only part of the year , along with nearby wetlands — the types of waters with ambiguous jurisdictional status following the supreme court's rulings .

like the 2003 and 2008 guidance documents and the 2014 proposal , it identifies categories of waters that are and are not jurisdictional , as well as categories of waters and wetlands that require a case - specific evaluation .

under the final rule , all tributaries to the nation's traditional navigable waters , interstate waters , the territorial seas , or impoundments of these waters would be jurisdictional per se .

all of these waters are jurisdictional under existing rules , but the term "tributary" is newly defined in the rule .

waters — including wetlands , ponds , lakes , oxbows , and similar waters — that are adjacent to traditional navigable waters , interstate waters , the territorial seas , jurisdictional tributaries , or impoundments of these waters would be jurisdictional by rule .

the final rule for the first time puts some boundaries on what is considered "adjacent. .

some waters — but fewer than under current practice — would remain subject to a case - specific evaluation of whether or not they meet the legal standards for federal jurisdiction established by the supreme court .

the final rule establishes two defined sets of additional waters that will be a "water of the united states" if they are determined to have a significant nexus to a jurisdictional waters .

the final rule identifies a number of types of waters to be excluded from cwa jurisdiction .

some are restatements of exclusions under current rules ( eg , prior converted cropland ) ; some have been excluded by practice and would be expressly excluded by rule for the first time ( eg , groundwater , some ditches ) .

some exclusions were added to the final rule based on public comments ( eg , stormwater management systems and groundwater recharge basins ) .

the rule makes no change and does not affect existing statutory exclusions: permit exemptions for normal farming , ranching , and silviculture practice and for maintenance of drainage ditches ( cwa §404 ( f ) ( 1 ) ) , as well as for agricultural stormwater discharges and irrigation return flows ( cwa §402 ( l ) ) .

the agencies' intention was to clarify questions of cwa jurisdiction , in view of the supreme court's rulings and consistent with the agencies' scientific and technical expertise .

much of the controversy since the court's rulings has centered on the many instances that have required applicants for cwa permits to seek a time - consuming case - specific evaluation to determine if cwa jurisdiction applies to their activity , due to uncertainty over the geographic scope of the act .

in the rule , the corps and epa intended to clarify jurisdictional questions by clearly articulating categories of waters that are and are not protected by the cwa and thus limiting the types of waters that still require case - specific analysis .

however , critical response to the proposal from industry , agriculture , many states , and some local governments was that the rule was vague and ambiguous and could be interpreted to enlarge the regulatory jurisdiction of the cwa beyond what the statute and the courts allow .

officials of the corps and epa vigorously defended the proposed rule .

but they acknowledged that it raised questions that required clarification in the final rule .

in an april 2015 blog post , the epa administrator and the assistant secretary for the army said that the agencies responded to criticisms of the proposal with changes in the final rule , which was then undergoing interagency review .

the blog post said that the final rule would make changes such as: defining tributaries more clearly ; better defining how protected waters are significant ; limiting protection of ditches to those that function like tributaries and can carry pollution downstream ; and preserving cwa exclusions and exemptions for agriculture .

the final rule announced on may 27 , 2015 , does reflect a number of changes from the proposal , especially to provide more bright line boundaries and simplify definitions that identify waters that are protected under the cwa .

the agencies' intention has been to clarify the rules and make jurisdictional determinations more predictable , less ambiguous , and more timely .

based on press reports of stakeholders' early reactions to the final rule , it appears that some believe that the agencies largely succeeded in that objective , while others believe that they did not .

congressional interest in the rule has been strong since the proposal was announced in 2014 .

on february 4 , 2015 , the senate environment and public works committee and the house transportation and infrastructure committee held a joint hearing on impacts of the proposed rule on state and local governments , hearing from public and epa and corps witnesses .

other hearings have been held by senate and house committees in the 114 th congress .

the proposal also was discussed at house committee hearings during the 113 th congress .

as described below , a number of bills were introduced in the 114 th congress , most of them intended either to prohibit the agencies from finalizing the 2014 proposed rule or to detail procedures for a new rulemaking .

as noted earlier , some in congress have long favored halting epa and the corps' current approach to defining "waters of the united states. .

to do so legislatively , there are at least four options available to change the agencies' course: a resolution of disapproval under the congressional review act , appropriations bill provisions , standalone legislation , and broad amendments to the clean water act .

this report has discussed four legislative options that congress could consider to halt or redirect epa and the corps' "waters of the united states" rule and that were reflected in bills in the 114 th congress: the congressional review act , appropriations bill limitations , standalone legislation , and broad amendments to the clean water act .

it is noteworthy that several of the options — a cra resolution , appropriations bill limitations , and some current forms of standalone legislation — would not only have blocked epa and the corps from adopting , implementing or enforcing the 2015 rule , but also would have prohibited them from developing a similar rule .

as described previously , blocking both the rule and future action ( eg , h.r .

594 , h.j.res .

59 , and s.j.res .

22 ) , limiting the agencies through appropriations , or requiring the agencies to restart the rulemaking process ( eg , h.r .

1732 and s. 1140 ) would leave in place the status quo , with determinations of cwa jurisdiction being made pursuant to existing regulations , non - binding agency guidance issued in 2003 and 2008 , and jurisdictional determinations done by 38 separate corps district offices that in many cases require time - consuming , case - specific evaluation by regulatory staff .

as described above , on october 9 , 2015 , a federal appeals court placed a nationwide stay on the clean water rule .

the effect of the court's order is to achieve , at least temporarily , the goal of some of the legislation discussed in this report — to leave the status quo in place for determinations of cwa jurisdiction .

many critics of the 2015 rule endorse that result .

other critics favor passage of legislation that would provide direction to epa and the corps to develop a different rule , because legal challenges to the 2015 rule may take years to resolve .

stakeholder groups involved in the "waters of the united states" debate find agreement on few aspects of the issue .

some support the 2015 rule , some prefer the status quo rather than a rule that they consider unclear , and some have concerns with the rule but do support clarifying the extent of cwa - regulated waters .

the 114 th congress legislative activity in the senate on s.j.res .

22 and s. 1140 and in the house on h.r .

1732 suggests that , even with the final rule on hold nationwide for now and judicial proceedings that could continue for quite some time , there is continuing interest in congress to change the agencies' course of action .

with a change in administration in january 2017 , the 115 th congress and the new administration seem likely to revisit the "waters of the united states" issue and controversies .

the new administration's legislative priorities , as well as plans for addressing the ongoing litigation of the 2015 rule or for initiating a new cwa jurisdiction rule are unclear for now .

for congress , although a resolution of disapproval under the cra is no longer an available option to halt the rule , congress could pursue the other legislative options to halt or redirect the rule discussed here .

