in response to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks against the united states , congress enacted the authorization for use of military force ( 2001 aumf ; p.l .

107-40 ; 50 u.s.c .

§1541 note ) to authorize the use of military force against those who perpetrated or provided support for the attacks .

president george w. bush identified al qaeda as the group that carried out the attacks , and the taliban , then in control of the governance of afghanistan , as harboring al qaeda within the territory of that country .

under the authority of the 2001 aumf , in october 2001 president bush sent u.s. armed forces to afghanistan to conduct military operations "designed to disrupt the use of afghanistan as a terrorist base of operations and to attack the military capability of the taliban regime. .

more than 13 years later , in december 2014 , president obama declared the end of the combat mission in afghanistan .

despite this announcement , u.s. armed forces remain in afghanistan and are reportedly authorized to target al qaeda and the taliban .

as armed conflict against al qaeda and the taliban has progressed , and u.s. counterterrorism strategy has evolved , u.s. use of military force has expanded outside afghanistan .

after the u.s. invasion of afghanistan , many members of al qaeda moved out of the country and into pakistan .

in response , the united states has conducted unmanned aerial vehicle ( uav ) missile strikes against al qaeda and taliban targets in pakistan .

the united states has identified other groups in the middle east and africa that it considers "associated forces" of al qaeda , that is , organized forces that have entered alongside al qaeda in its armed conflict with the united states and its coalition partners .

the united states has used force against these al qaeda associates in a number of other countries , including yemen , somalia , libya , and most recently , syria .

in addition , the president has relied in part on the 2001 aumf as authority for his campaign against the islamic state ( also known as isis or isil ) in iraq and syria , and against the khorosan group of al qaeda in syria .

since 2001 , counterterrorism activities involving deployment of u.s. armed forces , if not always the use of military force , have steadily increased , taking place in countries around the world , although it is not clear whether the 2001 aumf has provided authority for these activities .

the 2001 aumf , as many have argued and the executive branch has agreed , does not seem to authorize all uses of military force in furtherance of u.s. counterterrorism objectives .

although some presidential reporting to congress suggests a wide interpretation of the scope of 2001 aumf authority , the obama administration , as recently as may 2014 , has stated that the 2001 aumf authorizes only those uses of military force against al qaeda , the taliban , and their associated forces , and , when such actions are taken outside of afghanistan , only in cases of imminent threat of attack against the united states .

because the 2001 aumf covers only some uses of military force to counter terrorist threats , other legislation and presidential powers under article ii of the constitution provide authority to carry out u.s. counterterrorism activities globally .

some observers and members of congress have argued that the 2001 aumf , focused as it is on those who perpetrated and supported the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , is outdated and should be repealed , as it has been stretched and perhaps distorted to fit uses of force that were not contemplated when the 2001 aumf was enacted .

others assert that the 2001 aumf should be updated to reflect the evolution of the terrorist threat since 2001 and the continued need to authorize the use of military force against this threat , perhaps with greater oversight and procedural requirements from congress .

the obama administration has indicated its willingness to address concerns about the 2001 aumf and continued uses of military force in support of counterterrorism goals , in the past arguing that the 2001 aumf must remain in force until combat operations end in afghanistan .

by the end of 2014 , the united states and afghanistan had finalized a bilateral security agreement , and the combat mission in afghanistan had been declared complete .

the obama administration , however , still finds itself relying on 2001 aumf authority not only for continuing u.s. military operations in afghanistan , but also for beginning a new campaign against the islamic state in iraq and syria , and possibly expanding operations to other countries if the islamic state or al qaeda groups or associates effectively expand their reach and pose a threat to u.s. national security and interests .

the president , in his february 11 , 2015 , letter to congress concerning his draft proposal for a new authorization for use of military force against the islamic state , stated , "i remain committed to working with the congress and the american people to refine , and ultimately repeal , the 2001 aumf. .

in the face of these issues , congress has for several years considered a number of legislative proposals to change the authority in the 2001 aumf , the manner in which it is used , and the congressional role in its oversight and continuing existence .

this process has continued in the 114 th congress , and deliberations over the future of the 2001 aumf have become entwined with consideration of proposals to enact a new aumf to respond to the actions of the islamic state in iraq and syria .

generally considered a broad authorization for the president to use military force against the terrorist threat posed by al qaeda after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , the 2001 aumf is nonetheless limited in scope , targeting only those who perpetrated or supported those attacks .

because of this limitation , the two most recent administrations have instituted procedures to determine which actors are lawful targets of military force and in which parts of the world such force might be used under different circumstances .

the effect has been u.s. uses of military force or other deployment activities in several countries , and varying as to type and scope .

president obama and his administration have publicly expressed support for possibly amending and eventually repealing the 2001 aumf , in order to change the stance of the united states , as president obama has termed it , "from a perpetual war - time footing. .

according to administration officials , the primary importance of the 2001 aumf has been to authorize u.s. armed forces to enter into armed conflict with those who carried out or supported the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , namely al qaeda and the taliban .

u.s. military operations against al qaeda and the taliban occurred for more than a decade primarily in afghanistan , and some u.s. armed forces currently remain there .

although the president announced the end of the u.s. military mission in afghanistan in december 2014 , he notified congress in december 2014 that certain u.s. military operations against al qaeda in afghanistan will continue pursuant to 2001 aumf authority , and such operations have been reported in 2015 .

the united states and afghanistan concluded a bilateral security agreement and status of forces agreement in late 2014 , providing the basis under international law to remain in afghanistan in a post - conflict role .

the obama administration has stated that with the end of the u.s. combat mission in afghanistan , it intends to work with congress to either amend or repeal the 2001 aumf .

administration officials have stated that any change to the 2001 aumf should not , however , constrain the president's authority in a way that frustrates his ability to protect the united states from terrorist attacks and to meet u.s. counterterrorism objectives generally .

the president has also maintained that he will oppose any attempt to legislate wider executive branch war - making authority .

instead , the administration has proposed modernizing the counterterrorism authorities of the 2001 aumf to precisely authorize the president to meet the current challenges posed by terrorist groups and networks around the world .

some members of congress have espoused this approach as well .

more recently , however , these stated administration goals for the reform or repeal of the 2001 aumf have been thrown into doubt by statements from the president and administration officials in connection with u.s. military operations conducted against forces of the islamic state and the khorasan group of al qaeda in iraq and syria .

the president , in his august 2014 notifications to congress , indicated that his powers as commander in chief and chief executive under article ii of the constitution gave him authority to undertake deployments and airstrikes in iraq against is forces .

the president's september 2014 notifications to congress for airstrikes and other actions in iraq and syria , however , stated that the 2001 aumf provides authorization for certain u.s. military strikes against the islamic state .

due to al qaeda's february 2014 disavowal of any remaining ties with the islamic state , and the islamic state's seeming lack of connection with the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , some experts have questioned whether the islamic state can be targeted under the 2001 aumf .

the obama administration has stated that the islamic state can be targeted under the 2001 aumf because its predecessor organization , al qaeda in iraq , communicated and coordinated with al qaeda ; the islamic state currently has ties with al qaeda fighters and operatives ; the islamic state employs tactics similar to al qaeda ; and the islamic state , with its intentions of creating a new islamic caliphate , is the "true inheritor of osama bin laden's legacy. .

this interpretation seems to suggest that the islamic state could be treated either as part of al qaeda that has splintered from the main group , or as an associate of al qaeda ; under either interpretation , the islamic state would arguably be targetable under the 2001 aumf .

prior to the wider military campaign against the islamic state , the obama administration had stated that it will use limited force against individuals and groups outside afghanistan under 2001 aumf authority only when they are legally defined military targets that "pose a continuing , imminent threat to u.s. persons.... " with regard to the current crisis in iraq and syria , the administration has indicated that the islamic state's threat to u.s. national security is one factor in the president's decision to conduct the current military campaign against the group .

although it is not clear whether the administration is still adhering to this policy of limited force , the administration might have made a determination of a "continuing , imminent threat" from the islamic state , thus plausibly placing the current military campaign within the limited scope of 2001 aumf authority set out by the administration prior to the islamic state crisis .

the ongoing , indefinite , large - scale military campaign against the islamic state , outside the afghanistan theater of operations , however , might be seen as an executive branch policy shift toward a more expansive interpretation of 2001 aumf authority .

without a new authorization for use of military force specifically targeting the islamic state , it seems the president would rely heavily on 2001 aumf authority indefinitely to prosecute the military conflict against the group .

despite this , the president has continued to make statements confirming that administration policy remains one of amending or repealing the 2001 aumf , including in his february 11 , 2015 , letter to congress accompanying his proposal for a new authorization for use of military force against the islamic state .

the executive branch's reliance on the 2001 aumf has raised a number of concerns among some members of congress and policy analysts .

these concerns relate to congress's constitutional role in declaring and funding war , as well as several executive branch activities to counter terrorism that are perceived as problematic .

in contrast , obama administration officials have testified that the legal framework for the current conflict against al qaeda and associated forces , which includes the 2001 aumf , remains valid and effective in meeting the u.s. military's requirements for conducting counterterrorism operations , even as they state that they remain open to working with congress to amend or repeal it .

some members of congress have supported legislative options to repeal , amend , or replace the 2001 aumf , while others defend leaving it as is .

some of the key arguments being made in support of or against these options are considered below .

over the past few congresses , a number of legislative proposals contained provisions to sunset or repeal the 2001 aumf , or to limit the use of appropriated funds to carry out the 2001 aumf's provisions .

these proposals were not enacted into law .

with the advent of the islamic state crisis and the u.s. military response , many proposals affecting the 2001 aumf introduced late in the 113 th congress and early in the 114 th congress have been included in proposals for a new authorization for use of military force against the islamic state or are otherwise related to that crisis .

current proposals specifically concerning the 2001 aumf include the following: on february 2 , 2015 , representative adam schiff introduced the authorization for use of military force against isil resolution ( h.j.res .

27 ) .

the resolution would repeal the 2001 aumf three years after the resolution's enactment .

on february 10 , 2015 , representative barbara lee introduced the comprehensive solution to isil resolution ( h.j.res .

30 ) , which would repeal the 2001 aumf as well as the 2002 aumf .

repeal would become effective 60 days after enactment .

senator ben cardin introduced the sunset of the 2001 authorization for use of military force act ( s. 526 ) on february 12 , 2015 .

the bill would repeal the 2001 aumf three years upon enactment .

on march 4 , 2015 , representative barbara lee introduced the repeal of the authorization for use of military force ( h.r .

1303 ) , which would repeal the 2001 aumf 180 days after enactment .

past enacted legislation concerning the 2001 aumf has generally confirmed executive branch claims of authority under the 2001 aumf , such as provisions included in the 2006 and 2009 acts related to military commissions , and the national defense authorization act , fiscal year 2012 ( ndaa 2012 ; p.l .

112-81 ) .

section 1021 of the ndaa 2012 includes the term "associated forces" with regard to detentions of terrorist suspects ; some claim that term has been effectively adopted into the authorities of the 2001 aumf to justify broader authority for military action against loosely affiliated groups .

