the 114 th congress is likely to face numerous water resource issues as it conducts oversight and deliberates on authorizations and appropriations related to federal water resource development , management , and protection .

such issues include how to make investment decisions in the face of fiscal constraints ; how to maintain and reinvest in an aging portfolio of federal infrastructure ( eg , dams , locks , and levees ) ; how to effectively respond to and prepare for flood and drought emergencies ; and how to distribute investment between activities to meet new demands for water supplies , navigation , flood management , and aquatic ecosystem restoration and protection .

these issues often arise at the regional level but have a federal connection .

for example , congress may be faced with responding to various water - related crises , such as extreme drought or flooding issues ( eg , california drought in 2014 and coastal flooding issues associated with hurricane sandy or other storms ) .

more broadly , congress may be faced with addressing navigation challenges due to drought - induced low river flows or floods and water supply needs of farm and urban communities while also protecting threatened and endangered species .

the crux of many of these challenges is how to balance competing demands for water and river management , including how to cope with the growing budget limitations and the effect of federal project operations on the environment .

this report first discusses recent congressional activity and possible topics for the 114 th congress .

next , it provides an overview of the federal role in water resources development , management , and protection , including a discussion of the two major federal water resources agencies — the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) and the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) — and related legislation .

the report then provides an overview of overarching policy issues , including flood and drought preparedness and response , project funding and authorization priorities , and aquatic ecosystem restoration .

the water resource issues of the 114 th congress are shaped in part by the actions of past congresses .

legislative activity often is specific to the federal water resource management agencies , such as the u.s. army corps of engineers in the department of defense and the department of the interior's bureau of reclamation , or it is specific to water use by particular sectors , such as energy , agriculture , navigation , recreation , and municipal and industrial use .

occasionally , congress takes up broader water resource policy issues , such as coordination of federal water resource activities and programs .

legislation enacted for both the corps and reclamation during the 113 th congress was less than in prior congresses , in large part due to congressional earmark policies , which may limit authorization of and appropriations for site - specific projects ; however , some broad legislation was enacted for both agencies .

the federal government has long been involved in efforts to facilitate navigation , expand irrigation , and reduce flood and drought losses .

for example , nearly every large river basin in the country — from the columbia , sacramento , and colorado rivers in the west to the missouri , mississippi , and delaware rivers — contains one or more federal dam or navigation projects .

these projects have largely been constructed by the corps and reclamation .

more recently , federal involvement has expanded to include municipal water supply development and efforts to protect water - related resources such as fish and wildlife .

increasing pressures on the quality and quantity of available water supplies have resulted in heightened local and regional water use conflicts throughout the country , particularly in the west and southeast .

pressures include population growth , environmental regulation , in - stream species and ecosystem needs , water source contamination , agricultural and energy water demands , climate change and variability , and changing public interests , such as heightened demand for in - stream recreation .

congress historically has played a major role in water resources through authorization of and appropriations for regional and site - specific activities ; however , numerous responsibilities are split or shared with state , local , and tribal governments , particularly related to water allocation and resource planning and management .

congress also establishes the policies that define the federal role in planning for federal water resource projects , and provides direction for construction , maintenance , inspection , and support of federal projects .

congress makes these decisions within the context of multiple and often conflicting objectives , competing legal decisions , long - established institutional mechanisms ( eg , century - old water rights , and contractual obligations ) , and in response to events such as floods , droughts , and structural failures .

federal water resource construction activities shrank during the last decades of the 20 th century , marking the end of earlier expansionist policies that had supported large federal investments in dams and hydropower facilities , navigation locks and channels , irrigation diversions , and flood control levees , as well as basin - wide planning and development efforts .

fiscal constraints , changes in national priorities and local needs , few remaining prime construction locations , and environmental and species impacts of construction and operation of federal projects all contributed to this shift .

although these forces are still active , there are proposals for renewed federal financial and technical assistance to address growing pressures on developed water supplies , to manage regional water resources to meet demands of multiple water uses , and to address the aging stock of water resources infrastructure .

recent drought conditions in the west and southwest on top of extended and widespread drought in 2012 , coastal flooding due to hurricane sandy and hurricane katrina , and midwest floods of 2011 have raised other questions about the federal role in water resources .

in particular , disasters have brought attention to the trade - offs in approaches to distributing federal appropriations among competing water resources projects , to risk management in water resources , and to the trade - offs in benefits , costs , and risks of the current division of responsibilities among local , state , and federal entities .

most of the large dams and water diversion structures in the united states were built by , or with the assistance of , reclamation or the corps .

historically , reclamation projects were designed principally to provide reliable supplies of water for irrigation and some municipal and industrial uses .

corps projects were planned principally to improve navigation and reduce flood damages , with power generation , water supply , and recreation being incidental benefits .

reclamation currently manages hundreds of dams and reservoirs in 17 western states , providing water to approximately 10 million acres of farmland and 31 million people , as well as 58 power plants capable of producing 40 billion kilowatt - hours of electricity annually ( enough for approximately 3.5 million homes ) , and which generate more than $1 billion in revenues annually .

the corps operates nationwide , and its activities are diverse .

the corps has constructed thousands of flood damage reduction and navigation projects throughout the country , including nearly 12,000 miles of commercially active waterways , nearly 1,000 harbors , and 600 dam and reservoir projects ( with 75 hydroelectric plants generating 68 billion kilowatt - hours annually ) .

additionally , the corps constructed , usually with nonfederal participation , roughly 9,000 miles of the estimated 100,000 miles of the nation's levees , but the agency only maintains 900 miles .

the remaining levees are operated by nonfederal entities , often local governments or special districts .

the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) in the u.s. department of agriculture also facilitates water resources development , primarily for flood control in small watersheds and for soil and water conservation purposes .

for more information on usda conservation programs and policies , see crs report r40763 , agricultural conservation: a guide to programs , by [author name scrubbed] .

many other federal agencies have water - related programs ( eg , the environmental protection agency , the u.s. geological survey , the national oceanographic and atmospheric administration , national aeronautics and space administration , federal emergency management agency , and energy - related agencies such as the federal energy regulatory commission and power marketing administrations ) .

however , the remainder of this report focuses on the projects , programs , and policies of the corps and reclamation .

for more information on federal water projects and programs — including types of financing and financial assistance — see crs report rl30478 , federally supported water supply and wastewater treatment programs , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

for more information on other federal water activities , see crs report r42653 , selected federal water activities: agencies , authorities , and congressional committees , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

in addition to issues related to federal projects , the 114 th congress faces a number of overarching water resources issues , including flood and drought management and response ; project funding and authorization priorities ; and aquatic ecosystem restoration .

congress is often faced with reacting to natural disasters such as droughts and floods .

drought conditions in california and elsewhere in the west and southwest , and widespread drought in 2012 , have left many areas vulnerable to drought - induced impacts , such as water supply and use limitations , reduced agricultural and power production , and degraded fish and wildlife habitat .

responsibilities for drought planning and response are split among various levels of government and involve many different federal agencies .

although congress has enacted legislation to coordinate drought information through the national integrated drought information system ( nidis ) , there is no overarching national drought policy .

in addition to nidis reauthorization ( p.l .

113-86 ) and drought - related provisions of the 2014 farm bill , the 113 th congress enacted legislation ( p.l .

113-121 ) that authorized the corps to assess its reservoir operations during drought and expanded epa loan and loan guarantee opportunities and eligibility for water supply systems , as discussed in crs report r43298 , water resources reform and development act of 2014: comparison of select provisions .

multiple bills in the 113 th congress addressed drought operations of reclamation facilities ( eg , h.r .

3964 , h.r .

4239 , and s. 2198 ) .

others addressed water efficiency , conservation , and alternative supplies ( eg , h.r .

5363 , s. 2771 ) ; several would have facilitated federal or nonfederal water storage projects ( eg , h.r .

3980 , h.r .

5412 ) .

additionally , some bills ( eg , s. 2016 ) proposed changes to the stafford act , an emergency assistance act .

the majority of these bills consisted of authorizations , with many provisions' implementation contingent upon appropriations ; a few bills proposed appropriations to address the western u.s. drought ( eg , h.r .

4039 , s. 2016 ) .

because of ongoing drought conditions in much of the west , congress might again address drought planning and preparedness through oversight hearings and / or specific legislation .

for more information on drought impacts and congressional response , see crs report r43407 , drought in the united states: causes and current understanding , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report if00058 , drought policy , response , and preparedness ( in focus ) ( pdf ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r42854 , emergency assistance for agricultural land rehabilitation , by [author name scrubbed] .

periodic but intense flooding also garners attention from congress .

for example , hurricane sandy flooding in 2012 and midwest floods in 2011 tested the nation's emergency response system and resulted in billions of dollars in damages .

although the corps is the principal flood - fighting agency , other agencies also play a role in flood response and mitigation , such as fema's disaster assistance , flood insurance , and pre - disaster mitigation programs .

additionally , responsibilities for flood damage reduction are spread among federal , state , local , and tribal governments .

states and local governments in many ways play a primary role in floodplain management because of their jurisdiction over land use decisions and local zoning ordinances — deciding where and how development may occur .

the 113 th congress was engaged in some aspects of flood policy: policies affecting fema's national flood insurance program , flood damage reduction program and project authorizations in wrrda 2014 , and oversight recovery for areas recently affected by floods .

given the magnitude of the nation's flood risk ( eg , over $10.6 trillion in insured properties in coastal counties on the east coast and along the gulf of mexico ) and how the nation's flood risk is increasing , the 114 th congress may consider additional ways to reduce flood risk , such as by improving infrastructure and protecting natural flood mitigation , removing disincentives to improved floodplain management , or promoting more pre - disaster recovery plans for highly vulnerable areas .

u.s. water infrastructure is aging ; the majority of the nation's dams , locks , and levees are more than 50 years old .

failure of these structures could have significant effects on local communities as well as regional and national impacts .

major capital investments in these structures have been limited in recent years and repairing these facilities would cost billions of dollars .

congressional funding has largely been at the project level and has remained essentially flat , while funding needs have increased over time .

to date , no comprehensive reporting or funding solutions to these issues has been enacted .

some propose funding mechanisms that might be more conducive to major capital investments in these projects , such as authorization of loan programs for some infrastructure types , or else including water resource infrastructure among the eligible recipients of funding from an infrastructure bank ( such as that proposed in h.r .

2553 in the 113 th congress ) .

others have proposed utilizing revenues from project beneficiaries ( eg , hydropower revenues , increased user fees ) to fund project repairs and upgrades , or even deauthorizing and / or transferring projects to nonfederal entities , such as state or local governments .

still others think that congress requires more uniform information on the extent of this issue before it considers major funding solutions .

in the 113 th congress , the senate held a hearing on this topic and enacted legislation that would require increased reporting by reclamation on its aging infrastructure backlog ( s. 1800 ) .

 ( see also discussion below on " changing federal partnerships ." ) .

some have expressed frustration with the pace of authorization for federal water resource projects , and this has resulted in some local sponsors pursuing projects with limited federal partnership or support , or with expectations of future federal reimbursement or credit .

an example is the potential construction of sites reservoir in california — an off - stream water storage project associated with the federal central valley project ( ca ) .

language authorizing nonfederal construction of proposed federal projects ( as long as no federal funding is used ) was included in h.r .

1837 and h.r .

6247 in the 112 th congress and h.r .

3964 in the 113 th congress .

the fy2014 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

113-76 , h.r .

3547 ) included a provision authorizing the secretary of the interior to partner with local joint power authorities to advance authorized planning and feasibility studies , among other things , including providing grants for such purpose ( §208 ) .

the 113 th congress ( eg , p.l .

113-121 ) expanded the ability for nonfederal entities to advance funding for federal projects to spur project construction .

such proposals , however , raise the question of whether federal investment is needed if local sponsors can finance the projects on their own , whether the federal government will be able to meet the expectations for reimbursement , and whether the nonfederal sponsors with available financing will determine which projects get reimbursed from limited federal water resources infrastructure funds .

another approach was initiated in the 113 th congress through its authorization of title x of wrrda 2014 , the water infrastructure finance and innovation act ( wifia ) .

the title authorized a pilot program , to be administered by the corps and the environmental protection agency , for loans and loan guarantees for certain flood damage reduction , public water supply , and wastewater projects .

wifia was modeled after a similar program that assists transportation projects , the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act , or tifia , program .

water resource project funding is often a part of the debate on congressionally directed spending , or "earmarks. .

although water resource project development has historically been directed by congress , the site - specific nature of the authorizations and appropriations process resulted in projects being subject to earmark disclosure rules and earmark moratoria beginning in the 112 th congress .

earmark moratoria appear to be altering the makeup of corps and reclamation appropriations in particular by reducing the congressional additions of specific projects to the budget , and by congress funding broad categories of activities rather than specific projects .

as a result , some projects that have historically benefitted from congressional support have received less ( or no ) funding in recent enacted appropriations bills .

in addition to funding impacts , earmark moratoria have also influenced consideration of site - specific authorizations of water resource projects .

the 114 th congress may consider the status and priority of major federal efforts to restore aquatic ecosystems that have been altered or impaired by development , habitat loss , and federal water resource projects .

some of these restoration initiatives include those in the everglades , california bay - delta , great lakes , gulf coast , chesapeake bay , klamath basin , and elsewhere .

the 114 th congress may consider a number of issues pertaining to these ecosystems .

for example , congress may consider legislation to authorize a framework for governance and a comprehensive restoration plan for the great lakes and might conduct oversight over the implementation of restoration efforts in the gulf coast region .

further , lack of congressional authorization for new construction projects in the everglades , such as the central everglades planning project ( cepp ) , has caused concern that the initiative could be delayed .

congress might consider policies that would streamline authorizations to allow for more projects to be implemented .

funding for existing and new restoration initiatives might generate controversy and could face challenges in the 114 th congress .

deliberations over fy2016 appropriations could also address ecosystem restoration initiatives in various appropriations bills .

