t he manner in which staff are deployed within an organization may reflect the missions and priorities of that organization .

in congress , employing authorities hire staff to carry out duties in member - office , committee , leadership , and other settings .

the extent to which staff in those settings change may lend insight into the senate's work over time .

some of the insights that might be taken from staff levels include an understanding of the division of congressional work between senators working individually through their personal offices , or collectively , through committee activities ; the relationship between committee leaders and chamber leaders , which could have implications for the development and consideration of legislation , the use of congressional oversight , or deployment of staff ; and the extent to which specialized chamber administrative operations have grown over time .

this report provides staffing levels in senators' , committee , leadership , and other offices since 1977 .

no senate publication appears to officially and authoritatively track the actual number of staff working in the chambers by office or entity .

data presented here are based on staff listed by chamber entity ( offices of senators , committees , leaders , officers , officials , and other entities ) in senate telephone directories .

figure 1 displays overall staffing levels in the senate .

table 1 in the " data tables " section below provides data for all staff listed in chamber directories in the senate through 2016 .

joint committee staff data from the senate for panels that met in the 114 th congress ( 2015-2016 ) are provided in table 7 .

since 1987 , the number of staff working for the senate has grown .

there have been increases in the number of staff working in senate leadership offices , and larger increases in the staffing of officers and officials through 2015 , though 2016 saw a dip in those numbers .

staff working for senators have shifted from committee settings to leadership settings or the personal offices .

some of these changes may be indicative of the growth of the senate as an institution , or the value the chamber places on its various activities .

one example that may be an indication of institutional development arguably is found in the growth of the number of staff working in leadership and officers and officials' offices .

a potential explanation for these changes may be found in what some might characterize as an ongoing professionalization and institutionalization of congressional management and administration .

some note that as organizations such as governing institutions develop , they identify needs for expertise and develop specialized practices and processes .

in congress , some of those areas of specialization arguably include supporting the legislative process through the drafting of measures , oversight and support of floor activities , and the management of legislation in a bicameral , partisan environment .

another potential explanation related to a more institutionalized , professionalized congress could be the demands for professional management and support .

this could arise as a result of congressional use of communications technologies , and the deployment of systematic , professionalized human resources processes , business operations , and financial management .

consequently , increased specialized support of congressional legislative and administrative activities may explain increases among staff working for chamber leaders , and officers and officials .

in another example , the distribution of staff working directly for senators has shifted from committee settings to personal office settings .

staff in member offices has grown while staff in senate committees has decreased , both in real numbers and in percentage of total staff .

this may represent a shift from collective congressional activities typically carried out in committees ( including legislative , oversight , and investigative work ) to individualized activities typically carried out in senators' personal offices ( including direct representational activities , constituent service and education , and political activity ) .

