article iii , section i , of the constitution provides , in part , that the "judicial power of the united states , shall be vested in one supreme court , and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to time ordain and establish. .

it further provides that justices on the supreme court and judges on lower courts established by congress under article iii have what effectively has come to mean life tenure , holding office "during good behaviour. .

along with the supreme court , the courts that constitute the article iii courts in the federal system are the u.s. circuit courts of appeals , the u.s. district courts , and the u.s. court of international trade .

this report concerns nominations made by president obama and other recent presidents to the u.s. circuit courts of appeals and the u.s. district courts .

outside the report's scope are the occasional nominations that these presidents made to the supreme court and the u.s. court of international trade .

in recent congresses , there has been ongoing interest in the process by which u.s. circuit and district court judges are nominated by the president and approved by the senate .

during senate debates over judicial nominations , differing perspectives have been expressed about the relative degree of success of a president's nominees in gaining senate confirmation , compared with the nominees of other recent presidents .

additionally , senate debate has , at times , concerned whether a president's judicial nominees , relative to the nominees of other recent presidents , had to wait longer before receiving consideration by the senate judiciary committee or "up - or - down" floor votes on confirmation .

of related concern to congress has been increases in recent years in the number of vacant judgeships in the federal judiciary , the frequency with which vacant judgeships are considered "judicial emergencies," and the time it has taken to process nominations to fill judicial vacancies .

perhaps in response to some of the issues described above , the senate , on november 21 , 2013 , reinterpreted the application of senate rule xxii to floor consideration of presidential nominations by overturning a ruling of the chair on appeal .

for nominations other than to the supreme court , the new precedent lowered the vote threshold by which cloture can be invoked — from three - fifths of the senate to a simple majority of those voting , thereby enabling a supportive majority to reach an 'up - or - down' vote on confirming a nomination .

the reinterpretation of the application of senate rule xxii , hereinafter referred to as "the reinterpretation," was in effect from november 21 , 2013 , during the first session of the 113 th congress ( near the end of president obama's fifth calendar year in office ) to the end of the second session of the 113 th congress ( through president obama's entire sixth calendar year in office ) .

as of this writing , the reinterpretation continues to be in effect during the 114 th congress .

the statistics and analysis presented in this section account only for those nominees who were confirmed by the senate during a president's first six years ( thus excluding from the analysis nominees who were never confirmed or who were later confirmed in a president's term , i.e. , during his seventh year or later , and , for president obama , those nominations for which final disposition has not yet been determined ) .

figure 1 tracks by president the average and median number of days from nomination to confirmation for all circuit and district court nominees confirmed during a president's first six years in office .

if a nominee was nominated more than once by a president during his first six years ( and he or she was also confirmed within those six years ) , the first date he or she was nominated was used to calculate the days elapsed from nomination to confirmation .

the percentage of vacant circuit and district court judgeships varies over the course of a presidency and is affected , in part , by the pace at which a president selects nominees for vacancies as well as the speed by which the senate considers the president's nominees .

table 3 compares for the four presidents: ( 1 ) the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office ; ( 2 ) the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships vacant on january 1 of a president's seventh year in office ; and ( 3 ) the change in the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships from january 1 of a president's sixth year to january 1 of his seventh year in office .

note that an increase ( or decrease ) in the percentage of vacant judgeships over a particular period of time is not solely a reflection of relatively fewer ( or greater ) number of nominations being confirmed by the senate .

it may be the case , for example , that the percentage of vacant judgeships increased during a particular period because a greater number of judges stepped down from active service than during the preceding period — thus , creating more vacancies .

 table 3 shows that the percentage of circuit court judgeships that were vacant at the beginning of a president's sixth year in office was greatest during the clinton and obama presidencies ( 12.8% and 9.5% , respectively ) while , at the beginning of a president's seventh year in office , the percentage of circuit court judgeships that were vacant was greatest during the clinton and g.w .

bush presidencies ( 9.5% and 8.9% , respectively ) .

the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships at the beginning of president obama's seventh year in office , 3.9% , was the lowest percentage of vacant judgeships on january 1 of any of the president's sixth or seventh years in office .

the table also shows that , of the four presidencies , the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships decreased from the beginning of a president's sixth year to his seventh year during the clinton and obama presidencies ( decreasing 3.3 and 5.6 percentage points , respectively ) .

the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships increased by 2.3 and 1.6 percentage points from the beginning of the sixth to the seventh years of the reagan and g.w .

bush presidencies , respectively .

as with circuit court vacancies , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office was greatest during the clinton and obama presidencies ( 9.3% and 11.1% , respectively ) .

on january 1 of a president's seventh year in office , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships was greatest during the reagan and clinton presidencies ( 7.2% and 6.4% , respectively ) .

the percentage of vacant district court judgeships at the beginning of president obama's seventh year in office , 4.9% , was the lowest percentage of vacant judgeships on january 1 of any of the presidents' sixth or seventh years in office .

from the beginning of a president's sixth to seventh year in office , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships declined during the reagan , clinton , and obama presidencies ( decreasing 0.5 , 2.9 , and 6.2 percentage points , respectively ) .

the percentage of vacant district court judgeships increased slightly , however , from the sixth to seventh years during the g.w .

bush presidency ( rising 0.7 percentage points ) .

a vacancy is deemed a "judicial emergency" by the judicial conference of the united states if certain criteria are met regarding the number of case filings for that judgeship or court and , in some cases , the length of time a particular judicial vacancy has existed .

as with vacancies , generally , the percentage of vacant circuit and district court judgeships deemed judicial emergencies is affected by a combination of factors .

a full accounting is beyond the scope of this report , but such factors include , in part , the pace at which a president selects nominees for vacancies as well as the speed by which the senate considers the president's nominees .

for circuit court vacancies , a judicial emergency exists if adjusted case filings per appellate panel are in excess of 700 or , for any circuit court vacancy that is in existence for more than 18 months , where adjusted filings are between 500 to 700 per panel .

for district court vacancies , a judicial emergency exists when a district court has weighted case filings in excess of 600 per judgeship ; or a vacancy is in existence more than 18 months where weighted filings are between 430 to 600 per judgeship ; or any district court with more than one authorized judgeship and only one active judge .

table 4 compares , for president obama and two of his predecessors , ( 1 ) the percentage of circuit and district court vacancies considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of each president's sixth year in office ; ( 2 ) the percentage of circuit and district court vacancies considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of each president's seventh year ; and ( 3 ) the change in the percentage of judicial vacancies considered judicial emergencies from january 1 of a president's sixth to seventh year in office .

data on judicial emergencies is not available for the reagan presidency ; consequently , it is omitted from this part of the analysis .

 table 4 shows that the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office was greatest during the g.w .

bush presidency ( 61.5% ) , followed by the obama and clinton presidencies ( 58.8% and 39.1% , respectively ) .

the percentage of such vacancies considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of a president's seventh year in office was also greatest during the g.w .

bush presidency ( 81.2% ) .

the percentage of circuit court vacancies considered judicial emergencies at the beginning of president obama's and clinton's seventh years was 42.9% and 64.7% , respectively .

of the three presidents , president obama is the only one for whom the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships deemed judicial emergencies decreased from january 1 of his sixth year to january 1 of his seventh year ( decreasing from 58.8% to 42.9% ) .

for presidents clinton and g.w .

bush the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships considered judicial emergencies increased by 25.6% and 19.7% , respectively .

as shown by table 4 , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office was greatest during the obama presidency ( 36.0% ) , followed by the clinton and g.w .

bush presidencies ( 33.3% and 22.9% , respectively ) .

the percentage of such vacancies considered judicial emergencies on january 1 of a president's seventh year in office was greatest during the clinton presidency ( 34.1% ) .

the percentage of district court vacancies considered judicial emergencies at the beginning of president g.w .

bush's and obama's seventh years was 30.0% and 27.3% , respectively .

president obama is the only one of the three presidents for whom the percentage of vacant district court judgeships deemed judicial emergencies declined from january 1 of his sixth to seventh year in office ( i.e. , declining from 36.0% to 27.3% ) .

for presidents clinton and g.w .

bush the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships considered judicial emergencies increased ( by 0.8 and 7.1 percentage points , respectively ) from january 1 of each president's sixth to seventh year .

