recent legal events related to vietnam - era servicemembers who received an "other than honorable" ( oth ) discharge ( commonly referred to as an "undesirable" or "bad paper" discharge ) from the military have drawn the attention of congress due to the impact that oth discharges may have on restricting eligibility for veterans' benefits .

on march 3 , 2014 , a group of veterans , assisted by the yale law school veterans legal services clinic , filed a class action lawsuit on behalf of vietnam servicemembers who received oth discharges due to misconduct that — the servicemembers contend — was related to undiagnosed post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) .

the plaintiffs sued the secretaries of the army , navy , and air force alleging violations of the administrative procedure act during the review of petitions to the boards for correction of military / naval records ( bcm / nr ) requesting an "upgrade" in discharge status .

an upgrade to an honorable or general discharge ( under honorable conditions ) would allow some vietnam - era servicemembers with oth discharges to establish basic eligibility for veterans' benefits .

in response to the class action , then - secretary of defense chuck hagel issued a september 3 , 2014 , memorandum to the secretaries of the military departments providing supplemental policy guidance for the bcm / nr to give "liberal consideration" to petitions for changes in discharge status .

the guidance " ... is intended to ease the application process ... and assist the boards in reaching fair and consistent results" for ptsd - related cases involving former servicemembers petitioning the bcm / nr for redress .

although the department of veterans affairs ( va ) is not party to the lawsuit , in a process known as a character of s ervice determination , the va plays a separate , but related , role in assessing entitlement to veterans' benefits for individuals whose character of discharge does not automatically meet basic eligibility criteria .

the circumstances surrounding a servicemember's discharge from the military have implications for his or her ability to claim entitlement to a wide range of gratuitous benefits administered by the va , including service - connected disability compensation , health care , education assistance , non - service - connected pension , burial benefits , housing benefits , and vocational rehabilitation , among others .

to meet basic eligibility criteria for veterans' benefits , the former servicemember must first establish "veteran" status .

specifically , the individual must meet certain active duty service requirements and minimum length - of - service requirements , and have a discharge or separation from the military under conditions that are "other than dishonorable. .

entitlement to veterans' benefits is generally denied to former servicemembers who do not meet the statutory definition of a veteran .

this report discusses the discharge or separation requirement for veteran status or , more specifically , how the va assesses character of service to determine whether a former servicemember's separation from the military can be considered other than dishonorable .

in some instances , the military characterization of discharge is relatively uncomplicated , creating a binding entitlement to va benefits ( i.e. , an honorable or general discharge [under honorable conditions] ) , assuming the individual meets other eligibility requirements for veteran status .

however , if the characterization of discharge may preclude access to veteran's benefits , the va must develop the case , through an assessment of service records and other evidence related to a claimant's time in the military .

this report includes a hypothetical example ( in appendix c ) illustrating the complexities associated with making character of service determinations by the va .

the initial step in filing a claim , for example , for va disability compensation or pension benefits , is to submit an application either through the va's online system or a completed va form 21-526 to a local va regional office in person or by mail .

currently , a former servicemember does not need to submit a completed form to initiate a claim for veterans' benefits , because the va accepts informal claims that include "[a]ny communication or action , indicating an intent to apply for one or more benefits under the laws administered by the department of veterans affairs , from a claimant , [or] his or her duly authorized representative. .

veteran status forms the basis for eligibility for all va benefits .

the va predicates access to benefits based on a former servicemember meeting the statutory criteria for a veteran , without which , they would generally be barred from benefits .

although veteran status can be demonstrated through a number of pathways , a former servicemember must meet three primary criteria: 1. full - time active duty ( other than active duty for training ) military service ( i.e. , army , navy , air force , marine corps , coast guard ) or commissioned officers of the public health service ( phs ) , and national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) or its predecessor , the environmental science services administration ; 2 .

24 months of continuous service , or the full period for which the servicemember was called to duty if activated for less than 24 months ( applicable to enlistments after september 7 , 1980 ) ; and 3. discharge or separation from the military under conditions other than dishonorable .

congress has established that certain characterizations of service will preclude a former servicemember from receiving va benefits .

in addition , congress has delegated to the secretary of the va the authority to promulgate regulations establishing additional circumstances that could bar receipt of va benefits .

collectively , these are known as legal bars .

legal bars to veterans' benefits will not apply if the va finds that the former servicemember was insane at the time of the offense that led to the oth discharge .

in addition , a former servicemember may qualify for veterans' benefits based on a prior period of other than dishonorable service .

see the " exceptions to legal bars to va benefits " section below .

certain exceptions permit the awarding of veterans' benefits , even if a statutory or regulatory bar would ordinarily prohibit access .

if the va determines that the claimant was insane at the time of the offense leading up to the discharge , the claimant may be granted veterans' benefits .

there does not need to be a direct connection between the insanity and any misconduct that led to the punitive discharge .

in addition , the va may grant benefit eligibility based on a prior period of other than dishonorable service for individuals with two or more periods of service .

if the characterization of a former servicemember's discharge comes into question during the claims process for veterans' benefits , the regional offices of the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) , a sub - agency of the va , are tasked with developing the character of service to make a basic eligibility determination .

the va will " ... request the facts and circumstances surrounding the claimant's discharge prior to making a formal decision," which entails a comprehensive review of the entire period of the claimant's enlistment ( s ) to assess the quality of the service and to determine whether the individual is deserving of veterans benefits .

in making the determination , the va will generally review personnel files provided by the claimant's military branch , service treatment records , records of any court - martial proceedings ( if applicable ) , and statements , documents , or other information submitted by the claimant .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) of the va operates the nation's largest integrated direct health care delivery system .

eligible veterans receive health care and counseling services through 150 va medical centers ( hospitals ) , 830 community - based outpatient clinics ( cbocs ) , 136 community - living centers , and 300 vet centers .

generally , veterans are required to be enrolled in the va health care system to obtain health care services .

veterans who are enrolled have access to a comprehensive medical benefits package that includes a range of outpatient and inpatient services .

once enrolled , the veteran remains enrolled in the health care system and may access health care services at any va medical facility .

vha's health care system manages the enrollment of veterans based on priority categories ( priority groups ) .

veterans are not required to be enrolled to receive readjustment counseling services through vet centers .

similar to other benefits and services provided by the va , eligibility for va health care is based primarily on veteran status .

to reiterate , veteran status is established by the former servicemember meeting three primary criteria: 1. full - time active duty ( other than active duty for training ) military service ( i.e. , army , navy , air force , marine corps , coast guard ) or commissioned officers of the public health service , and national oceanic and atmospheric administration or its predecessor , the environmental science services administration ; 2. minimum active duty requirement of 24 months of service or the period called to service if activated for less than 24 months — reservists and national guard members called to active duty by a federal order ( for other than training purposes ) and completing the full call - up period would qualify ; 3. discharge or release from active military service under conditions other than dishonorable — va accepts discharges that are characterized as honorable or general ( under honorable conditions ) , as other than dishonorable for va benefit purposes .

once these three criteria are met a veteran may enroll in the va health care system .

a veteran who does not receive an honorable or general discharge ( under honorable conditions ) from the military may still receive health care services from the vha .

it should be noted that a veteran's character of discharge under oth conditions is not the same as dishonorable and does not deprive the veteran of all benefits .

if a veteran received an oth discharge that is determined to fall under a regulatory bar , the veteran will still be eligible to receive care for a disability or illness determined to be incurred or aggravated during active service ( see figure 1 ) .

however , a veteran with an oth discharge that is determined to fall under a statutory bar for va benefits or discharged by reason of a bad conduct discharge , would not be eligible for va health care for that same period of service .

veterans with multiple periods of service may be eligible for va health care services based on a prior period of other than dishonorable service .

the process for appealing a dishonorable character of service determination by the va is handled in the same manner as other appeals for veterans claims .

during the appeal process for veterans' claims , various officials will handle the claim .

this section briefly introduces the decision makers who will potentially review an appeal .

each va regional office ( ro ) has at least one decision review officer ( dro ) on staff .

the dro is a "senior technical expert who is responsible" for processing appeals made to the ro .

if a claimant elects to undergo a dro review , the dro is to review the claim at the ro level , before the appeal reaches the board of veterans' appeals ( bva ) .

during review , a dro will examine the claim de novo — that is , he or she will look at the case anew and afford no deference to the initial determination made by the ro .

the dro may not revise the initial decision "in a manner that is less advantageous to the claimant" unless the dro finds an instance of "clear and unmistakable error. .

to have an appeal reviewed by a dro , the claimant must ask to take dro review .

otherwise a review , directly through the bva , will proceed .

if a claimant opts for dro review , the claimant may still request that the bva review the claim if the dro's decision is not favorable to the claimant .

when a claimant's application for benefits has been denied , an appeal can be made to the bva .

the bva is part of the va , located in washington , dc , and makes the final determination on an appeal within the va .

the board consists of experienced attorneys in the field of veterans law .

board members are appointed by the va secretary , with the approval of the president .

as of 2012 , the board consisted of 64 members .

the bva also employs staff attorneys that assist the board members while preparing a decision for a claim , much like a clerk for a judge .

if a claimant is not satisfied with the decision from the bva , the claimant has the option of appealing to the court of appeals for veterans claims ( cavc ) .

the cavc is an article i court , established by congress , which has exclusive jurisdiction over appeals from the bva .

therefore , the cavc is a separate entity from the va that reviews bva decisions .

currently , up to nine judges may sit on the cavc and review appeals from the bva .

the va's general counsel will defend the bva decision before the court .

if the claimant is dissatisfied with the determination reached by the cavc , the claimant may appeal the decision to the court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) .

the scope of review on veterans' appeals provided by the federal circuit is limited by statute .

the federal circuit can set aside regulations that are arbitrary or capricious , unconstitutional , in excess of statutory jurisdiction , or procedurally deficient .

generally , the federal circuit is not permitted to review any challenge to a factual determination , or a "challenge to a law or regulation as applied to the facts of a particular case. .

the federal circuit provides the last appeal of right for claimants appealing decisions made by the bva .

finally , if the claimant is still not satisfied by the decision reached by the court of appeals for the federal circuit , the claimant may petition the supreme court for certiorari .

the supreme court may or may not decide to grant certiorari ( hear the case ) — the claimant is not guaranteed to have the supreme court hear the appeal .

if the supreme court grants certiorari , any decision provided by the supreme court is final .

appendix a. descriptions of military character of discharge appendix b. descriptions of statutory and regulatory bars to va benefits appendix c. applied example: understanding the impact of character of discharge and va's decisio .

