the u.s. department of commerce's national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) is the "lead national laboratory for providing the measurements , calibrations , and quality assurance techniques which underpin united states commerce , technological progress , improved product reliability and manufacturing processes , and public safety. .

by statute , nist is "to assist private sector initiatives to capitalize on advanced technology ; to advance , through cooperative efforts among industries , universities , and government laboratories , promising research and development projects , which can be optimized by the private sector for commercial and industrial applications ; and to promote shared risks , accelerated development , and pooling of skills which will be necessary to strengthen america's manufacturing industries. .

nist conducts leading - edge research in its seven research laboratories located in facilities in gaithersburg , md , and boulder , co. nist employs approximately 3,000 scientists , engineers , technicians , and support personnel , and hosts about 3,500 guest researchers and associates from academia , industry , and other government agencies , who collaborate with nist staff and access user facilities .

research is focused on measurement , standards , test methods , and basic "infrastructural technologies" that enable development of advanced technologies .

infrastructural technologies assist industry in characterizing new materials , monitoring production processes , and ensuring the quality of new product lines .

cooperative research with industry to overcome technical barriers to commercialization of emerging technologies is a major component of nist's work .

in addition , nist manages extramural programs such as the hollings manufacturing extension partnership ( mep ) program and the network for manufacturing innovation ( nmi , also referred to as manufacturing usa ) .

several other extramural programs previously conducted by nist have been eliminated or integrated into other nist activities .

these programs are discussed in the next section .

unlike most federal laboratories , nist has a mission specified by statute ( 15 u.s.c .

271-282a ) , has a separate authorization and appropriation , and is headed by a senate - confirmed presidential appointee ( the under secretary of commerce for technology and standards ) .

nist was originally created by the nbs organic act of 1901 ( p.l .

56-177 ) as the national bureau of standards ( nbs ) , at a time when the first centralized industrial labs were being established .

under the act , nbs was charged with working on "the solution of problems which arise in connection with standards" and to engage in the "determination of physical constants and the properties of materials , when such data are of great importance to scientific or manufacturing interests and are not to be obtained of sufficient accuracy elsewhere. .

these objectives remain central to nist's laboratory work today .

when nbs was renamed nist under the provisions of the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 , the laboratory was given additional missions and supporting programs .

two of the new programs — the advanced technology program and the manufacturing extension partnership program — were intended to improve u.s. innovation and industrial competitiveness .

these programs generated criticism from some policymakers and analysts who objected to them on a variety of grounds , including whether such activities are appropriate for the federal government to undertake ; whether they might result in suboptimal choices of technologies , choices better left to market forces ; whether certain technologies , companies , or industries might be chosen for support based on criteria other than technical or business merit ; and whether tax dollars should be awarded to already - profitable firms .

in contrast , nist's historical mission of conducting laboratory research in support of standards and metrics continued to enjoy broad support and faced little controversy .

evidence of this support can be seen in the selection of the strs account — through which nist laboratory work is funded — as one of the targeted accounts in the doubling efforts of former presidents george w. bush and barack obama and successive congresses .

however , even with broad support and the absence of controversy , funding for the nist strs account did not grow at the pace its advocates supported in presidential budget requests and successive authorizations of appropriations due to tight overall fiscal constraints on the federal budget .

these issues are discussed in more detail below .

in the early 2000s , many industry , academia , and policy leaders expressed growing concern that federal investments in physical sciences and engineering research were not growing fast enough to keep the united states on the leading edge of technological innovation and commercial competitiveness .

in his 2006 state of the union remarks , president bush announced the american competitiveness initiative ( aci ) , which , among other things , sought to double funding for targeted appropriations accounts that fund physical sciences and engineering research over a 10-year period .

among the targeted accounts were the nist strs and construction accounts .

subsequently , congress passed the america competes act ( p.l .

110-69 ) , which set appropriations authorizations for the targeted accounts for fy2008-fy2010 that represented a compound annual growth rate ( cagr ) of 10.1% that would have , if continued , resulted in a doubling over approximately seven years .

in his fy2010 plan for science and innovation , president obama stated that he ( like president bush ) would seek to double funding for basic research over 10 years ( fy2006 to fy2016 ) at the aci agencies .

actual appropriations , however , did not keep pace with the america competes act authorization levels .

in his fy2011 budget request , president obama extended the period over which he intended to double these agencies' budgets to 11 years .

in 2010 , congress enacted the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-358 ) , setting appropriations authorizations for the targeted accounts for fy2011-fy2013 at a level that effectively set an 11-year doubling pace ( a 6.3% cagr ) .

however , as with the original act , appropriations did not keep pace with the authorization act levels .

while reiterating president obama's intention to double funding for the targeted accounts from their fy2006 levels , president obama's fy2013 budget request did not specify the length of time over which the doubling was to take place .

president obama's fy2014 budget expressed a commitment to increasing funding for the targeted accounts , but did not commit to doubling .

president obama's fy2017 budget did not address the doubling effort .

from fy2006 , the base year for the doubling effort , through fy2016 , funding for the nist strs and construction accounts grew by 42.3% in nominal terms , a compound annual growth rate of 3.6% , a rate that would result in doubling in about 20 years .

president obama's fy2017 request sought an increase in aggregate funding for these accounts of 2.0% .

president trump's fy2018 and fy2019 budget requests did / do not mention doubling .

the doubling effort appears to no longer be a priority for congress or the president .

it remains to be seen how support for internal r&d at nist will evolve .

some of nist's external programs have faced substantial opposition over time .

beginning with the 104 th congress , many members expressed skepticism over a "technology policy" based on providing federal funds to industry for development of precompetitive generic technologies .

this philosophical shift from previous congresses , coupled with pressures to balance the federal budget , led to significant reductions in funding for nist's external programs .

the advanced technology program and the manufacturing extension partnership , which accounted for over 50% of the fy1995 nist budget , were proposed for elimination .

although in the past strong support by the senate led to their continued financing , funding for atp remained controversial .

beginning in fy2000 , the house - passed appropriations bills did not contain funding for atp , and many of the budget proposals submitted by former president george w. bush called for abolishing the program .

in the 110 th congress , the america competes act eliminated atp and replaced it with the tip initiative .

while tip received appropriations from fy2008 to fy2011 , it has received no appropriations since .

in his fy2003 budget proposal , president bush also recommended suspension of federal support for those mep centers in operation for more than six years ; the following year , funding for the mep program was significantly reduced .

however , the fy2005 omnibus appropriations act brought support for mep back up to the level necessary to fully fund the existing centers .

since then , funding has grown from $107.5 million in fy2005 to $130.0 million in fy2016 .

president obama requested $142.0 million for mep for fy2017 , an increase of $12.0 million ( 9.2% ) ; congress provided $130 million , an amount equal to its fy2016 level .

for fy2017 , congress provided $140.0 million for mep .

president trump's fy2018 budget request sought to end the mep program , providing $6.0 million in fy2018 to provide "for the orderly wind down of federal funding for the program. .

president trump's fy2019 request would provide no funding for mep .

for more information on the mep program , see crs report r44308 , the manufacturing extension partnership program , by john f. sargent jr .

in his fy2013 budget , president obama requested $1 billion in mandatory funding for the creation of a national network for manufacturing innovation to help accelerate innovation by investing in industrially relevant manufacturing technologies with broad applications , and to support manufacturing technology commercialization by bridging the gap between the laboratory and the market .

congress did not act on this request or on president obama's fy2014 request for the same amount .

in fy2015 , president obama requested $2.4 billion for the nnmi as part of his opportunity , growth , and security initiative .

president obama also requested $5.0 million for coordination of manufacturing innovation institutes as part of nist's budget request .

in december 2014 , congress enacted the revitalize american manufacturing and innovation ( rami ) act of 2014 as title vii of division b of the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) , establishing a network for manufacturing innovation ( nmi ) .

the act does not appropriate funds specifically for the nmi program but instead authorizes nist to spend up to $5.0 million of funds appropriated to nist's its account each year from fy2015 to fy2024 to carry out the program .

in addition , the act authorizes the department of energy ( doe ) to transfer up to $250.0 million to nist for the 10-year period fy2015 to fy2024 to carry out the program .

as of the date of this report , doe has not transferred any funding to nist for this purpose .

through the end of calendar year 2015 , seven nnmi institutes sponsored by the department of defense ( dod ) and department of energy had been awarded , and two additional institutes were being competed .

in december 2015 , congress appropriated specific funding , for the first time , for the establishment and coordination of institutes under the provisions of the rami act .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) provided nist with $25.0 million for fy2016 for the nnmi , to include funding for establishment of institutes and up to $5.0 million for coordination activities .

the explanatory statement accompanying the act directed nist to "follow the direction of the revitalize american manufacturing and innovation act of 2014 in requiring open competition to select the technological focus areas of industry - driven manufacturing institutes. .

nist subsequently announced its intention to establish two institutes .

on december 16 , 2016 , nist awarded the national institute for innovation in manufacturing biopharmaceuticals ( niimbl ) , led by the university of delaware , "to advance u.s. leadership in biopharmaceutical manufacturing. .

nist did not award a second institute due to a lack of funds .

p.l .

115-141 provides $15.0 million for nist nnmi efforts in fy2018 , to include funding for its center and $5.0 million for coordination activities .

president obama had requested $25.0 million in discretionary funding and $1.9 billion in mandatory funding for nist to establish institutes and coordinate the activities of the network .

as of the date of this report , 14 nnmi institutes have been established — 8 by dod , 5 by doe , and 1 by the department of commerce .

as congress completes the fy2019 appropriations process , an overarching issue will be how to respond to the trump administration's fy2019 nist budget request and its policy implications , how much funding to provide to nist in aggregate , and how to allocate nist appropriations among the core standards and measurement functions performed by its laboratories and nist external programs , such as mep , amtech , and the nmi .

for a broader discussion about the network for manufacturing innovation and associated policy issues , see crs report r44371 , the national network for manufacturing innovation , by john f. sargent jr .

appendix a .

requested and enacted discretionary appropriations for nist accounts appendix b .

requested and enacted appropriations for selected nist program .

