science and technology play an increasingly important role in our society .

advances in science and technology can help drive economic growth , improve human health , increase agricultural productivity , and help meet national priorities .

federal policies affect scientific and technological advancement on several levels .

the federal government directly funds research and development activities to achieve national goals or support national priorities such as funding basic life science research through the national institutes of health ( nih ) or new weapons of mass destruction detectors through the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the federal government establishes and maintains the legal and regulatory framework that affects science and technology activities in the private sector .

federal tax , intellectual property , and education policies can have large effects on private sector science and technology ( s&t ) activity performance .

the federal government also directly regulates certain aspects of science and technology such as limiting who is allowed to perform research with certain dangerous biological pathogens through the select agent program .

this report serves as a brief introduction to many of the science and technology policy issues that may come before the 114 th congress .

each issue section provides background information and outlines the policy issues that may be considered .

each issue includes a heading entitled "for further information" that provides the author's contact information and the titles of relevant crs reports to pursue more detailed policy analysis and information .

several issues of potential congressional interest apply to federal science and technology policy in general .

this section begins with a brief introduction to the roles each branch of the federal government plays in s&t policymaking , then discusses overall federal funding of research and development .

additional sections address issues related to the america competes act , tax policy , and public access to federally supported research results and data .

maintaining a rapid pace of scientific and technological advancement requires a sufficient workforce of scientists and engineers .

this section discusses workforce - related issues that may come before the 114 th congress , including the adequacy of the current workforce and efforts to develop the future workforce .

the federal government supports billions of dollars of agricultural research annually .

the 114 th congress is likely to face issues related to the budget for this research and specific issues arising from advances in agricultural biotechnology .

congress has long supported biomedical research and development .

some of the biomedical research and development issues that the 114 th congress may face include the budget and oversight of the national institutes of health , oversight of dangerous microbial pathogens in laboratories , and the development of medical countermeasures to chemical , biological , nuclear and radiological threats .

science and technology play an important role in national defense .

the department of defense relies on a robust research and development effort to develop new military systems and improve existing systems .

issues that may come before the 114 th congress regarding the department of defense's science and technology include budgetary concerns and the effectiveness of programs to transition s&t findings into fielded products .

the science and technology related - energy issues that may come before the 114 th congress include the funding and role of the department of energy's office of science and the advanced research projects agency - energy , development of biofuels , reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel , and the development of biofuels and of ocean energy technology .

science and technology play an increasingly large role in environmental issues .

science - and technology - related environmental issues that may come before the 114 th congress include climate change science , carbon sequestration , and ocean acidification .

the federal government spends billions of dollars supporting research and development to protect the homeland .

some of the issues that the 114 th congress may consider include how the department of homeland security performs research and development and issues regarding its programs to detect smuggled nuclear material and biological terrorism .

the rapid pace of advancements in information technology presents several issues for congressional policymakers , including those related to cybersecurity , potential changes to how the internet is governed , federal networking r&d , broadband access , and wireless services .

this section focuses on policy issues relating to federal efforts supporting research and development in the physical and material sciences .

some of the policy issues in this area that the 114 th congress may address include funding and oversight of the national science foundation and the multiagency initiative supporting the research and development in the emerging field of nanotechnology .

issues relating to the department of energy office of science and arpa - e , both of which support science and technology in physical and material sciences , are discussed in the " energy " section of this report .

congress has historically had a strong interest in space policy issues .

two space topics that may come before the 114 th congress include the reauthorization of the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) and issues related to earth - observing satellites .

spaceflight has been an issue of strong congressional interest since the establishment of nasa in 1958 .

the 114 th congress will likely address nasa reauthorization legislation , which was considered in both chambers in the 113 th congress but not enacted .

issues include the goals and strategy of nasa's human spaceflight program and the impact of constrained budgets on nasa's other missions .

with the end of the space shuttle program in july 2011 , the united states lost the capability to launch astronauts into space .

since that time , nasa has relied on russian spacecraft for crew transport to the international space station ( iss ) .

for iss cargo transport , nasa - contracted u.s. commercial flights have been delivering payloads of supplies and equipment since october 2012 .

as directed by the nasa authorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-267 ) , nasa is pursuing a two - track strategy for human spaceflight .

first , for transport to low earth orbit , including the iss , nasa is supporting commercial development of a crew capability like the commercial cargo capability achieved in 2012 .

nasa expects commercial crew transportation services to become operational in 2017 .

second , for human exploration beyond earth orbit , nasa is developing a new crew capsule called orion and a new heavy - lift rocket to launch it .

nasa expects the first crewed test flight of orion in fy2021 or fy2022 .

under current plans , an asteroid will be orion's first destination for human exploration , but many details of the first mission remain to be determined .

the 2010 authorization act projected funding increases for nasa that did not materialize .

in considering reauthorization , the 114 th congress may examine whether reduced budget expectations require corresponding changes to planned programs .

one common concern is that the cost of planned human spaceflight activities may mean less funding for other nasa missions , such as unmanned science satellites , aeronautics research , and space technology development .

some of those other missions have their own issues as well , such as the cost and schedule of the james webb space telescope , future plans for unmanned mars exploration , and nasa's role in earth science .

for further information [author name scrubbed] , specialist in science and technology policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) crs report r43144 , nasa: issues for authorization , appropriations , and oversight in the 114 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43419 , nasa appropriations and authorizations: a fact sheet , by [author name scrubbed] crs in focus if10016 , space exploration , by [author name scrubbed .

the constellation of earth - observing satellites launched and operated by the united states government performs a wide range of observational and data collecting activities , such as measuring the change in mass of polar ice sheets , wind speeds over the oceans , land cover change , as well as the more familiar daily measurements of key atmospheric parameters that enable modern weather forecasts and storm prediction .

satellite observations of the earth's oceans and land surface help with short - term seasonal forecasts of el niño and la niña conditions , which are valuable to u.s. agriculture and commodity interests , identification of the location and size of wildfires which can assist firefighting crews and mitigation activities , as well as long - term observational data of the global climate which are used in predictive models that help assess the degree and magnitude of current and future climate change .

congress continues to be interested in the performance of nasa , noaa , and the u.s. geological survey in building and operating u.s. earth - observing satellites .

congress has been particularly interested in the agencies meeting budgets and time schedules so that critical space - based observations are not missed due to delays and cost overruns .

congressional scrutiny has focused recently on the joint polar satellite system ( jpss ) , designed to provide daily measurements from polar orbit that inform weather forecasts and storm predictions .

jpss has experienced delays and higher costs than originally projected .

jpss is currently scheduled to launch in 2017 .

a potential problem is the possibility of a gap in coverage from the polar - orbiting weather satellite system .

the current system of polar - orbiting weather satellites includes the suomi - npp satellite — now filling the operational gap until the jpss spacecraft is operational .

the suomi - npp mission only life extends to 2016 ; there is a risk that its instruments will fail before jpss is launched , which will result in a gap in polar - orbiting weather satellite coverage .

on february 11 , 2013 , nasa launched landsat 8 , a remote sensing satellite jointly operated by the u.s. geological survey and nasa .

landsat 8 is the latest in a series of earth - observing satellites that began on july 23 , 1972 , with the launch of landsat 1 .

landsat has been used in a wide variety of applications , including land use planning , agriculture , forestry , natural resources management , public safety , homeland security , climate research , and natural disaster management , among others .

a question for congress is , should there be a landsat 9 ? .

more generally , should congress support the development of another moderate resolution land - imaging satellite , and what are the alternatives ? .

for further information [author name scrubbed] , specialist in energy and natural resources policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) crs report r40594 , landsat: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed .

