this report provides an overview of fy2015 appropriations actions for accounts traditionally funded in the appropriations bill for the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) .

this bill provides discretionary and mandatory appropriations to three federal departments: the department of labor ( dol ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the department of education ( ed ) .

in addition , the bill provides annual appropriations for more than a dozen related agencies , including the social security administration ( ssa ) .

discretionary funds represent less than one - quarter of the total funds appropriated in the l - hhs - ed bill .

nevertheless , the l - hhs - ed bill is typically the largest single source of discretionary funds for domestic non - defense federal programs among the various appropriations bills ( the department of defense bill is the largest source of discretionary funds among all federal programs ) .

the bulk of this report is focused on discretionary appropriations because these funds receive the most attention during the appropriations process .

the l - hhs - ed bill typically is one of the more controversial of the regular appropriations bills because of the size of its funding total and the scope of its programs , as well as various related policy issues addressed in the bill such as restrictions on the use of federal funds for abortion and for research on human embryos and stem cells .

see the key policy staff table at the end of this report for information on which analysts to contact at the congressional research service with questions on specific agencies and programs funded in the l - hhs - ed bill .

this report is divided into several sections .

the opening section provides an explanation of the scope of the l - hhs - ed bill ( and hence , the scope of this report ) , as well as an introduction to important terminology and concepts that carry throughout the report .

next is a series of sections describing major congressional actions on fy2015 appropriations and ( for context ) a review of the conclusion of the fy2014 appropriations process .

the following section provides a high - level summary and analysis of proposed and enacted mandatory and discretionary appropriations for fy2015 , compared to comparable fy2014 funding levels .

the body of the report concludes with overview sections for each of the major components of the bill: the department of labor , the department of health and human services , the department of education , and related agencies .

these sections provide selected highlights of the fy2015 omnibus , compared to proposed appropriations in the senate subcommittee - approved stand - alone fy2015 l - hhs - ed bill , the fy2015 president's request , and comparable fy2014 levels .

finally , an appendix provides a summary of budget enforcement activities for fy2015 .

this includes information on the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) and sequestration , as well as procedural efforts related to budget resolutions and subcommittee spending allocations .

 table 1 provides a timeline of major legislative actions toward full - year fy2015 l - hhs - ed appropriations .

the remainder of this section provides additional detail on these and other steps toward full - year l - hhs - ed appropriations .

 table 2 displays the total amount of fy2015 discretionary and mandatory l - hhs - ed funding provided or proposed , by title , as well as comparable fy2014 funding levels .

the amounts shown in this table reflect total budget authority provided in the bill ( i.e. , all funds appropriated in the current bill , regardless of the fiscal year in which the funds become available ) , not total budget authority available for the current fiscal year .

 ( for a comparable table showing current - year budget authority , see table a - 2 in the appendix . ) .

when taking into account both mandatory and discretionary funding ( non - emergency ) , hhs received roughly 82% of total l - hhs - ed appropriations in fy2015 ( see figure 2 ) .

this is largely due to the sizable amount of mandatory funds included in the hhs appropriation , the majority of which is for medicaid grants to states and payments to health care trust funds .

after hhs , ed and the related agencies represent the next - largest shares of total l - hhs - ed funding , accounting for about 8% apiece in fy2015 .

the majority of the appropriations for ed are discretionary , while the bulk of funding for the related agencies goes toward mandatory payments and administrative costs of the supplemental security income program at the social security administration .

finally , dol accounts for the smallest share of total l - hhs - ed funds: roughly 2% in fy2015 .

when looking only at discretionary appropriations ( non - emergency ) , however , the overall composition of l - hhs - ed funding is noticeably different ( see figure 2 ) .

hhs accounts for a comparatively smaller share of total discretionary appropriations ( 43% in fy2015 ) , while ed accounts for a relatively larger share ( 41% in fy2015 ) .

together , these two departments represent the majority ( 84% ) of discretionary l - hhs - ed appropriations in fy2015 .

meanwhile , dol and related agencies combine to account for a roughly even split of the remaining 16% of discretionary l - hhs - ed funds in fy2015 .

note that all figures in this section are based on regular l - hhs - ed appropriations only ; they do not include funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for unemployment insurance benefits payments ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

note that all figures in this section are based on regular l - hhs - ed appropriations only ; they do not include funds for hhs agencies provided through other appropriations bills ( eg , funding for the food and drug administration ) or outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for medicare or pre - appropriated mandatory funds provided by authorizing laws , such as the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

note that all figures in this section are based on regular l - hhs - ed appropriations only ; they do not include funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , certain direct appropriations for federal direct student loans and pell grants ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

note that figures in this section are based on regular l - hhs - ed appropriations only ; they do not include funds provided outside the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for old - age , survivors , and disability insurance benefit payments by the social security administration ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

the fy2015 omnibus provided roughly $70.05 billion in combined mandatory and discretionary funding for related agencies funded through this bill .

this is about $61 million ( - 0.1% ) less than the comparable fy2014 funding level and $191 million ( - 0.3% ) less than the fy2015 president's request .

 ( see table 10 . ) .

of the total provided for related agencies in the fy2015 omnibus , roughly $14.18 billion ( 20% ) is discretionary .

this is $114 million ( +0.8% ) more than the comparable fy2014 discretionary funding level and $221 million ( - 1.5% ) less than the discretionary amount requested in the fy2015 president's budget .

in general , the largest share of funding appropriated to related agencies in the l - hhs - ed bill goes to the social security administration ( ssa ) .

when taking into account both mandatory and discretionary funding , the ssa accounted for 97% of the entire related agencies appropriation in fy2015 .

the bulk of mandatory ssa funding from the l - hhs - ed bill supports the supplemental security income program , which provides means tested benefits to disabled children and adults and to persons 65 and older .

when looking exclusively at discretionary funding , the ssa remains the largest component of the related agencies appropriation , constituting roughly 84% of discretionary funds in fy2015 .

the majority of discretionary ssa funding covers administrative expenses for social security , ssi , and medicare .

after the ssa , the next - largest agency of the related agencies appropriation is the corporation for national and community service ( cncs ) , which constitutes roughly 2% of all funding and 7% of discretionary funding in fy2015 .

typically , each of the remaining related agencies receives less than $1 billion from the annual l - hhs - ed appropriations bill .

for more information , see table 11 .

the fy2015 president's request for the ssa limitation on administrative expenses ( lae ) account , which provides the administrative funding for all the ssa programs and operations except the office of the inspector general ( oig ) , was $12 billion .

of this amount , $1.4 billion was requested for program integrity activities including continuing disability reviews ( cdrs ) and ssi redeterminations of eligibility , with $273 million set aside from the base lae funding and $1.3 billion in additional funding above the discretionary funding caps set by the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) .

the final appropriation for the ssa lae account was $11.8 billion , which includes the full requested amount of $1.4 billion for program integrity .

the framework for budget enforcement under the congressional budget process has both statutory and procedural elements .

the statutory elements include the discretionary spending limits and mandatory spending sequester derived from the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) .

the procedural elements are primarily associated with the budget resolution and limit both total discretionary spending and spending under the jurisdiction of each appropriations subcommittee .

budget control act and sequestration the bca , as amended , requires annual reductions to mandatory and discretionary spending over an extended period .

for mandatory spending , reductions are to occur through sequestration in each of fy2013-fy2024 .

for discretionary spending , reductions occurred through sequestration in fy2013 , but are to be achieved through lower discretionary spending limits for each of fy2014-fy2021 .

the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba , division a of p.l .

113-67 ) established new limits for fy2014 and fy2015 defense and nondefense discretionary spending , with no further reductions to those limits required .

the bca does not call for sequestration of discretionary spending in fy2014-fy2021 unless one or both of the statutory discretionary spending limits ( defense and nondefense ) is breached .

the l - hhs - ed bill only includes funding in the nondefense category .

fy2015 on march 10 , 2014 , concurrent with the release of the fy2015 president's budget , president obama issued the required sequestration order for nonexempt fy2015 mandatory spending .

the sequester order took effect on october 1 , 2014 .

omb's fy2015 joint committee reductions report stated that the sequestration percentages were equal to 2% of nonexempt medicare spending and 7.3% of other nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending in fy2015 .

omb estimated that this would reduce nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending by over $17 billion in fy2015 .

 ( the report also estimated a 9.5% reduction , totaling roughly $702 million , in nonexempt defense mandatory spending , but this is not applicable to l - hhs - ed funds. ) .

the omb report's appendix displays the actual dollar amounts to be sequestered from each budget account .

while the report displays reductions at the account level , the sequester itself is implemented at the program , project , or activity level .

sequestration of discretionary spending was not required in fy2015 .

according to omb's analysis , after making allowable adjustments , the fy2015 omnibus did not violate the defense and nondefense spending limits .

cap adjustments , exemptions , and special rules the bca , as amended , established discretionary spending limits ( sometimes called budget caps ) for fy2012-fy2021 .

the law includes provisions allowing for limited adjustments to the caps .

for l - hhs - ed , the most notable of these is for increases ( up to a point ) in new budget authority for specified program integrity initiatives at hhs and the social security administration .

in addition , although sequestration largely consists of automatic , across - the - board spending reductions , the law exempts a limited number of programs from sequestration and subjects others to special rules .

the l - hhs - ed bill contains several programs that are exempt from sequestration , including medicaid , payments to health care trust funds , supplemental security income , special benefits for disabled coal miners , retirement pay and medical benefits for commissioned public health service officers , foster care and adoption assistance , and certain family support payments .

the l - hhs - ed bill also contains several programs that are subject to special rules under sequestration , such as unemployment compensation , certain student loans , health centers , and portions of medicare .

budget resolution and 302 ( b ) suballocations the procedural elements of budget enforcement generally stem from requirements under the congressional budget act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-44 ) that are associated with the adoption of an annual budget resolution .

through this process , the appropriations committee in each chamber receives a procedural limit on the total amount of discretionary budget authority for the upcoming fiscal year , referred to as a 302 ( a ) allocation .

the appropriations committee subsequently divides this allocation among its 12 subcommittees .

these subcommittee - level spending limits are referred to as 302 ( b ) suballocations .

the 302 ( b ) suballocations restrict the amount of budget authority available to each subcommittee for the agencies , projects , and activities under its jurisdiction , effectively acting as a cap on each of the 12 regular appropriations bills .

enforcement of the 302 ( a ) allocation and 302 ( b ) suballocations occurs through points of order .

congress did not adopt a budget resolution for fy2015 .

although the house agreed to a budget resolution ( h.con.res .

96 ) on april 10 , 2014 , this measure was not taken up in the senate , nor did the senate consider a separate budget resolution for fy2015 .

instead , both the house and the senate used an alternative mechanism for fy2015 procedural budget enforcement that was enacted as part of the bba .

it allowed the chairs of the house and senate budget committees to submit statements for publication in the congressional record that included fy2015 spending levels ( i.e. , 302 ( a ) allocations ) for the house and the senate appropriations committees , provided these levels were "consistent with the discretionary spending limits" set forth in the bba .

the house statement was filed in the congressional record on april 29 ; the senate statement was filed on may 5 .

once filed , these levels became enforceable on the house and the senate floors .

based on the budget enforcement provided via this alternative mechanism , the house and the senate appropriations committees each reported initial 302 ( b ) suballocations to their subcommittees prior to floor consideration of the fy2015 regular appropriations bills .

however , it is common for these suballocations to be revised throughout the year to reflect actual action on appropriations bills and changes in congressional priorities ; such changes are not always reported .

the house most recently reported revised suballocations for fy2015 on june 17 , 2014 .

the senate most recently reported revised suballocations on december 12 , 2014 .

see table a - 1 for an overview of the published l - hhs - ed 302 ( b ) suballocations for fy2015 , as compared to the proposed fy2015 senate subcommittee - approved bill and the enacted fy2015 omnibus .

note that compliance with discretionary spending allocations is evaluated based on budget authority available in the current fiscal year , adjusted for scorekeeping by the congressional budget office .

as such , totals shown in this table may not be comparable to other totals shown in this report .

current - year budget authority table a - 2 displays the total l - hhs - ed current - year budget authority for fy2015 discretionary and mandatory appropriations provided or proposed , by title , compared to comparable fy2014 funding levels .

the amounts shown in this table reflect total budget authority available for obligation in the fiscal year , regardless of the year in which it was first appropriated .

 ( for a comparable table showing total budget authority in the bill , rather than current - year budget authority , see table 2 in the body of this report. ) .

as mentioned above , it is current - year budget authority ( adjusted for scorekeeping by the congressional budget office ) that is used to determine compliance with discretionary spending allocations .

