t he unemployment insurance ( ui ) system has two primary objectives: ( 1 ) to provide temporary , partial wage replacement for involuntarily unemployed workers and ( 2 ) to stabilize the economy during recessions .

in support of these goals , several ui programs provide benefits for eligible unemployed workers .

in general , when eligible workers lose their jobs , the joint federal - state unemployment compensation ( uc ) program may provide up to 26 weeks of income support through regular uc benefit payments .

uc benefits may be extended for up to 13 weeks or 20 weeks by the extended benefit ( eb ) program if certain economic situations exist within the state .

during previous congresses , the temporarily authorized emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) program provided additional weeks of benefits ( depending on the date , from 13 weeks to 53 weeks ) .

euc08 benefits expired on december 28 , 2013 , and are no longer authorized .

currently , although the uc and eb programs are authorized , no state is in an active eb period .

for information on the expired euc08 program , which provided additional unemployment benefits depending on state economic conditions during the period of july 2008 to december 2013 , see crs report r42444 , emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) : status of benefits prior to expiration .

the sequester order required by the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) and implemented on march 1 , 2013 ( after being delayed by p.l .

112-240 ) , affected some but not all types of unemployment insurance expenditures .

regular uc , ucx , and ucfe payments are not subject to the sequester reductions .

eb , euc08 ( when available ) , and most forms of administrative funding are subject to the sequester reductions .

please see crs report r43133 , the impact of sequestration on unemployment insurance benefits: frequently asked questions , for additional information on the impact of sequestration on ui benefits and sequestration for fy2013 and fy2014 .

if a recession is deep enough and if state unemployment tax ( suta ) revenue is inadequate for long periods of time , states may have insufficient funds to pay for uc benefits .

federal law , which requires states to pay these benefits , provides a loan mechanism within the utf framework that an insolvent state may opt to use to meet its uc benefit payment obligations .

states must pay back these loans .

if the loans are not paid back quickly ( depending on the timing of the beginning of the loan period ) , states may face interest charges and the states' employers may face increased net futa rates until the loans are repaid .

near the end of the 114 th congress on october 18 , 2016 , only california and the virgin islands had outstanding loans .

together they owed a cumulative $3.6 billion to the federal accounts within the utf .

in general , the increased state borrowing to fund uc benefits reflects the magnitude of the recession and the slow employment recovery afterward .

president obama's budget proposal for fy2017 attempted to address some of the state and federal financing concerns .

in addition , the proposal would have expanded and reformed ui benefits and benefit availability .

s. 499 ( senator orin hatch ) , s. 2005 ( senator david vitter ) , and h.r .

918 ( representative sam johnson ) , all titled the social security disability insurance and unemployment benefits double dip elimination act , would have required for any month that an individual is entitled to uc , eb , or trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) for at least one week , he or she would have been deemed to have engaged in substantial gainful activity ( sga ) and be disqualified from receiving ssdi benefits .

if an ssdi beneficiary had been participating in a period of trial work , the individual would have been deemed to have rendered services in a month if he or she had been entitled to uc , eb , or taa for any week that month ( and , therefore , that month would count toward the 60-month rolling period in the trial work period without having the benefits reduced or terminated ) .

h.r .

5919 , the preserving and reforming ssdi ( par - ssdi ) act of 2016 , was introduced by representative david schweikert .

h.r .

5919 would have required ( among other provisions ) that for any week in whole or in part within a month that an individual was paid or determined to be eligible for uc , he or she would have been deemed to have engaged in substantial gainful activity and so be disqualified from receiving social security disability benefits after a certain period has elapsed .

s. 343 , the reducing overlapping payments act , was introduced by senator jeff flake .

s. 343 would have required for any month that an individual was entitled to uc , no ssdi benefits would be paid .

representative david reichert sponsored h.r .

2503 , the permanently ending receipt by prisoners act .

h.r .

2503 would have required states to use the prisoner update processing system ( pups ) data compiled by the social security administration .

states would use pups data to confirm that an individual was not confined in a jail , prison , or other penal institution or correctional facility .

any individual who was incarcerated would not be eligible for regular uc benefits because the individual would not have been available for work .

representative kevin brady sponsored h.r .

2512 , the furloughed federal employee double dip elimination act .

the bill would have clarified that if a federal employee were to receive back pay for a period during which he or she had been furloughed due to a lapse in federal appropriations , the federal employee would have to repay any unemployment compensation for that period .

representative steve pearce sponsored h.r .

1136 , the accountability in unemployment act of 2015 .

the bill would have required individuals to undergo drug testing and test negative to be eligible for uc benefits .

h.r .

1136 would also have required a 30-day waiting period for applicants who test positive for any one of several specified drugs and would have required individuals to be ineligible for uc benefits for five years after the third positive drug test .

representative earl carter sponsored h.r .

2148 , the ensuring quality in the unemployment insurance program ( equip ) act .

the bill would have required any uc applicant to complete a substance abuse risk assessment .

if the applicant had been deemed high - risk , the applicant would have to pass a controlled substances test to receive uc benefits .

those who did not pass the test would be ineligible for benefits for 30 days and then would have to be retested to determine eligibility .

representative kevin brady introduced h.r .

5945 , the ready to work act of 2016 .

the proposal would have terminated the final rule issued by the u.s. dol on august 1 , 2016 , the "federal - state unemployment compensation program ; middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 provision on establishing appropriate occupations for drug testing of unemployment compensation applicants" ( 81 fed .

reg .

50298 ) .

this dol rule established occupations that regularly conduct drug testing .

as such , the rule implemented a change made under the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ; february 22 , 2012 ) that allowed states to drug test uc applicants for whom suitable work is available only in an occupation that regularly conducts drug testing .

representative bill pascrell introduced h.r .

481 , the long - term unemployed hiring incentive act .

the bill would have extended the work opportunity tax credit ( wotc ) for companies that hire any uc exhaustees through december 31 , 2017 .

representative julia brownley introduced h.r .

2265 , the vow to hire heroes extension act of 2015 , and senator richard blumenthal introduced an identically named bill , s. 1517 .

this legislation would have expanded and extended wotc for companies that hire veterans through december 31 , 2018 .

in addition , the bill would have expanded the program by allowing tax - exempt organizations to apply a credit against payroll taxes for hiring a veteran .

representative barbara lee introduced h.r .

2721 , the pathways out of poverty act of 2015 , and representative frederica wilson introduced h.r .

3555 .

both proposals would have amended the work opportunity tax credit to allow an increased work opportunity tax credit for long - term unemployed individuals ( individuals who are unemployed and receiving unemployment compensation for six months or more ) .

representative david mckinley introduced the manufacturing economic recovery act of 2015 , h.r .

3622 .

the bill , among other items , would have created a permanent work opportunity tax credit for hiring a full - time employee in a manufacturing facility located in the united states and included an increased credit for hiring individuals receiving unemployment compensation .

delegate eleanor holmes norton introduced the reducing long - term unemployment act , h.r .

4593 .

the bill would have suspended employment and railroad retirement taxes for employers who hired unemployed individuals through 2017 .

the aggregate reduction in taxes from such suspension would have been limited to $5,000 per employee .

representative bonnie watson coleman introduced the investing in older americans act of 2016 , h.r .

4973 .

the bill would have made the wotc permanent and expanded it to include the hiring of older long - term unemployment recipients who are at least 55 years old at the time of hiring .

the bill would have limited the amount of the qualified first - year wages that may be taken into account under the wotc to $14,000 for a qualified older long - term unemployment recipient .

two bills would have reauthorized the lapsed temporary emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) benefits until the end of 2015: h.r .

2721 , the pathways out of poverty act of 2015 and h.r .

3555 , the jobs ! .

jobs ! .

jobs ! .

act of 2015 ( representative frederica wilson ) .

representative james renacci sponsored h.r .

2509 , the flexibility to promote reemployment act .

the bill would have made a number of changes to the state uc demonstration projects created by the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 ) .

the bill would have extended the time period that the ( now - expired ) state demonstration projects could be approved by dol through december 31 , 2019 ( p.l .

112-96 authorized these demonstration projects through december 31 , 2015 ) , as well as expanded the existing authority for state uc demonstration projects by authorizing 10 states per year to conduct approved demonstration projects ( the original , expired authority was only for 10 states total ) .

h.r .

2509 also would have revised state uc demonstration project requirements , including removing a requirement that any direct disbursements paid to employers for hiring uc claimants not exceed an individual's uc weekly benefit amount and requiring that dol approve state applications for uc demonstration projects based on the order of receipt .

additionally , the bill would have transferred the responsibility for the state uc demonstration project impact evaluation from the states , as under the now - expired demonstration authority , to dol and would have required a specific procedure for termination of the state uc demonstration project by dol .

both h.r .

2721 , the pathways out of poverty act of 2015 , and h.r .

3555 , the jobs ! .

jobs ! .

jobs ! .

act of 2015 , among many provisions , would have allowed states to ( 1 ) establish a bridge to work program to provide euc08 claimants with short - term work experience placements with eligible employers ; ( 2 ) provide a wage insurance program to pay , for up to two years , an euc08 claimant who obtains reemployment up to 50% of the difference between the wages received at the time of work separation and the wages received for reemployment ; and ( 3 ) provide a program of enhanced reemployment services to euc08 claimants , including unemployed individuals who have exhausted their euc08 rights .

representative rodney davis sponsored h.r .

2219 , the opportunity knocks act .

the bill would have required that states allow uc beneficiaries to participate in a workforce investment act ( wia ) authorized job training program and remain eligible for benefits .

if the uc beneficiary has been profiled to exhaust regular benefits , the individual would have been allowed to enroll in any coursework necessary to attain a recognized postsecondary credential .

representative tony cárdenas sponsored h.r .

2755 , the american worker mobility act of 2015 .

the proposal would have authorized the u.s. department of labor to grant a relocation subsidy of up to $10,000 to long - term unemployed workers .

both h.r .

2721 , the pathways out of poverty act of 2015 , and h.r .

3555 , the jobs ! .

jobs ! .

jobs ! .

act of 2015 , would have provided temporary 100% federal financing for up to three years and six months after enactment for short - time compensation ( stc ) benefits in states with existing stc programs .

states without existing stc programs would have been allowed to enter into an agreement with dol for up to two years and three months after enactment and receive federal reimbursement for administrative expenses , as well as temporary federal financing of 50% of stc payments to individuals , with employers paying the other 50% of stc costs .

if a state would have entered into an agreement with the secretary of labor and then subsequently enacted a law providing for stc , that state would have been eligible to receive 100% federal financing at that enactment .

the proposals would have awarded grants of up to $700 million total to eligible states , with one - third of each state's grant available for implementation and improved administration purposes and two - thirds of each state's grant available for program promotion and enrollment of employers .

this proposal would have provided $1.5 million for dol to submit a report to congress and the president , within four years of enactment , on the implementation of this provision .

representative rosa delauro and senator jack reed introduced the layoff prevention extension act of 2016 , h.r .

5408 and s. 1902 , respectively .

the proposals would have extended federal financing of the stc programs for an additional two years .

additionally , they would have extended the deadline by two years for a state to submit its application for a stc grant through december 31 , 2016 .

senator bernie sanders introduced s. 2398 , the clean energy worker just transition act .

among other provisions , the proposal would have provided additional weeks of unemployment benefits for adversely affected workers in coal - related or coal - dependent or similar energy industries .

the workers' employment status would have had to change for causes attributable to the low cost of competing alternative forms of energy .

representative evan jenkins introduced h.r .

5669 , the creating opportunities for america's laid - off ( coal ) miners act of 2016 .

the proposal would have added up to 26 weeks of additional unemployment benefits for adversely affected workers in coal - related or coal - dependent or similar energy industries .

representative lucille roybal - allard and senator patty murray introduced the security and financial empowerment act of 2015 , h.r .

3841 and s. 2208 , respectively .

the bills would have required states to consider an individual who quit a job as a result of domestic or sexual violence to be eligible for uc benefits .

