t he patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) expanded insurance coverage in the united states through its "shared responsibility" provisions: employers either provide health coverage or face potential employer tax penalties ; likewise , individuals purchase health coverage or face potential individual tax penalties .

the aca does not require employers to provide health coverage , but it does impose employer penalties in the form of a monthly tax on employers that do not provide adequate and affordable health coverage to certain employees .

this is known as the employer "shared responsibility" provision .

since 2015 , employers with at least 50 full - time equivalent ( fte ) employees are subject to the employer shared responsibility provisions under section 4908h of the internal revenue code ( irc ) as amended by the aca .

however , in 2015 , employers with between 50 and 100 fte employees were eligible for transition relief if certain criteria were met .

 ( for details , see " implementation and transition relief " below. ) .

this report describes the potential employer penalties as well as regulations to implement the aca employer provisions .

the regulations address insurance coverage requirements , methodologies for determining whether a worker is considered full time , provisions relating to seasonal workers and corporate franchises , and other reporting requirements .

for an economic analysis of the employer penalty and policy options to modify the penalty , see crs report r43181 , the affordable care act and small business: economic issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

regardless of whether a large employer offers coverage , it will be potentially liable for a shared responsibility tax ( penalty ) only if at least one of its full - time employees obtains coverage through an exchange and receives a premium tax credit .

for purposes of determining the penalty , a full - time employee includes only those individuals working on average 30 hours or more per week .

as shown in figure 1 , part - time workers are not included in the penalty calculations ( even though they are included in the determination of a "large employer" ) .

an employer will not pay a penalty for any part - time worker even if that part - time employee receives a premium credit .

as discussed under implementation issues below , employers are not likely to pay a penalty based upon seasonal workers receiving a premium credit if they work less than 30 hours on average over a pre - specified time period ( up to 12 months ) .

to fulfill the shared responsibility requirements , employers must provide health insurance coverage that is both affordable and adequate to full - time employees and their dependents .

the aca , as written , required that the employer shared responsibilities begin to be implemented in 2014 .

however , the irs delayed the employer mandate implementation until 2015 .

there were up to three forms of transition relief available for employers in 2015 .

first , large employer status determination was allowed to have a measurement period as short as six consecutive months .

second , there was an additional year to expand the 2015 health plans to include dependent coverage .

finally , for employers with fewer than 100 ftes , the aca employer penalty did not apply in 2015 .

 ( for details see the following section " employers with fewer than 100 ftes ." ) .

in addition , there were similar delays in the employer reporting requirements for 2014 .

beginning in 2015 , a large employer must file a return with the irs reporting certain information about the health care coverage the employer offered to each full - time employee ( or alternatively , that the employer did not offer health care coverage to that employee ) .

additionally , large employers must furnish a similar statement to each full - time employee by january 31 of the following calendar year .

 ( see appendix a for details. ) .

in 2015 , rather than being required to use the full 12 months of 2014 to measure whether an employer has 50 ftes , an employer was allowed to measure any consecutive six - month period during 2014 .

an employer that took steps toward offering dependent health coverage in 2015 was not subject to the aca employer penalty solely on account of a failure to offer coverage to dependents for that plan year .

this transition relief applied to health plans offered by an employer if dependent coverage is not offered , is not adequate , or is offered for some but not all dependents .

employers could qualify for the dependent coverage transition relief only for those dependents who were without an offer of coverage from the employer in both the 2013 and 2014 plan years and if the employer had taken steps in either the 2014 or 2015 plan year ( or both ) to extend coverage to dependents not offered coverage in 2013 or 2014 .

for employers with fewer than 100 ftes in 2014 , the aca employer penalty did not apply for any calendar month during the 2015 plan year , including the months during the plan year that fell in 2015 .

this transition relief applied only if the workforce size was fewer than 100 ftes , the employer had not reduced its workforce size to qualify for relief , and the employer maintained health care coverage in 2015 that had been offered in 2014 .

the employer must have employed on average at least 50 ftes but fewer than 100 ftes on business days during 2014 in order to qualify for transition relief .

the number of full - time employees ( including ftes ) was determined in accordance with the otherwise applicable rules in the final regulations for determining status as an applicable large employer .

the employer could not reduce the size of its workforce or the overall hours of service of its employees in order to qualify for the transition relief .

however , an employer that reduced workforce size or overall hours of service for bona fide business reasons was still eligible for the relief .

the employer could not eliminate or materially reduce the health coverage , if any , it offered as of february 9 , 2014 , in order to qualify for transition relief .

the maintenance requirement must have been met for the period beginning on february 9 , 2014 , and ending on december 31 , 2015 .

 ( employers with non - calendar - year plans must have met the maintenance requirement through the last day of the 2015 plan year. ) .

an employer was not treated as eliminating or materially reducing health coverage if any of these conditions were met: it continued to offer each employee who was eligible for coverage an employer contribution toward the cost of employee - only coverage that either ( 1 ) was at least 95% of the dollar amount of the contribution toward such coverage that the employer was offering on february 9 , 2014 , or ( 2 ) was at least the same percentage of the cost of coverage that the employer was offering to contribute toward coverage on february 9 , 2014 ; in the event of a change in benefits under the employee - only coverage offered , that coverage provided minimum value after the change ; and it did not alter the terms of its group health plans to narrow or reduce the class or classes of employees ( or the employees' dependents ) to whom coverage under those plans was offered on february 9 , 2014 .

appendix a .

employer reporting and other requirements under section 6056 of the irc , a large employer must file a return with the irs reporting certain information about the health care coverage the employer offered to each full - time employee ( or alternatively , that the employer did not offer health care coverage to that employee ) .

in addition , section 6051 ( a ) ( 14 ) of the irc requires that large employers must furnish a similar statement to each full - time employee by january 31 of the following calendar year .

in summary , large employers must provide the following information to their full - time employees: the existence of an exchange , including services and contact information ; the employee's potential eligibility for premium credits and cost - sharing subsidies if the employer plan's share of covered health care expenses is less than 60% ; and the employee's potential loss of any employer contribution if the employee purchases a plan through an exchange .

large employers must provide the following to the irs: a return including the name , address , and employer identification number ; a certification as to whether the employer offers its full - time employees ( and dependents ) the opportunity to enroll in minimum essential coverage under an eligible employer - sponsored plan ; the length of any waiting period ; months coverage was available ; monthly premiums for the lowest - cost option ; the employer plan's share of covered health care expenses ; the number of full - time employees ; the name , address , and tax identification number of each full - time employee ; and information about the plan for which the employer pays the largest portion of the costs ( and the amount for each enrollment category ) .

in addition , the employer must also provide each full - time employee the following: a written statement showing contact information for the person required to make the above irs return and the specific information included in the w - 2 return for that individual .

on november 2 , 2015 , p.l .

114-74 , the bipartisan budget act of 2015 , repealed the automatic enrollment requirement in section 18a of the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) .

this provision had been added by section 1511 of the aca .

the automatic enrollment provision would have required an employer ( covered under the flsa ) with more than 200 full - time employees to automatically enroll new full - time employees in one of the employer's health benefits plans and continue the enrollment of current employees .

additionally , employers would have had to provide adequate notice and the opportunity for employees to opt out of any automatically enrolled coverage .

appendix b .

related legislative activity in the 114 th  congress in the 114 th congress , section 4007 of p.l .

114-41 ( the surface transportation and veterans health care choice improvement act of 2015 , signed into law on july 31 , 2015 ) created a new requirement that hours worked by individuals receiving care under the tricare program or individuals enrolled and receiving coverage through certain department of veterans affairs' health care programs are excluded from calculations to determine if an employer is large .

in the 114 th congress , many bills have been introduced related to the employer mandate ( including h.r .

3236 , which was signed into law as p.l .

114-41 , and h.r .

1314 , which was signed into law as p.l .

114-74 ) .

see table b - 1 for details .

