from the earliest days of commercial radio , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and its predecessor , the federal radio commission , have encouraged diversity in broadcasting .

this concern has repeatedly been supported by the u.s. supreme court , which has affirmed that "the widest possible dissemination of information from diverse and antagonistic sources is essential to the welfare of the public," and that "assuring that the public has access to a multiplicity of information sources is a governmental purpose of the highest order , for it promotes values central to the first amendment. .

the fcc's policies seek to encourage four distinct types of diversity in local broadcast media: diversity of viewpoints , as reflected in the availability of media content reflecting a variety of perspectives ; diversity of programming , as indicated by a variety of formats and content , including programming aimed at various minority and ethnic groups ; outlet diversity , to ensure the presence of multiple independently owned media outlets within a geographic market ; and minority and female ownership of broadcast media outlets .

in addition to promoting diversity , the fcc aims , with its broadcast media ownership rules , to promote localism and competition by restricting the number of media outlets that a single entity may own or control within a geographic market .

localism addresses whether broadcast stations are responsive to the needs and interests of their communities .

in evaluating the extent of competition , the fcc considers whether stations have adequate commercial incentives to invest in diverse news and public affairs programming tailored to serve viewers within their communities .

in contrast , antitrust authorities primarily consider the prices stations charge advertisers to air commercials during programming , and , in the case of television stations , the prices they charge cable and satellite operators for the retransmission of broadcast programming .

the debate over media ownership rules is occurring against the background of sweeping changes in news consumption patterns .

figure 1 illustrates these general trends .

based on surveys conducted by pew research center , the percentage of adults citing local broadcast television as a news source declined from 65% in 1996 to 46% in 2016 .

nevertheless , local television still outranks other local news sources .

the percentage of respondents who stated that they "got news yesterday" from online sources grew from 2% in 1996 to 38% in 2016 .

in contrast , those citing printed newspapers as a source they "read yesterday" or use regularly declined from 50% in 1996 to 20% in 2016 .

these trends raise questions as to whether common ownership of multiple media outlets in the same market might limit diversity of viewpoints as much today as two decades ago .

two characteristics of broadcast television and broadcast radio stations determine whether or not the media ownership rules described in later sections of this report are triggered: ( 1 ) the geographic range ( or contours ) of their signals , and ( 2 ) the limits of their media markets as determined by the nielsen company , a market research firm .

many owners of commercial broadcast stations have relationships that fall short of the fcc's definition of common ownership , yet allow the owner of one station to exert substantial influence over the operation and finances of another station .

to minimize such behavior , the fcc has developed attribution rules "to identify those interests in or relationships to licensees that confer a degree of influence or control such that the holders have a realistic potential to affect the programming decisions of licensees or other core operating functions. .

the following summarizes the media attribution rules , as described and modified in the 2014 quadrennial review second report and order , and related fcc policies .

the fcc has five distinct sets of rules governing ownership of multiple media outlets in a single market: ( 1 ) local television ownership rules ( known as the television duopoly rules ) ; ( 2 ) local radio ownership rules ; ( 3 ) radio / television cross - ownership rules ; ( 4 ) newspaper / broadcast cross - ownership rules ; and ( 5 ) the dual network rule .

in 2004 , 2011 , and 2016 , the u.s. court of appeals , third circuit , directed the fcc to review its broadcast ownership diversity policies in conjunction with the media ownership rules .

specifically , the u.s. court of appeals ordered the fcc to consider a range of standards for defining entities that would be eligible for exceptions to its media ownership rules , and what the exceptions might be .

as evidence of the fcc's "statutory obligation to promote minority and female broadcast ownership," the third circuit cited two sections of the communications act of 1934 .

due to the manner in which the fcc licenses new broadcast stations , however , it is possible that only one of these two sections currently applies .

the first section , section 309 ( i ) ( 3 ) ( a ) of the communications act , states , in the context of applications to the fcc for a random selection for licenses or construction permits , that "to further diversify the ownership of the media of mass communications , an additional significant preference shall be granted to any group controlled by a member or members of a minority group. .

in 1997 , however , as part of the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-33 ) , congress directed the fcc to resolve competing applications for commercial broadcast stations by competitive bidding , rather than random selection , and expanded the fcc's competitive bidding authority under section 309 ( j ) of the communications act .

the second section cited by the third circuit is section 309 ( j ) ( 3 ) ( b ) of the communications act of 1934 , which specifies that in awarding licenses and permits via competitive bidding , one of the fcc's objectives must be promoting opportunities for , among others , "businesses owned by members of minority groups and women. .

to achieve this goal , section 309 ( j ) ( 4 ) ( d ) of the communications act directs the fcc to "ensure that small businesses , rural telephone companies , and businesses owned by members of minority groups and women are given the opportunity to participate in the provision of spectrum - based services , and , for such purposes , consider the use of tax certificates , bidding preferences , and other procedures. .

in 1999 , the fcc relaxed several of its media ownership rules .

acknowledging that various parties expressed concern that greater consolidation of broadcast ownership could make it more difficult for new licensees to enter the broadcasting industry , the fcc stated that ( 1 ) it was conducting studies that would enable it to address the requirement that its rules withstand the u.s. supreme court's scrutiny of any rules selectively applied to organizations based on the race or gender of their owners , and ( 2 ) upon completion of the studies , it would examine steps it could take to expand opportunities for minorities and women to enter the broadcast industry .

in addition , as described in " local television ownership rules ( television duopoly rules ) ," the fcc reasoned that the notification requirement would give minorities and women interested in purchasing a station an opportunity to bid .

the commission reiterated that "the [fcc] has made a number of efforts separate from this proceeding to address minority and female ownership issues , and we hope to take further steps in this area. .

in 2002 , the fcc issued an order repealing and / or further relaxing several media ownership rules , including the failed station solicitation rule ( fssr ) , described in " local television ownership rules ( television duopoly rules ) ," arguing that "the efficiencies associated with operation of two same - market stations , absent unusual circumstances , will always result in the buyer being the owner of another station in that market. .

the fcc deferred consideration of other proposals to advance minority and female ownership , stating that it would address them in a future rulemaking .

in 2004 , in prometheus radio project v. federal communications commission ( shorthanded as prometheus i ) , the u.s. third circuit court of appeals remanded the repeal of the fssr , noting that the fcc did "not explain that preserving minority ownership was the purpose of the fssr , nor [did] it argue that the fssr was harmful or ineffective toward this purpose. .

also in prometheus i , the third circuit directed the fcc to consider proposals to promote minority broadcast ownership at the same time that it addressed other media ownership rules .

the fcc reinstated the fssr as part of the 2006 quadrennial review order , which it adopted in 2007 .

in 2003 , to help promote diversity of ownership , the fcc established a class of broadcast licensees called "eligible entities" that would be eligible for an exception to its radio / television cross - ownership rules .

specifically , the fcc permitted broadcast licensees to assign or transfer control of a grandfathered combination of radio and television stations to any entity that would qualify as a small business consistent with revenue - based standards for its industry grouping , as established by the small business administration .

in 2008 , in response to the third circuit's directive in prometheus i , the fcc adopted a range of additional measures designed to promote the diversification of media ownership .

the measures enabled eligible entities to abide by less restrictive media ownership and attribution rules , and more flexible licensing policies , than their counterparts .

once again , the fcc used a revenue - based definition .

the fcc claimed that the measures would "be effective in creating new opportunities for a variety of small businesses and new entrants , including those owned by women and minorities. .

it also stated that such a "race - and gender - neutral definition" would enable the fcc to avoid "constitutional difficulties" that might impede timely implementation of its efforts to diversify media ownership .

in 2011 , in prometheus radio project v. federal communications commission ( shorthanded as prometheus ii ) , the third circuit vacated and remanded each of the measures adopted in the 2008 diversity order , ruling that the fcc failed to provide evidence that its revenue - based eligible entity definition would meet its goal of increasing broadcast ownership by minorities and women .

the third circuit also directed the fcc to consider other proposed definitions for eligible entities , so that the fcc might "adequately justify or modify its approach to advancing broadcast ownership by minorities and women. .

in 2016 , in prometheus radio project v. federal communications commission ( shorthanded as prometheus iii ) , the third circuit concluded that the fcc had unreasonably delayed action on its definition of an eligible entity , and ordered the fcc to "act promptly. .

in 2016 , the fcc adopted rules designed to increase broadcast ownership diversity , and addressed whether the agency believes that it has the constitutional authority to adopt rules specifically targeting minority and female ownership of broadcast stations .

the fcc found in 2016 that , though there were differing opinions on the interpretation of the case law , the u.s. supreme court could deem the fcc's interest in promoting a diversity of viewpoints sufficient to pass its legal tests for regulations targeting minorities and females .

however , even if the fcc's interest in promoting viewpoint diversity were deemed sufficient , the fcc concluded that it lacked sufficient evidence to pass other elements of the supreme court's tests for such rules .

the fcc cited two reasons: 1 .

the studies it commissioned on media ownership and hispanic television ( based in part on data from its broadcast ownership reports ) , as well as studies submitted by commenters , did not demonstrate adequately that the connection between minority and female ownership and viewpoint diversity is direct and substantial .

2 .

the record did not reveal a feasible means of adopting race - or gender - based measures in a flexible , nonmechanical way .

the fcc stated that it did not believe that either section 257 of the 1996 telecommunications act or section 309 ( j ) of the communications act of 1934 requires it to adopt race - or gender - conscious measures in order to promote ownership diversity .

the fcc did not discuss section 309 ( i ) of the communications act of 1934 .

in 2016 , the fcc reinstated the revenue - based eligible entity standard , using the small business administration's definition of a "small business. .

entities that own broadcast stations and have total annual revenue of $38.5 million or less qualify for exemption from the media ownership rules .

such a definition could potentially apply to entities that own stations engaged in the joint financial and operational arrangements , described in " joint sales agreements ," that the media bureau stated it would carefully scrutinize .

in 2016 the fcc also reinstated the six measures from its 2008 diversity order to enable eligible entities to abide by less restrictive media ownership and attribution rules , and more flexible licensing policies , than their counterparts .

by exempting small businesses from some of its ownership and attribution rules , the fcc could potentially undermine the rationales for retaining and tightening these rules , other portions of the 2014 quadrennial review , and the media bureau public notice .

