over the course of the last year , a host of cyberattacks have been perpetrated on a number of high profile american companies .

in january 2014 , target announced that hackers , using malware , had digitally impersonated one of the retail giant's contractors , stealing vast amounts of data — including the names , mailing addresses , phone numbers or email addresses for up to 70 million individuals and the credit card information of 40 million shoppers .

cyberattacks in february and march of 2014 potentially exposed contact and log - in information of ebay's customers , prompting the online retailer to ask its more than 200 million users to change their passwords .

in september , it was revealed that over the course of five months cyber - criminals tried to steal the credit card information of more than fifty million shoppers of the world's largest home improvement retailer , home depot .

one month later , j.p. morgan chase , the largest u.s. bank by assets , disclosed that contact information for about 76 million households was captured in a cyberattack earlier in the year .

in perhaps the most infamous cyberattack of 2014 , in late november , sony pictures entertainment suffered a "significant system disruption" as a result of a "brazen cyber attack" that resulted in the leaking of the personal details of thousands of sony employees .

and in february of 2015 , the health care provider anthem blue cross blue shield disclosed that a "very sophisticated attack" obtained personal information relating to the company's customers and employees .

the high profile cyberattacks of 2014 and early 2015 appear to be indicative of a broader trend: the frequency and ferocity of cyberattacks are increasing , posing grave threats to the national interests of the united states .

indeed , the attacks on target , ebay , home depot , j.p. morgan - chase , sony pictures , and anthem were only a few of the many publicly disclosed cyberattacks perpetrated in 2014 and 2105 .

experts suggest that hundreds of thousands of other entities may have suffered similar incidents during the same period , with one survey indicating that 43% of firms in the united states had experienced a data breach in the past year .

moreover , just as the cyberattacks of 2013 — which included incidents involving companies like the new york times , facebook , twitter , apple , and microsoft — were eclipsed by those that occurred in 2014 , the consensus view is that 2015 and beyond will witness more frequent and more sophisticated cyber incidents .

to the extent that its expected rise outpaces any corresponding rise in the ability to defend against such attacks , the result could be troubling news for countless businesses that rely more and more on computers in all aspects of their operations , as the economic losses resulting from a single cyberattack can be extremely costly .

and the resulting effects of a cyberattack can have effects beyond a single company's bottom line .

as "nations are becoming ever more dependent on information and information technology," the threat posed by any one cyberattack can have "devastating collateral and cascading effects across a wide range of physical , economic and social systems. .

with reports that foreign nations — such as russia , china , iran , and north korea – may be using cyberspace as a new front to wage war , fears abound that a cyberattack could be used to shut down the nation's electrical grid , hijack a commercial airliner , or even launch a nuclear weapon with a single keystroke .

in short , the potential exists that the united states could suffer a "cyber pearl harbor," an attack that would "cause physical destruction and loss of life" and expose — in the words of one prominent cybersecurity expert – "vulnerabilities of staggering proportions. .

given the growing and potentially grave threat posed by cyberattacks , one of the stated priorities of the president and congressional leadership is to enact laws that ensure that both the public and private sector are prepared to meet the cyber - challenges of the future .

while considerable debate exists with regard to the best strategies and methods for protecting america's various cyber - systems , one point of "general agreement" amongst cyber - analysts is the perceived need for enhanced and timely exchange of cyber - threat intelligence both within the private sector and between the private sector and the government .

the argument for the real time sharing of cyber - intelligence — which could include the sharing of vulnerability data ( the vulnerabilities an intruder might exploit to gain access to a computer system ) , threat data ( the types of malware circulating the internet and the nature of the threats a given entity has faced ) , and countermeasure data ( the steps an entity has taken to prevent or mitigate the effects of a cyberattack ) — is grounded in the idea that effective cybersecurity depends upon robust knowledge about potential threats and wide dissemination of the best practices and strategies to combat such threats .

despite widespread agreement about the need for enhanced cyber - information sharing , there is similar agreement among cyber - experts that current public and private sector information sharing efforts are simply inadequate .

while there may be many reasons why entities may opt to not participate in a cyber - information sharing scheme , a primary rationale for such a decision concerns the potential liability that could result from sharing internal cyber - threat information with other private companies or the government .

indeed , in a recent survey of over 700 information technology security practitioners , half of the respondents listed worries about "potential liability [from] sharing" as the main reason for not participating in an initiative for exchanging threat information .

more broadly , the legal issues surrounding cybersecurity information sharing — whether it be with regard to sharing between two private companies or the dissemination of cyber - intelligence within the federal government — are complex and have few certain resolutions .

in this vein , this report analyzes the major legal issues regarding cyber - threat information sharing by beginning with a discussion of the current legal authorities respecting the exchange of cyber - intelligence .

included in this discussion will be an examination of the various sources of liability that could result from information sharing .

the report concludes by discussing several of the major legislative proposals aimed at reforming federal cyber - information sharing laws and potential legal issues that such laws could prompt .

while often the concept of "cyber - information sharing" is thought of as a monolith , the sharing of cyber - intelligence touches on three related , but distinct concepts .

first , cyber - information sharing is often used in the context of describing efforts to promote the dissemination of cyber - intelligence from the federal government to other government entities or the private sector .

this sort of cyber information sharing would occur , for example , when the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) provides the department of homeland security ( dhs ) or privately owned banks with the ip addresses of computers known to have launched distributed denial of service ( ddos ) attacks against other entities within the financial sector .

second , cyber - threat information sharing also embraces the concept of private entities sharing cyber - intelligence with each other , such as when several companies in a particular sector establish a formal exchange or formal agreements to share relevant cyber - information with each other .

finally , cyber - information sharing also describes when private entities share cyber - threat information in their possession with the government .

such information sharing could occur , for example , when private security firms report to dhs details about potential cyber - vulnerabilities unearthed in research .

while collectively these three variants on the concept of cyber - information sharing have some commonalities , each also raises separate legal challenges that may impede cyber - intelligence dissemination more generally .

perhaps the area in which there is the most legal clarity with respect to cyber - information sharing pertains to the authority of the federal government – and its subcomponents — to disseminate cyber threat information within the government and with the private sector .

two central components of dhs lead efforts to distribute cyber - intelligence to others in the government and the private sector .

first , the office of intelligence and analysis ( i&a ) , an entity established under section 201 of the homeland security act of 2002 ( homeland security act or the act ) , is generally authorized to "access and receive" information and intelligence from "agencies of the federal government , state and local government agencies ( including law enforcement agencies ) , and private sector entities" in order to "identify and assess" "terrorist threats to the homeland" and "actual and potential vulnerabilities to the homeland. .

in addition , the i&a is responsible for "integrat[ing] relevant information , analysis , and vulnerability assessments" and disseminating such information in "both classified and unclassified formats , as appropriate" to "other agencies of the federal government , state , and local government agencies and authorities , the private sector , and other entities. .

in turn , pursuant to 6 u.s.c .

section 143 , dhs , through i&a , is required to provide to state and localities "analysis and warnings related to threats to , and vulnerabilities of," "critical information systems," a term of art presumably controlled by the homeland security act's definition for the term "critical infrastructure": [s]ystems ... so vital to the united states that the incapacity or destruction of such systems ... would have a debilitating impact on security , national economic security , national public health or safety , or any combination of those matters .

moreover , dhs is authorized "upon request" to provide the same "analysis and warnings" to "private entities that own or operate critical information systems. .

in practice , the i&a has primarily exercised its authority by focusing its efforts on analyses of cyber - threat information and the distribution of those analyses to various public and private entities .

in addition to the i&a , dhs's national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) and its subcomponents play perhaps an even more important role with respect to the sharing of cyber - threat information with other government and private entities .

within the nppd exists the office of cybersecurity and communications ( cs&c ) , an office congress created in 2006 that is tasked with overseeing the "security , resiliency , and reliability of the nation's cyber and communications infrastructure. .

to execute this mission , cs&c , supports "24x7 information sharing , analysis , and incident response" through the national cybersecurity and communication integration center ( nccic or center ) .

established in 2009 , the nccic is a "24-hour , dhs - led coordinated watch and warning center" monitoring "threats and incidents affecting the nation's critical information technology and cyber infrastructure. .

nccic , through the united states computer emergency readiness team ( us - cert ) , helps operate "key aspects" of several information sharing programs , including the cyber information sharing and collaboration program ( ciscp ) and enhanced cybersecurity services ( ecs ) .

ciscp allows for often unclassified "cyber threat , incident , and vulnerability information" to be disclosed "in near real - time" with private information sharing organizations and select owners and operators of so - called critical infrastructure and key resources .

ecs entails a "voluntary information sharing program" that , in part , "shares sensitive and classified government ... cyber threat information" with certain private actors .

in late 2014 , congress enacted the national cybersecurity protection act of 2014 ( ncpa ) , which formally codified nccic's authority , allowing the "center to carry out certain responsibilities of the under secretary" for the nppd .

specifically , the ncpa confirmed that the nccic's functions include serving as an "interface" for the "real - time" "sharing of information related to cybersecurity risks , incidents , analysis , and warnings between federal and non - federal entities. .

furthermore , the ncpa directs the center to provide a number of additional services , such as technical assistance , risk management support , and incident response capabilities to both public and private entities .

the ncpa requires nccic to include representatives of federal agencies , state and local governments , and private sector owners and operators of critical information systems , while still providing the under secretary for the nppd with discretion with respect to the precise makeup of the center .

in february of 2015 , in keeping with nccic's statutory role , president obama , in an executive order , mandated that the center "engage in continuous , collaborative , and inclusive coordination with" information sharing and analysis organizations ( isaos ) , a formal or informal entity or collaboration created or employed by public or private sector organizations that gather , analyze , and disseminate cyber - threat information .

the homeland security act , as amended by the ncpa , provides significant authority for dhs to disseminate a wide range of cyber - threat intelligence within the possession of the federal government to other government agencies and to the private sector .

earlier iterations of the homeland security act seemingly cabined dhs's authority to collect and share cyber - intelligence only to the extent such information respected a "terrorist threat" or would pertain to "critical information systems. .

in contrast , the ncpa provides nccic the authority to share cyber - information to the extent that such information relates to "cybersecurity risks," a term of art that encompasses any "threats" and "vulnerabilities" to information systems and "any related consequences caused by or resulting" from a host of actions that could compromise an information system or the information stored on an information system .

in other words , given dhs's discretion in designating various entities to participate in the nccic , it appears dhs has fairly broad authority to disseminate federal cyber threat information throughout the private sector , regardless of whether the information pertains to an industry that is "so vital to the united states that the incapacity or destruction" of that industry's assets or information systems would be "debilitating" to the country .

in fact , one issue that has been raised by commentators is whether the statutory authority allotted to the various entities within dhs — such as i&a and nppd — to engage in cyber - information sharing is so broad and ill - defined that confusion could result internally within the department as to who the central actor should be with respect to the sharing of federal cyber - intelligence .

the same argument could plausibly be made with respect to the authority to disseminate cyber - intelligence amongst the various entities of the federal government , as entities like the i&a and nppd within dhs and new entities outside of dhs , like the newly formed cyber threat intelligence integration center ( cticc ) appear to possess overlapping legal authorities with respect to the internal sharing of cyber - information within the federal government .

nonetheless , dhs's ability to share federal cyber - intelligence is not limitless .

first , cyber - threat information the government provides to the private sector generally must occur on a voluntary basis .

the plain language of section 223 of the homeland security act limits dhs's ability to share cyber - intelligence with "private entities that own or operate critical information systems," such that information sharing can only occur "upon [those entities'] request. .

and indeed , the ncpa contains an even more explicit provision disclaiming the act from being "construed to require any private entity" to request any assistance from the secretary of dhs .

in other words , under current law , dhs generally does not have the authority to "mandate private sector participation" in federal cyber information sharing efforts , leading some to question the value of the current voluntary information sharing scheme .

second , other laws outside of the context of cybersecurity may limit the ability of the government to disseminate cyber - threat information .

the homeland security act itself requires dhs to ensure that any intelligence in its possession "is protected from unauthorized disclosure and handled and used only for the performance of official duties. .

more specifically , the act mandates that dhs adhere to ( 1 ) the requirements of the national security act of 1947 to the extent any information pertains to intelligence sources and methods and ( 2 ) any authorities of the attorney general "concerning sensitive law enforcement information. .

in other words , to the extent any federal cyber - intelligence contains sensitive information , such as the sources or methods that are the heart of an ongoing cybercrime investigation , the government may be limited in its ability to disclose such information .

beyond laws aimed at limiting disclosures that may inhibit core governmental functions , laws aimed at preserving privacy and civil liberties may also restrict dhs's ability to share certain cyber - information .

the homeland security act requires dhs to "ensure ... that any information databases and analytical tools developed and utilized by the department" — which would presumably include programs like ciscp and ecs — "treat information in such databases in a manner that complies with applicable federal law on privacy. .

moreover , the ncpa requires that the nccic "comply with all policies , regulations , and laws that protect the privacy and civil liberties of united states persons. .

as such , if dhs's cyber intelligence included , for example , individually identifiable information — like a name or a social security number — laws like the privacy act of 1974 may restrict the manner in which the government may disclose such information in a cyber - information sharing program .

collectively , the legal effect of the various federal disclosure and privacy laws may limit the efficacy of any cyber - information dhs provides private entities .

as one commentator recently noted , the resulting "sanitation" of cyber - intelligence has a dual effect .

first , the host of federal agencies that "own classified or law enforcement information germane to a particular warning" "must be coordinated with as part of the review process," resulting in significant delays before dhs can release any information to a private entity , by which time the information may be irrelevant .

second , even if dhs releases government cyber threat information in a timely manner , the cyber intelligence resulting after agency review of the underlying material may omit critical information that is "actually useful to industry. .

whereas the law governing the dissemination of cyber - threat information in the possession of the federal government is relatively straightforward , the legal landscape surrounding the sharing of cyber - intelligence that is in the possession of private parties stands in stark contrast .

indeed , there is an array of legal concerns — some more theoretical than actual — that shroud the law governing the sharing of privately - held cyber - threat information in a cloud of uncertainty and create disincentives against the sharing of such information by private parties .

the legal issues can be divided between those that arise when private companies share cyber - information with each other and those that occur when private companies share cyber - intelligence with the government .

given the two major categories of cyber - information sharing — sharing of information in the possession of the government and sharing of information in the possession of the private sector — and the myriad of legal issues arising with respect to each category , legislative changes to federal law that aims to encourage the dissemination of cybersecurity information among the public and private sectors could take countless forms .

indeed , during the 113 th and 114 th congresses , several legislative proposals have been introduced that aim to remove the current legal obstacles that may be preventing more robust cyber - intelligence sharing , whether by removing discrete legal barriers to information sharing or by effectuating more wholesale change with regard to the distribution of cyber - intelligence within the public and private sectors .

while any one of the various legislative proposals on cybersecurity information sharing could merit a lengthy discussion , six themes permeate the various proposals aimed at promoting cybersecurity information sharing — one overarching theme , two that pertain to cyber - information possessed by the government , and three that pertain to cyber - information in the control of the private sector .

the current legal framework surrounding cyber - information sharing exists at the crossroads of several bodies of law and raises complicated questions respecting how cyber - intelligence can be collected and shared within the private sector and with the public sector .

moreover , as demonstrated by the host of discrepancies and complications raised by various legislative proposals on information sharing , if congress chooses to alter the current legal framework governing cybersecurity and intelligence sharing , the law will not necessarily be devoid of uncertainty .

instead , new legal questions may arise , likely out of the context of the balance congress attempts to strike between lowering disincentives for information sharing and ensuring that other interests embodied in privacy , antitrust , tort , or other laws are sufficiently protected under new cybersecurity information sharing legislation .

while cybersecurity information sharing is , at most , only one piece of a much larger puzzle regarding how to best protect the united states against potentially debilitating cyberattacks , resolution of the difficult legal questions posed by the regulation of cyber - intelligence sharing may be an important task for the 114 th congress .

