corinthian colleges , inc. ( cci ) was the parent company of several private , for - profit institutions of higher education , including the everest institute , everest colleges , heald colleges , and wyotech technical schools ( wyotech ) .

cci operated more than 100 of these institutions across the nation , with total enrollments of approximately 72,000 students who annually received roughly $1.4 billion in federal financial aid .

on june 19 , 2014 , the u.s. department of education ( ed ) announced that it had placed cci on an increased level of financial oversight known as heightened cash monitoring 1 ( hcm1 ) , coupled with a 21-day waiting period for funds reimbursement , as a stipulation to its continued participation in the higher education act ( hea ) title iv federal student aid programs .

ed had taken this action in response to cci's failure to address concerns relating to a variety of practices , including failing to provide ed with requested data related to inconsistences in job placement rates that had been presented to students .

in response to its limited access to federal student aid funds , cci announced it might have to close its schools .

on july 3 , 2014 , to avoid abrupt closure , cci and ed reached an agreement under which the company agreed to develop a plan to sell or teach - out its educational programs .

in exchange , ed agreed to immediately release $16 million in federal student aid ( fsa ) funds to cci's current students .

subsequently , the zenith education group ( zenith ) was formed as a nonprofit provider of career education programs .

zenith is a subsidiary of the educational credit management corporation ( ecmc ) , a nonprofit student loan guaranty agency involved in the administration of loans made through the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program .

zenith was formed for the purpose of buying a large portion of cci's schools .

in february 2015 , zenith agreed to buy 53 of cci's schools .

as part of the terms of the final agreement with ed and the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) , zenith agreed to provide $480 million in debt relief to former cci students for private student loans advanced by cci to its students ( known as genesis loans ) .

on april 14 , 2015 , ed notified cci that it would fine the company $30 million for misrepresenting its job placement data at its heald college locations .

approximately one week later , cci closed its remaining 30 schools , at which approximately 13,500 students were enrolled at the time .

in early may 2015 cci filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy under the u.s. bankruptcy code .

finally , on november 16 , 2015 , ed announced additional findings against cci for misrepresenting placement rates to former cci students and prospective students at its everest colleges and wyotech campuses in california and its everest university online program based in florida .

there are no statutory or regulatory provisions that provide relief to students who used pell grants to attend an institution of higher education ( ihe ) that closed .

additionally , there are no provisions to restore a portion of a student's eligibility toward the pell lifetime eligibility limit of 12 full - time semesters ( or the equivalent ) .

it appears unlikely that students who used pell grants to attend a cci school will be able to have their pell grant eligibility restored .

there are no statutory or regulatory provisions that provide relief to students who used gi bill educational assistance benefits to attend an ihe that closed .

additionally , there are no provisions to restore a portion of a student's gi bill entitlement , which is typically equal to 36 months ( or the equivalent for part - time educational assistance ) of enrollment .

the department of veterans affairs has indicated that "no debts will be created against students because of the school closure. .

in other words , students will not have to repay benefits received for periods of enrollment that did not occur as a result of the school's closure .

thus , it appears unlikely that students who used gi bill educational assistance benefits to attend a cci school will be able to have their entitlement restored for the amount used to attend a cci school ; however , they will not be responsible for repaying gi bill benefits received and used to attend a cci school .

