it is easy to find well - publicized examples of threats from invasive species: burmese pythons multiply in south florida , becoming top carnivores and killing large numbers of native species of reptiles , birds , and mammals .

formosan termites devastate living trees and historic buildings in new orleans' french quarter .

leafy spurge slashes the forage value of western grazing land , thereby creating precipitous drops in land value .

to continue with a full list of the damaging effects of invasive plants and animals risks sounding like hyperbole .

so vast is this "bioinvasion" ( as some have termed it ) that only rough estimates can be made of the numbers of non - native species now in north america , much less the rest of the world .

however , it is unclear how best to manage or prevent these effects or what legislation would be needed to address these problems .

laws concerning wild plants and animals — whether native or introduced — do not form a comprehensive body at the federal level .

the absence of a generalized federal responsibility in this area also circumscribes the federal role in addressing invasive species .

under the u.s. system , inherited from english legal tradition , the government regulates the taking of native wild animals generally and landowners control the native ( and other ) plants growing on their lands .

thus , colonial governments regulated native wild animals ( to the extent there was regulation of the take of wild animals at all ) and , after the u.s. constitution was ratified , the states retained the rights they previously had as colonies to control the wildlife within their boundaries .

with states retaining the right to regulate wildlife , the majority of wild plant and animal species are not federal responsibilities under current law .

moreover , because the problem of invasive species has continued to present itself as a series of seemingly disconnected crises , legislation has become a patchwork as each crisis has been addressed .

this report outlines the nature of the invasive species threat , the ability to predict invasions , methods of pest prevention or control , gaps in regulation , and options for congressional action .

the range of relevant federal laws ( as well as the federal agencies responsible for enforcing or administering them ) is addressed in another congressional research service ( crs ) report , but a short review of these laws is useful here .

the laws addressing invasive species threats to agriculture — for centuries a well - developed north american industry whose risks from non - native invasions are relatively clear — tend to be more developed than laws protecting other industries or those protecting ecosystems .

in consequence , agencies whose mission it is to address those risks also are better developed .

yet even the responsibilities to protect agriculture from invasives established in some u.s. regions but not others are diffuse , shared , or even lacking .

moreover , the enormous volume of trade makes the burden on federal inspection systems so severe as to permit only limited or cursory inspections and to force a strong reliance on self - reporting by importers of living and ( apparently ) nonliving cargo .

laws protecting the natural ecosystems on which industries such as tourism , electric power , or city water supplies depend are far less developed .

for example , a state agency that wishes to bring in a sport fish from another continent to benefit its anglers may face few obstacles in doing so , much less a burden of proof to show that the action will not harm other economic interests , natural resources , or ecosystems .

some laws , such as the lacey act , force the burden of proof in the other direction: an import is deemed safe unless it is on a list of organisms known to be harmful .

a local or state government , faced with the recent arrival of a new invasive species — whether terrestrial , freshwater , or marine ; plant or animal ; agricultural pest or recreational nuisance — has no single source to query to begin its response or guide it through a maze of options .

moreover , federal help , especially any timely help in the weeks or months after initial discovery , is rare to nonexistent and focuses more on information and less on practical assistance .

more than two decades ago , the office of technology assessment wrote "the current federal framework is a largely uncoordinated patchwork of laws , regulations , policies , and programs .

some focus on narrowly drawn problems .

many others peripherally address [nonindigenous species] .

in general , present federal efforts only partially match the problems at hand. .

this assessment largely holds true to this day , although since that time , the national invasive species council ( nisc ; see "executive order 13112" text box , above ) has addressed some aspects of the invasive species problem .

it has taken steps toward sharing more information across governments and with the public .

based on its mandate under e.o .

13112 , nisc asks specific agencies to take the lead in developing policies within their existing legislative mandates .

through its 2008-2012 report , meeting the invasive species challenge , nisc outlined a set of actions to address the bulk of existing problems .

these actions include developing legislative proposals to fill gaps in current law .

however , legislative efforts to date have tended to focus on well - established problems , such as the clear invasion of a single species , a specific pathway of introduction , or damage or risks to agriculture .

various abundant invasive species have had severe economic impacts on u.s. industries and the natural environment .

damage varies by species and can span an enormous range of effects , including power outages ; loss of farmland property value ; contamination of grain ; spread of disease ; increases in operating costs ; loss of irrigation water ; collapse of buildings ; competition with native plants ; loss of sport , game , or endangered species ; and ecosystem disturbance .

some invasive plants have been notorious for years for causing both economic and ecological damage ; kudzu , melaleuca , cordgrass , salt cedar , purple loosestrife , spotted knapweed , and russian thistle are examples .

their damage includes lowering water tables , poisoning humans and livestock , decreasing crop yields , and increasing pest control costs .

a serious infestation can cause substantial losses in property values .

invasive invertebrates also are well - known and include gypsy moths , japanese beetles , asian longhorn beetles , asian tiger mosquitoes , fire ants , and africanized honeybees .

in addition , introduced vertebrate pests ( eg , walking catfish , lake trout , cane toads , monk parakeets , starlings , bighorn sheep , nutria , and rats ) can have serious economic and ecological impacts .

introductions also include various human parasites and diseases .

in some cases , the source of the introduction is either known or strongly suspected .

introducers of some species , such as kudzu , melaleuca , and starlings , actually intended that their imports proliferate in the wild .

their purposes ranged from the practical ( kudzu for erosion control ) to the quixotic ( starlings for a purported desire to bring all of the birds mentioned in shakespeare's works to the united states ) .

whatever the motive , society itself was the loser in the importers' faustian bargains as the organisms proliferated to the detriment of the economy , native fauna and flora , and ecosystems .

introductions of non - native species may be intentional or unintentional .

some intentional introductions have produced benefits or at least low levels of harm , as in the case of the ring - necked pheasant ( a game bird native to asia ) or honeybees ( originally native to eurasia ) .

unintentionally introduced species may be present for years or decades before their presence is even recognized and the harm that they do , if any , is measured or observed .

however , catastrophic results can come from both accidental introductions ( e.g .

 , sea lampreys in the great lakes ) and intentional introductions ( e.g .

 , pigs in hawaii ) .

among recent efforts to coordinate scientific research on invasive species , a consortium of federal , state , and academic institutions formed the national institute for invasive species science ( niiss ) .

through its website , niiss allows researchers to share a range of information on taxonomy , identification , geospatial data , and so on .

its mission is to develop cooperative approaches for invasive species science that meet the urgent needs of land managers and the public .

administratively housed at the u.s. geological survey fort collins science center in colorado , the national institute of invasive species science provides a hub for invasive species science collaboration , coordination , and integration across agencies and disciplines... .

the mission of the national institute of invasive species science is to work with others to coordinate data and research from many sources to predict and reduce the effects of harmful non - native plants , animals , and diseases in natural areas and throughout the united states .

however , the niiss website is not intended for the general public and is difficult to use for such fundamental questions as the known distribution of invasives .

a second organization , also a consortium , is the north american invasive species network ( naisn ) .

it is a non - profit organization that was formed in 2010 by university and government scientists from across north america... .

the countries of mexico and canada participate as naisn members through a memorandum of understanding.... [members are] regional university centers and institutes , government institutions , non - profit organizations , research labs , and / or other groups and individuals with invasive species interests and qualifications that are valuable to the mission of naisn.... naisn aims to unify and connect existing regional invasive species efforts into a single network ... to help current invasive species management and prevention efforts across the continent .

its website ( http: / / www.naisn.org / ) is designed for a wider audience than niiss .

it offers videos demonstrating the characteristics of several dozen invasive plants and lists services offered by the consortium ; the services focus on data collection and coordination among agencies .

federal laws have tended to focus on black lists ( anything not on the list is allowed ) in contrast to a white list ( anything not on the list is excluded ) .

 ( see summary of various approaches in table 1 . ) .

each requires some , or even considerable , knowledge of the species to be listed in order to predict the likelihood of invasion .

the types of lists are discussed below .

although the ecological damage from some non - native species can be great , many such species are beneficial .

 ( for many species , the economic impacts are simply unknown. ) .

some industries rely heavily on non - natives .

for example , very few food plants and animals in the united states are native to the areas where they are now grown .

in addition to agriculture , the nursery , aquaculture , and pet industries rely significantly on non - native species .

a wide variety of intentional introductions have had effects that , even if harmful to natural ecosystems or biodiversity , have produced economic benefits sufficient to cause acceptance of collateral damage .

these include such food sources as cattle , chickens , honeybees , wheat , kiwi fruit , and soybeans and such ornamentals as tulips , chrysanthemums , and dawn redwoods , to name a few .

in each case , the introduction of these species was intentional and their propagation was more or less controlled .

the economic benefits conveyed by these species are vast and probably exceed many estimates for the annual costs of invasive species .

u.s. agriculture would have a far different appearance if it were limited to the several dozen food crops known to have been cultivated in north america before 1492 rather than the hundreds of crops grown today .

these non - native crops and their benefits are not the focus of this report but should not be forgotten in discussions of those imported species that cause serious harm .

the first — and perhaps only — line of defense against invasive species is preventing introductions into the country because controlling invasive species , once established , has been difficult .

prevention usually is economically advantageous because established invasive species can rarely be eradicated .

furthermore , controlling these species to acceptable levels , when or if possible , may be an expensive and endless task .

if inspections and quarantines fail to keep an invasive plant or animal out of a region and a species becomes established , the problem shifts to control of the species , which includes preventing its spread between local areas and beyond any established perimeter .

control of invasive species is divided into two related tasks: eradication , where possible , and reduction to manageable / tolerable levels where eradication is not possible .

key to this effort is early detection and rapid response ( edrr ) .

with edrr , eradicating very small populations before they become established may be possible and is more likely if many methods , such as those described below , are used intensively and in combination , including treating outlying populations as soon as they are discovered .

few control methods , if any , promise eradication if a species is well - established , but several methods , used in combination and continuously , might reduce a target species' population to tolerable levels .

several methods may be used to address an invasive species population , including cultural controls , mechanical controls , baits and attractants , biological controls , chemical controls , and bounties .

to apply any of these strategies , substantial knowledge of the target species' behavior , biochemistry , dietary preferences , diseases , or other aspects of its biology is usually essential .

combining pest control with an understanding of the underlying ecology of the species is central to integrated pest management ( ipm ) , which may be defined as: an ecosystem - based strategy that focuses on long - term prevention of pests or their damage through a combination of techniques such as biological control , habitat manipulation , modification of cultural practices , and use of resistant varieties .

pesticides are used only after monitoring indicates they are needed according to established guidelines , and treatments are made with the goal of removing only the target organism .

pest control materials are selected and applied in a manner that minimizes risks to human health , beneficial and nontarget organisms , and the environment .

generally "the most effective , long - term way to manage pests is by using a combination of methods that work better together than separately. .

the strategies described below overlap somewhat , both in concept and in practice , but their differences in timing or breadth of application make distinctions useful .

current federal laws concerning invasive species form a patchwork , stronger in certain areas , such as agriculture and ballast water , and weaker or absent in other areas .

current laws do not clearly address prevention of biological invasion across foreseeable pathways ( with the exception of ship ballast water ) or early detection and rapid response before the establishment of the new species .

at the latter event , the focus of effort shifts from less expensive prevention to more expensive and less efficient control .

coordination of current efforts alone means that , where there are gaps due to lack of coverage by existing laws or agency jurisdiction , those gaps will remain .

congress could choose to address these gaps either by explicitly delegating such authority to the president or by crafting legislation .

the national invasive species council ( nisc ) has become the focus for federal efforts to control and prevent invasive species affecting a broad range of industries or ecosystems .

however , many of the past shortages of authorities or personnel that have hampered efforts to limit the entrance of and damage from invasive species remain .

without clear federal legal authority to protect the nation's ecosystems ( except in agriculture ) , the information sharing under nisc and the national institute for invasive species science ( niiss ) takes on even greater importance .

simply informing responsible parties of the risks of their proposed actions may be one of the few vehicles available to deter potentially damaging releases due to gaps in the coverage of these agencies or their statutes .

although many agencies have some role in addressing invasive species , four agencies — aphis , the army corps of engineers , the fish and wildlife service , and the national marine fisheries service — have had major roles for many years .

yet even for these four agencies , important gaps remain ; the gaps in their authorities are described below .

although aphis oversees the importation of plants or animals , its authority to regulate living plants or animals once they are admitted is more limited .

specifically , it does not regulate the release of a species into the wild once they have been admitted , unless that species is already designated a noxious weed or disease carrier .

for example , aphis could inspect imported emus or ostriches for the sake of protecting domestic poultry from foreign diseases .

however , after the markets for these birds crashed some years ago and many were released by emu ranchers , aphis did not have authority to control the release of this non - native species .

nor does aphis regulate the sale of species that are already well - established .

for example , although english ivy is widely recognized as an invasive plant and harmful to forests , its sale does not violate federal law .

the sheer volume of plant and animal imports into the united states , as well as ever - increasing trade , raises practical questions about aphis's ability to maintain its oversight role .

the corps attempts to control noxious aquatic plant species ( eg , hydrilla ) and other impediments to inland navigation .

yet the corps has no authority to prevent or regulate the release of such pests in the first place .

the hydrilla infestations in florida and the potomac river , for example , very likely were caused by aquarium hobbyists dumping fish tank contents , but it is unclear whether the dumpers violated any state or federal laws .

similarly , the corps did not regulate the import of asian carp by fish aquaculturists , but it now has a major responsibility to manage certain corps locks in illinois to prevent the spread of this species from the mississippi river basin into the great lakes .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) does not have authority to provide general protection for the country's ecosystems from invasive species , nor even to protect most species popular with hunters and anglers .

only if the species were already regulated under the lacey act , or if fws knew that the introduced species might harm a species protected under the endangered species act , would it have any authority to stop the importation and release .

instead , fws waits for evidence of injury from the species to place it under regulation through provisions of the lacey act .

it does not currently have emergency authority under this law .

to make listings under the lacey act more expeditious , fws proposed a categorical exclusion under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) .

the proposal would have listings continue to be subject to the other "legal requirements of the lacey act , the regulatory flexibility act , and other required determinations for all injurious [species] rulemakings" as well as other requirements of nepa .

the regulation has not been finalized .

on inland waters , the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) has little regulatory authority because its responsibilities largely are confined to demonstrable effects on anadromous species protected under the endangered species act .

moreover , its authority to prevent harmful introductions into marine ecosystems appears to be nonexistent .

the dumping of invasive lionfish into the waters of the atlantic ocean and gulf of mexico , for example , appears to have violated no federal law .

legislation to address invasive species could take a species - by - species approach , a pathway approach , or a combination of the two .

the species approach implicitly assumes knowledge about a species' risk ( black list ) or safety ( white list ) .

a central dilemma , however , is the difficulty in making this prediction .

moreover , this approach assumes knowledge that a particular species actually is being imported .

a pathway approach does not assume knowledge about any particular species , only that a particular set of circumstances favors the arrival of unwanted organisms .

some agencies , including aphis and fws , currently analyze the risk presented by particular species that may become invasive .

however , addressing the multitude of agricultural pests relies on scarce agency resources at aphis .

in addition , some have criticized fws for its slow response to the blacklisting of species under the lacey act .

both agencies arguably would improve their effectiveness if they could provide faster assessments of either species or pathways so that they could direct resources to the most critical areas .

regulation by pathway is an approach suited to unintentional or unknowing introductions , as no list needs to be created .

among the most comprehensive pathway approaches to date is the non - indigenous aquatic nuisance prevention and control act .

its goals put prevention on an equal or higher footing compared with control of species that are already established .

it requires the participation of several federal agencies , promotes research , and implements regulations on the mid - ocean exchange of ballast water and other measures to exclude invasives from u.s. ports .

a review of writings by various specialists in this field suggests additional areas that might be explored by policymakers .

over the years , congress has considered many issues related to particular invasive species .

the list of options below is compiled from many sources and focuses only on topics that cover a broad range of species , pathways , or agencies .

research to identify pathways .

with the exception of agricultural threats , few comprehensive reviews exist to identify pathways providing the greatest risk of invasives .

research goals in this area might overlap with research designed to prevent certain kinds of security threats , and might benefit from cooperation with agencies involved in antiterrorism programs .

expert review of planned releases .

panels of experts might be created to analyze risks and make recommendations on planned releases by governmental or nongovernmental sources into any environment in which the species are not native .

according to nisc , such steps are planned and , in the case of plants that may affect agriculture , are in progress at aphis .

although such a panel could not have sounded the alarm on the unauthorized release of hydrilla into the potomac , for instance , it could provide a public warning on planned releases of exotic grasses by federal agencies or of non - native game fish .

exotic plants are proposed as feedstocks for biofuels and provide a current example of a release that might benefit from such reviews .

the use of the expertise of federal and other scientists and managers , if it prevented even a few ill - advised introductions , might be a cost - effective option .

education al campaign .

an educational campaign , possibly aimed in part at children , to prevent simple , inadvertent acts by the public might play a role in preventing some types of invasive species introductions .

preventing releases of exotic pets and aquarium species after the point of sale might be particularly susceptible to this type of approach .

warning list .

an informational warning list ( or gray list ) of species might be created by the collaboration of federal and state agencies .

the warning list might include species currently restricted under state laws , species thought to be newly arrived from other countries , and other species felt to merit special attention by regulators .

although a gray list would lack regulatory force , at least without legislation at the federal level , it could be designed to provide information on species whose eradication or control is in its early phases .

unification of data and reporting from many agencies would add greatly to the utility of such a list .

review of industries dependent on importing and transferring non - native species .

such a review could include a focus on cooperative methods to reduce introductions or releases after the point of sale .

the focus of past efforts has tended to be on the entry of these species into the united states .

to protect their businesses , import - dependent industries naturally have tried to reduce current obstacles and prevent imposition of new ones .

in this effort , the pet , hobby aquarium , and nursery businesses have been relatively successful .

yet there are other avenues to reduce risk besides prohibition .

these avenues might include incentives for the sale of sterile animals or plants only or efforts to create point - of - sale educational programs about the risk of releasing pets or plants into the wild and any penalties for doing so .

multi - agency federal or cooperative center for "first strike" prevention and control .

congress could authorize the creation of a first strike center along the lines of the national interagency fire center .

since the creation of nisc , agencies have begun to respond across a broad front in the days , weeks , or months after an invasion is discovered .

the prompt notification and agency attention to the discovery of northern snakeheads in maryland is an example of such a response .

 ( ultimately , the effort was too late , and the fish spread widely in the chesapeake bay area. ) .

however , although constraints on coordination and jurisdiction interfere with prompt responses less than in the past , much more progress is possible .

nisc is beginning to model its efforts on interagency fire management , a federal program that has long faced similar issues .

it seems possible that a similar center devoted to first strike prevention and control of invasive species , regardless of affected industry , ecosystem , or lead agency , could provide critical support at a time when eradication of a new animal or plant invader might still be possible .

in recent years , the national park service ( nps ) has adopted roughly this approach for plant pests .

emergency plant management teams address not only crises but also ongoing problems .

while the current 16 teams work primarily on nps lands , they also may work with adjoining landowners .

expansion of this program , perhaps with multi - agency teams , could provide a more efficient method of addressing new or incipient invasions .

it seems unlikely , however , that each federal agency would need to create its own separate team modeled after those of nps , because the duplication of manpower , equipment , and supplies could be substantial .

measures to reduce the risk of exporting invasive species .

the united states might take further internal steps to avoid exporting potentially invasive species to other countries .

these measures could be as simple as preventing their accidental export in bilateral aid programs or certifying that identified u.s. products ( eg , used tires ) are free of pests .

such certification is done for agricultural shipments .

such a review might examine disaster aid and emergency relief , for example: in the rush to provide humanitarian relief , shipments of supplies , equipment , and personnel may inadvertently introduce diseases or pests unknown in the receiving country .

because such supplies sometimes are prepared for shipment in advance , they could be examined to reduce the risk of such transfers .

the nisc management plan considers international cooperation generally and describes actions that might be taken on a multilateral or bilateral basis to reduce the import and export of invasive species .

however , it does not address steps the united states might take unilaterally , nor does it assess any positive or negative effects on u.s. trade that might occur from such steps .

it is difficult to discern progress in this area in the last few years .

these options are not mutually exclusive .

they likely would be under the jurisdiction of multiple committees in both house and senate .

they may offer opportunities for savings both to the economy and to ecosystems .

