t he livestock mandatory reporting act ( p.l .

106-78 , title ix ; lmr ) requires that meat packers report prices and other information on purchases of cattle , hogs , lamb , boxed beef , wholesale pork , and lamb carcasses and boxed lamb to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

authority for mandatory reporting was set to expire on september 30 , 2015 .

livestock industry stakeholders supported the reauthorization of the act , and producer groups put forward proposals amending mandatory reporting .

the house passed a reauthorization bill ( h.r .

2051 ) in june 2015 .

in september 2015 , the senate amended the house - passed bill , and congress reauthorized lmr until september 30 , 2020 , in the enacted agriculture reauthorizations act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-54 ) .

before livestock mandatory price reporting was enacted by congress in 1999 , the usda's agricultural marketing service ( ams ) collected livestock and meat price and related market information from meat packers on a voluntary basis under the authority of the agricultural marketing act of 1946 ( 7 u.s.c .

ยง1621 et seq. ) .

ams market reporters collected and reported prices from livestock auctions , feedlots , and packing plants .

the information was disseminated through hundreds of daily , weekly , monthly , and annual written and electronic usda reports on sales of live cattle , hogs , and sheep and wholesale meat products from these animals .

the goal was to provide all buyers and sellers with accurate and objective market information .

by the 1990s , the livestock industry had undergone many sweeping changes , including increased concentration in meat packing and animal feeding , more production specialization , and more vertical integration ( firms controlling more than one aspect of production ) .

fewer animals were sold through negotiated ( cash ; or "spot" ) sales , and more frequently sold under alternative marketing arrangements ( eg , formula sales based on a negotiated price established in the future ) with prices not publicly disclosed or reported .

some livestock producers , believing such arrangements made it difficult or impossible for them to determine "fair" market prices for livestock going to slaughter , called for mandatory price reporting for packers and others who process and market meat .

usda had estimated in 2000 that the former voluntary system was not reporting 35% - 40% of cattle , 75% of hog , and 40% of lamb transactions .

during debate on mandatory price reporting , opponents , including some meat packers and other farmers and ranchers , argued that a mandate would impose costly new burdens on the industry and could cause the release of confidential company information .

nonetheless , some of these earlier opponents decided to support a mandatory price reporting law .

livestock producers had been hit by very low prices in the late 1990s and were looking for ways to strengthen the markets .

some meat packers also decided to support a national consensus bill at least partly to preempt what they viewed as an emerging "patchwork" of state price reporting laws that could alter competition between packers operating under different state reporting laws .

the livestock mandatory reporting act of 1999 ( lmr , p.l .

106-78 , title ix ; 7 u.s.c .

ยง1635 et seq. ) .

was enacted in october 1999 as part of the fy2000 agriculture appropriations act .

the law mandated price reporting for live cattle , boxed beef , and live swine and allowed usda to establish mandatory price reporting for lamb sales .

the law authorized appropriations as necessary and required usda to implement regulations no later than 180 days after the law was enacted .

mandatory price reporting was authorized for five years , until september 30 , 2004 .

usda issued a final rule on december 1 , 2000 .

although reporting for lamb was optional in the lmr statute , usda established mandatory reporting for lamb in the final rule .

the rule was to be implemented on january 30 , 2001 , but usda delayed implementation for two months until april 2 , 2001 , to allow for additional time to test the automated lmr program to ensure program requirements were being met .

the implementation of mandatory reporting did not affect the continuation of the ams voluntary price - reporting program .

ams continues to publish prices from livestock auctions , and feeder cattle and pig sales , through voluntary - based market news reports .

lmr authority lapsed briefly in october 2004 before congress extended mandatory price reporting for one year to september 30 , 2005 .

authority for lmr lapsed again on september 30 , 2005 .

at that time , usda requested that all packers who were required to report under the 1999 act continue to submit required information voluntarily .

about 90% of packers voluntarily reported , which allowed usda to publish most reports .

in october 2006 , congress passed legislation to reauthorize reporting through september 30 , 2010 .

this act also amended swine reporting requirements from the original 1999 law , by separating the reporting requirements for sows and boars from barrows and gilts , among other changes .

because statutory authority for the program had lapsed , usda determined that it had to reestablish regulatory authority through rulemaking in order to continue lmr operations .

on may 16 , 2008 , usda issued the final rule to reestablish and revise the mandatory reporting program .

this rule incorporated the swine reporting changes and was intended to enhance the program's overall effectiveness and efficiency based on ams' experience in the administration of the program .

the rule became effective on july 15 , 2008 .

mandatory wholesale pork price reporting was not included in the original price - reporting act because the hog industry could not agree on reporting for pork .

section 11001 of the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) directed usda to conduct a study on the effects of requiring packers to report the price and volume of wholesale pork cuts , which was a voluntary reporting activity at the time .

the farm bill study on wholesale pork pricing was released in november 2009 and concluded that there would be benefits from a mandatory pork reporting program .

on september 27 , 2010 , the mandatory price reporting act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-239 ) was enacted , reauthorizing mandatory price reporting through september 30 , 2015 .

the act added a provision for mandatory reporting of wholesale pork cuts , directed the secretary to engage in negotiated rulemaking to make required regulatory changes for mandatory wholesale pork reporting , and established a negotiated rulemaking committee to develop these changes .

the committee was composed of representatives of pork producers , packers , processors , and retailers .

the committee met three times , was open to the public , and developed recommendations for mandatory pork reporting .

usda released the final rule on august 22 , 2012 , and the regulation was implemented on january 7 , 2013 .

see the appendix for a description of selected lmr reporting provisions , marketing definitions , confidentiality rules , and usda reporting and enforcement .

the house agriculture subcommittee on livestock and foreign agriculture started the reauthorization process by holding a hearing on april 22 , 2015 , that included producer representatives from the national pork producers council ( nppc ) , the national cattlemen's beef association ( ncba ) , and the american sheep industry association ( asi ) and a representative from the north american meat institute ( nami ) , which represents meat packers .

all representatives voiced support for mandatory reporting , and the producer representatives identified changes to specific reporting requirements they would like to see incorporated into lmr .

all stakeholders agreed that the loss of reporting during the october 2013 government shutdown was disruptive to the market , and they would like lmr to be deemed an "essential" service that operates if another government shutdown should occur .

on april 28 , 2015 , the mandatory price reporting act of 2015 ( h.r .

2051 ) was introduced in the house .

the house committee on agriculture marked up the bill on april 30 .

h.r .

2051 reauthorized lmr through september 30 , 2020 , and included several sections that addressed hog and lamb market issues that livestock stakeholders raised about lmr .

 ( see " livestock sector issues for reauthorization in 2015 " for a discussion of lmr issues of interest to the livestock industry. ) .

on june 9 , 2015 , the house passed h.r .

2051 on a voice vote .

on september 17 , 2015 , by voice vote , the senate agriculture committee marked up and reported to the full senate an amended version of the house - passed h.r .

2051 .

amended h.r .

2051 , the agriculture reauthorizations act of 2015 , included provisions to reauthorize mandatory price reporting , the u.s .

grain standards act , and the national forest foundation act , three laws that were set to expire on september 30 , 2015 .

on september 21 , 2015 , the senate passed the bill by unanimous consent , and the house passed the senate - amended bill on september 28 by voice vote .

the agriculture reauthorizations act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-54 ) was signed into law on september 30 , 2015 .

a simple reauthorization of mandatory reporting would amend the termination date in section 260 of the agricultural marketing act of 1946 ( 7 u.s.c .

1636i ) .

however , like past reauthorizations , livestock industry stakeholders suggested changes that were intended to improve mandatory reporting and to address issues that emerged since the last reauthorization .

several of the issues are discussed below .

during the nearly 15 years that lmr has been in place , livestock producers , processors , and industry analysts have come to rely on the ams mandatory price reporting data to make marketing decisions .

many livestock contracts between buyers and sellers are based on prices reported under lmr .

in october 2013 , during the government shutdown when most federal operations came to a standstill , meat packers continued to report lmr data to ams , but mandatory daily and weekly reports were not published .

in addition to the loss of price information for producers , the gap in lmr data affected the futures market because the cme group uses lmr data to settle live hog contracts .

cme also uses lmr - reported cattle carcass characteristics to settle live cattle futures contracts .

cme has noted that lmr price data are trusted and that few other public alternatives to the lmr data exist .

during the reauthorization debate , livestock stakeholders urged usda to deem mandatory reporting an "essential" service in order to avoid the loss of livestock price information if another government shutdown , such as in october 2013 , occurs due to a lapse in appropriations .

many contend that any gap in mandatory reporting is disruptive to livestock markets .

although the house - passed version ( h.r .

2051 ) contained such a provision , it was not included in the final bill .

the nppc recommended that ams add another purchase category for swine called negotiated formula purchase .

under this purchasing arrangement , a producer negotiates the sale of swine on a lot - by - lot basis , but the price will be determined by formula at a later date .

nppc believes this represents a negotiated sale , but under ams reporting it is classified as a swine or pork market formula purchase because there is no established price at the time of purchase .

negotiated purchases , or cash sales , are often viewed as the true measure of price discovery , but negotiated purchases as a share of total hog sales has dropped to less than 4% .

according to nppc testimony before the subcommittee on livestock and foreign agriculture of the house agriculture committee , the total number of hogs that would trade under this new category is not known , but possibly could increase the number of reported negotiated hog sales by 50-100% .

boosting the volume of negotiated purchases would be expected to increase price discovery .

some livestock sales occur after the afternoon reporting deadline for packers to send reports to ams and are not reported in a daily report .

pork producers believe that sales of hogs after the afternoon deadline are usually delivered to packing plants the next day .

to provide more timely hog marketing and price information , nppc recommends that hog trades that occur late in the day be reported in the next day's morning or afternoon daily reports .

the additional reporting would better reflect the daily hog market ; increase trade volume , thus reducing data disclosure issues ; and result in more complete reports .

these swine proposals were included in p.l .

114-54 .

the u.s. sheep and lamb industry is confronted with a very concentrated market that results in price - reporting challenges not necessarily experienced by the larger cattle and hog sectors .

the sheep and lamb industry as a whole ( production , feeding , and processing ) believes that lmr is crucial for creating a transparent market , and the american sheep industry association ( asi ) worked with ams from 2012-2014 to amend lmr in ways to improve lamb reporting ahead of reauthorization .

although the asi effort did not result in rulemaking , proposals developed in earlier years are the basis for the lamb industry's proposals during current reauthorization .

u.s. lamb imports account for half of the lamb consumed in the united states .

therefore , the pricing of lamb imports is crucial for u.s. lamb producers in making marketing decisions .

asi recommended that the reporting threshold for lamb imports be lowered to 1,000 metric tons from the current 2,500 metric tons to capture prices for a greater share of lamb imports .

in addition , smaller or mid - size lamb processors have entered the business to capture specialty lamb markets , but because of the smaller size , these businesses are often exempt from reporting .

to capture pricing data from mid - size lamb slaughters and processors , asi recommended that the threshold for packer reporting be reduced to an average of 35,000 head slaughtered per year during the immediately preceding five years from the current 75,000 head .

these two threshold changes for importers and packers were designed to pick up a larger share of the total lamb market and better reflect average prices in the market .

both proposals were included in p.l .

114-54 .

the sheep and lamb industry also faces the situation where there are few participants in the processing sector .

this leads to problems with non - reporting because of confidentiality requirements .

also , a substantial share of lamb processing is conducted on a "custom slaughter" basis , which is not counted as a buyer - seller transaction , and thus not reported under lmr .

in addition , almost one - third of u.s. lambs are processed by one cooperative that does not report under lmr because its business structure is treated as a packer - owned operation , even though , reportedly , the cooperative is willing to report under lmr .

asi recommended that ams be flexible with its packer definitions to allow such an operation to report under lmr .

p.l .

114-54 granted usda discretion to determine that importers and packers not meeting the threshold requirements may still be required to report .

the cattle industry supported the reauthorization of lmr , but the new law does not contain any cattle - specific proposals .

during the markup of the house bill , house agriculture committee chairman conaway indicated that the cattlemen and meat packers were working on proposals that could be included as amendments to the bill .

various cattle stakeholders raised some issues with mandatory reporting , but no consensus developed to amend lmr cattle provisions .

the ncba recommended that ams have flexibility to request additional information , as needed , to identify and report appropriate industry standards as cattle marketing changes .

also , ncba recommended that lmr include a new category for fed - cows , to be added to reporting for steers and heifers , and cows and bulls .

currently , ams reports cover all cows , but a breakout of fed - cows could have provided additional price and marketing information beneficial for cattle producers who market fed - cows .

in a letter to the senate agriculture committees , the ranchers - cattlemen action legal fund , united stockgrowers of america ( r - calf ) expressed specific concerns about new types of cattle purchases that are not captured in lmr .

these include ( 1 ) negotiated basis trade - type contracts that do not appear to be reported when negotiated , ( 2 ) negotiated cash sales that have extended delivery dates , and ( 3 ) "tops" trades , where a negotiated premium is offered on a cash trade and is then reported as a formula purchase .

r - calf also raised concern about the frequency of late - day transactions that miss the day's reporting deadline , thus possibly distorting the day's price .

the national farms union ( nfu ) expressed its support for the reauthorization of mandatory reporting as an important tool for combating market concentration .

in letters to the senate and house agriculture committees , nfu suggested changes to lmr for cattle that would have addressed confidentiality rules , reporting on imported cattle that go into feedlots , reporting on weekly market concentration , and separate data from forward contracts from those tied to the futures market .

the following sections discuss some of the main livestock mandatory reporting act ( lmr ) reporting requirements , as well as confidentiality rules , agricultural marketing service reporting , and enforcement of lmr .

the text box , included below , provides definitions for selected terms used in lmr .

selected reporting requirements packers that are subject to mandatory reporting are defined as federally inspected plants that have slaughtered a minimum annual average of 125,000 head of cattle , 100,000 head of swine , 200,000 head of sows and boars or a combination thereof , and 35,000 lambs during the immediate five preceding years .

if a plant has operated for fewer than five years , usda will determine , based on capacity , if the packer must report .

packers are required to report the prices established for steers and heifers twice daily ( 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. central time ) ; cows and bulls twice daily ( 10 a.m. central for current day , and 2 p.m. for previous - day purchases ) ; barrows and gilts three times daily ( 7 a.m. central for prior - day purchases , and 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. central ) ; sows and boars once daily ( 7 a.m. central for prior - day purchases ) ; and lambs once daily ( 2 p.m. central ) .

besides the established prices , packers report premiums and discounts and the type of purchase ( eg , negotiated , formula , or forward contract ) .

packers are required to report , depending on the species , the quantity delivered for the day ; the quantity committed to the packer ; the estimated weight on a live weight basis or a dressed weight basis ; and quality characteristics , such as choice grade .

in addition to daily reporting , on the first reporting day of the week , packers file a cumulative weekly report of the previous week's purchases of steers and heifers , and swine .

lamb packers are required to report the previous week's purchases on the first and second reporting day of the week , depending on the data .

steer and heifer and lamb packers are to include data on type of purchase ( negotiated , formula , or forward contract ) , premiums and discounts , and some carcass characteristics ( eg , quality grade and yield , average dressing percentage ) .

swine packers are required to report the amount paid in premiums that are based on noncarcass characteristics ( eg , volume , delivery timing , hog breed ) .

also , packers must make available to producers a list of such premiums .

in addition to livestock purchase prices , packers are required to report sales data for boxed beef , wholesale pork , and carcass and boxed lamb .

sales are reported twice daily for beef and pork ; once daily for lamb .

packers are required to provide price , quantity , quality grade for beef and lamb , and type of cut .

packers report beef and pork domestic and export sales and domestic boxed lamb sales .

lamb importers who have imported a minimum average of 1,000 metric tons of lamb in the immediate five preceding years are required to report such information as weekly lamb prices , quantities imported , the type of sale ( negotiated , formula , or forward contract ) , cuts of lamb , and delivery period .

confidentiality the lmr law requires that price reporting be confidential to protect the identity of packers and contracts and proprietary business information .

in determining what data could be published , ams initially adopted a "3 / 60" confidentiality guideline ( commonly used throughout the federal government ) , i.e. , at least three entities in the regional or national reporting area , and no single entity could account for more than 60% of the reported market volume .

otherwise , the data cannot be published in order to protect the identity of those reporting .

ams found that the "3 / 60" guideline resulted in large gaps in data reporting .

for example , during april 2 , 2001 , and june 15 , 2001 , 24% of daily reports and 20% of weekly reports were not published because of confidentiality provisions .

in order to address the data gaps , ams adopted a "3 / 70 / 20" guideline in august 2001 .

it required that at least three entities report 50% of the time over a 60-day period ; no one entity could account for more than 70% of volume over a 60-day period ; and in cases where only one entity reports , the entity cannot be the only reporter more than 20% of the time over a 60-day period .

these new guidelines substantially eliminated the data gaps .

ams reporting the livestock , poultry , and grain market news division ( lpgmn ) of the ams livestock , poultry , and seed program is responsible for compiling and disseminating the information collected under lmr .

in addition , lpgmn continues to operate a voluntary reporting program for livestock not covered under lmr , poultry and grain .

under lmr , lpgmn publishes 62 daily reports and 47 weekly reports .

ams publishes 29 daily reports for cattle , 20 for swine , 6 for beef , 4 for pork , and 3 for lamb .

weekly reports total 24 for cattle , 2 for swine , 11 for beef , 8 for pork , and 2 for lamb .

according to ams budget documents , mandatory reporting currently provides data for 79% of total slaughtered cattle , 94% of hogs , and 46% of sheep .

for meat products , lmr covers 94% of boxed beef production , 87% of wholesale pork , and 57% of lamb meat .

small plants , which fall below required thresholds , or non - federally inspected plants account for the remaining percentage of slaughter and production .

ams market news operates on an annual appropriation of about $34 million , and the lmr program accounts for about $5 million to $6 million of that amount .

enforcement ams compliance staff enforces lmr through audits once every six months .

ams reviews support documentation for randomly sampled lots .

if non - compliance is found , ams will ask the packer to correct the problem .

if the packer does not correct the problem , ams may issue a warning letter , and ultimately , the packer could be fined $10,000 for each violation if corrective action is not taken .

ams published quarterly compliance reports through september 2014 , and then released a six month ( october 2014-march 2015 ) compliance report .

