the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) requires health insurance exchanges ( also known as marketplaces ) to be established in every state .

aca exchanges are virtual marketplaces in which consumers and small businesses can shop for and purchase private health insurance coverage and , where applicable , be connected to public health insurance programs ( eg , medicaid ) .

exchanges are intended to simplify the experience of obtaining health insurance .

they are not intended to supplant the private market outside of the exchanges but rather to provide an additional source of private health insurance coverage options .

this report provides an overview of key aspects of the health insurance exchanges .

the report includes summary information about the major functions of exchanges and how they are structured .

it describes individual and small business eligibility and enrollment processes , provides enrollment estimates , explains the financial assistance available to certain consumers and small businesses , and discusses consumer enrollment assistance options .

the report also reviews the role of exchanges in certifying participating plans and outlines the range of plans offered through exchanges .

it briefly addresses funding for the exchanges .

it provides a high - level description of these exchange - related topics while referencing other crs reports with further information on specific topics , including on topics related to market stabilization policy considerations .

a primary function of the exchanges is to provide a way for consumers and small businesses to compare and purchase health plan options offered by insurers .

in addition to carrying out their consumer - facing activities that facilitate the purchase of coverage , exchanges are responsible for several administrative functions , including certifying the plans that will participate in their marketplaces .

sbes , sbe - fps , and state entities in some ffes ( where states have chosen to perform some plan - management functions ) are each responsible for annually certifying or recertifying plans to be sold in their exchanges as q ualified h ealth p lans ( qhps , see " qualified health plans ," below ) .

in ffes in which hhs oversees all plan - related functions , cms does this for each state .

qhp certification involves a review of various factors , including the benefits a plan will cover , the network of providers it will include , its premium rates , its marketing practices , and its adherence to quality - of - care standards .

the qhp certification process is to be completed each year in time for issuers to advertise their plans and rates during the exchanges' annual oep .

exchanges' other administrative activities include collecting enrollment and other data , reporting data to and otherwise interacting with the departments of hhs and the treasury , and working with state insurance departments and federal regulators to conduct ongoing oversight of plans .

the aca provided an indefinite ( i.e. , unspecified ) appropriation for hhs grants to states to support the planning and establishment of exchanges .

for each fiscal year between fy2011 and fy2014 , the hhs secretary determined the total amount that was made available to each state for exchange grants .

however , none of these exchange grants could be awarded after january 1 , 2015 , and exchanges were expected to be self - sustaining beginning in 2015 .

exchanges may generate funding to sustain their operations , including by assessing fees on participating health insurance plans .

to raise funds for the exchanges it oversees , hhs assesses a monthly fee on each health insurance issuer that offers plans through an ffe or sbe - fp .

the fee is a percentage of the value of the monthly premiums that the issuer collects on exchange plans in a given state , and hhs updates the percentage each year through rulemaking .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

currently , these user fees are the primary source of funding for ffes ; they are estimated to account for 70% of all ffe funding in fy2018 .

most sbes also assess user fees on issuers participating in their exchanges , often 1% - 3% of premiums or a monthly flat fee .

states also can use other state funding to support their exchanges , and some have become ffes or moved to the federal it platform due to challenges and / or costs of maintaining their exchanges .

user fees also have been assessed on issuers participating in shop exchanges .

however , in the 2019 payment notice , hhs announced that the fees won't be assessed for issuers selling plans under the new model of reduced federal it support ( see " changes in shop exchange web portal functionality " in this report ) .

for more information about certain issues addressed in or relevant to this report , see the following crs reports: crs report r45146 , federal requirements on private health insurance plans crs report r44425 , health insurance premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies crs report r44438 , the individual mandate for health insurance coverage: in brief appendix a .

exchange types by state appendix b .

types of plans offered through the exchange .

