both patents and regulatory exclusivities have been the subject of congressional interest in recent years .

the 112 th congress made significant changes to the patent system through the leahy - smith america invents act ( aia ) .

the 113 th congress considered additional patent system reforms , including the innovation act .

the innovation act passed the house of representatives in the 113 th congress and has been introduced in the 114 th congress in virtually identical form .

as well , the 111 th and 112 th congresses created new forms of regulatory exclusivity for biologic medicines and qualified infectious disease products , respectively .

the patent system has traditionally served as the primary innovation incentive for new medicines .

patents , which are administered by the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) , allow for a uniform 20-year term of protection for a variety of inventions .

a patent may be awarded on any process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter that is useful , novel , and nonobvious .

patents issued by the uspto provide their owners with the right to exclude others from practicing the invention or importing it into the united states .

starting with the orphan drug act , congress has also developed a new form of intellectual property right in order to promote the marketing of new drugs .

regulatory exclusivities apply to drugs and biologic medicines regulated by the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

federal legislation establishes a complex range of regulatory exclusivities applicable to , among other subjects , new chemical entities , orphan drugs , and generic drugs .

in general , these intellectual property rights require the fda to protect an approved drug from competing applications for a set period of time .

for the past three decades , regulatory exclusivities have served alongside patents as a parallel , shorter - term exclusion mechanism for the vast majority of innovative pharmaceuticals .

contemporary legislative trends may elevate the regulatory exclusivity from a supplemental protection scheme to the primary driver of innovation within the pharmaceutical industry .

recent laws have increased the term of regulatory exclusivities to periods that begin to rival those of patents .

the biologics price competition and innovation act of 2009 created a 12-year regulatory exclusivity , and under the generating antibiotics incentives now ( gain ) act a "qualified infectious disease product" that consists of a new chemical entity enjoys an exclusivity period of 10 years .

legislation considered by previous sessions of congress , the moddern cures act , would have extended this paradigm .

that unenacted legislation would have effectively allowed brand - name pharmaceutical firms , in certain circumstances , to exchange their patents for a 15-year period of regulatory exclusivity .

these proposals have been placed before the 114 th congress in the form of a discussion draft of the 21 st century cures act .

this report reviews the evolving nature of patents and regulatory exclusivities within the pharmaceutical industry .

it begins by introducing the patent system , with emphasis upon its application to the pharmaceutical industry .

this report next discusses the growing number of fda - administered regulatory exclusivities and compares them to the patent right .

it then reviews the moddern cures act and the innovation act , legislation that appears to continue a trend towards distinct treatment of pharmaceuticals as subjects of intellectual property .

this report concludes with a discussion of legislative issues and options with respect to the two intellectual property rights .

u.s. law currently calls for what may be seen as a two - track utility patent system .

one patent system pertains to pharmaceuticals , biologics , medical devices , and other fda - regulated products .

the other applies to all other fields of high - technology endeavor .

the mainstream patent system requires inventors who wish to obtain rights to file a patent application at the uspto .

uspto examiners then review the application to ensure that certain statutory requirements are met .

among these statutory requirements is that the invention must be adequately described in the patent application and not have been obvious to a skilled artisan .

once a patent has issued , the statutory term is twenty years from the date the application was filed .

patent proprietors obtain the right to exclude others from practicing the patented invention in the united states .

pharmaceutical patents work much in the same manner , but with some important modifications introduced by the hatch - waxman act and related legislation .

first , in order to compensate for regulatory approval delays at the fda , the term of pharmaceutical patents may be extended by up to five years .

however , the total period during which the patent proprietor holds both marketing approval and a term - extended patent may not exceed fourteen years .

second , pharmaceutical patents may be enforced against generic competitors before they actually market their products .

in particular , brand - name firms may pursue patent litigation as soon as a generic firm seeks marketing approval from the fda .

in addition , if a pharmaceutical patent holder prevails in litigation , it automatically blocks the generic drug company from marketing its product throughout the life of the patent .

in other sorts of patent cases , the patent proprietor must demonstrate that it has suffered an irreparable injury that cannot otherwise be remedied , that a balance of hardships between the plaintiff and defendant favors the issuance of an injunction , and that the public interest would not be disserved by a permanent injunction .

pharmaceutical patent holders may also automatically block generic competitors from marketing their products for a period of 30 months from when patent litigation begins .

this remedy is similar to a "preliminary injunction," a measure that is usually regarded as "exceptional" and awarded only after strong showings from the proponent of the injunction .

although these rules favor brand - name pharmaceutical firms , the hatch - waxman act balanced them against other provisions that favor generic companies .

due to the " bolar exemption," generic firms may commence work on a competing version of an approved drug at any time during the life of a brand - name firm's patent without facing infringement liability , so long as that work furthers compliance with fda requirements .

further , a generic firm may obtain marketing approval from the fda by filing an abbreviated new drug application , or anda , that relies upon the safety and efficacy data developed by a brand - name firm .

the anda process allows a generic manufacturer to avoid the considerable costs and delays associated with filing a full - fledged new drug application .

this blended architecture sets pharmaceutical patents apart , but it also ensures that broader developments within the patent system impact them .

for example , if the u.s. supreme court issues a decision setting forth the standards of nonobviousness in a patent dispute involving automobile parts , or discusses claim definiteness in a case concerning an exercise machine , the new rules also apply to pharmaceutical patents .

legislative reforms also ordinarily apply to all patented inventions .

the recent shift of the united states from a first - to - invent to a first - inventor - to - file priority system , for example , applies to pharmaceutical patents as well as patents from other industrial sectors .

the term "regulatory exclusivity" generally refers to a period of time during which the fda affords an approved drug protection from competing applications for marketing approval .

congress has established fifteen regulatory exclusivities .

in particular , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) identifies twelve different sorts of regulatory exclusivities: ten - year transitional exclusivity ; seven - year orphan drug exclusivity ; five - year new chemical entity exclusivity ; five - year enantiomer exclusivity ; five - year qualifying infectious ( qi ) disease product exclusivity ; five - year qi act antibiotic exclusivity ; three - year qi act antibiotic exclusivity ; three - year new clinical study exclusivity for an original nda ; three - year new clinical study exclusivity for a supplemental nda ; two - year transitional exclusivity ; six - month pediatric exclusivity ; and 180-day generic exclusivity .

in addition , the public health service act calls for three additional regulatory exclusivities which apply to biologics .

brand - name firms are entitled to a four - year period during which no application to market a follow - on biologic may be filed and a 12-year period in which no follow - on biologic may be approved .

a first interchangeable biologic also obtains a period of regulatory exclusivity , typically a period of one year following its first commercial marketing .

the five - year new chemical entity ( nce ) exclusivity provides an example of how these intellectual property rights work in practice .

a drug is judged to be an nce if the fda has not previously approved its active ingredient .

during the five - year period that commences from the date the fda approved the drug for sale , the agency may not accept an application submitted by a generic company seeking marketing approval .

as a result , the practical effect of nce exclusivity is to restrict a potential generic manufacturer from bringing a product to market for five years plus the length of fda review of the generic application .

the growing prominence of this intellectual property right invites comparison between regulatory exclusivities and patents .

in particular , although regulatory exclusivities have sometimes been described as "pseudo - patents," this characterization is apt only at a level of rough approximation .

this report reviews the salient distinctions between these innovation incentives next .

statutory distinctions between the pharmaceutical industry and other industrial sectors with respect to intellectual property may be increasing , however .

as discussed below , this trend may be observed in proposed legislation with respect to both patents and regulatory exclusivities .

the moddern cures act and related legislation suggest that the pharmaceutical industry may place increasing reliance upon regulatory exclusivities to support innovation .

this trend appears to align with intuitions over the political economy of the patent system .

recent discussion of the america invents act and innovation act demonstrates that the patent system involves a diverse range of stakeholders .

as a result , congress may be more readily able to introduce reforms to drug regulation , including regulatory exclusivities , than to the patent system .

the membership of the united states in the world trade organization ( wto ) also restricts congressional ability to tailor the patent system to specific industries .

the wto agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property ( "trips agreement" ) requires signatories to provide patent protection "without discrimination as to the place of invention , the field of technology and whether products are imported or locally produced. .

the brand - name pharmaceutical industry is said to have promoted this language because it would require wto member states to amend national laws that disallowed the issuance of patents on pharmaceutical products .

but the trips agreement seems to bar discrimination in favor of pharmaceutical patents as well as against them .

on the other hand , the trips agreement places few restrictions upon the award of regulatory exclusivities by wto member .

indeed , unlike patents , they are arguably not even required .

virtually any desired behavior by participants within a regulated industry could be promoted through a specifically tailored regulatory exclusivity .

the development of ethnic medicines , personalized medicines , and treatments for any particular medical condition that excites legislative interest would be worthy candidates for new regulatory exclusivities .

the award of regulatory exclusivities need not even be tied to a particular disease or to the novelty of the active ingredient approved .

regulatory exclusivities could just as easily be awarded for such activities as domestic manufacturing , employing environmentally sound packaging , or donating medications to the poor .

in view of the increasing prominence of regulatory exclusivities , congress may choose to consider several steps that would improve the rationality of this intellectual property system .

the fifteen current regulatory exclusivities arguably offer a diverse assortment of proprietary interests .

some exclusivities block the ability of competitors to submit applications at the fda altogether , while others allow the agency to receive an application but bar its approval .

some protect the data package the brand - name firm has submitted to the fda , but others bar marketing permission whether the data has been referenced or not .

the term of most of the regulatory exclusivities commences on the date the fda awards marketing approval , but one begins on the date of first sale .

most of the regulatory exclusivities run their full term subject to wavier by the rights holder , yet at least one can be forfeited and the term of another truncated .

one so - called "exclusivity" may actually be shared by competitors .

some exclusivities are merely additive , meaning that in the absence of an existing proprietary right , no exclusivity is awarded at all .

and of course the term of regulatory exclusivities varies markedly , from 180 days to 12 years .

as an alternative to these ad hoc distinctions , congress may consider developing categories of scopes of protection that can be easily referenced .

for example , the regulatory exclusivities could be divided into categories based upon the extent of protection , including ( 1 ) denial of approval of any competing product for the same indication , as provided under the orphan drug act , ( 2 ) denial of access to the sponsor's data package , as is the case for the new chemical entity exclusivity , and ( 3 ) protection limited to a specific use , formulation , or route of administration of an approved drug , the scope of rights provided by the new clinical study exclusivity .

congress might also choose to assign specific names to the various regulatory exclusivities .

the relevant food and drug laws do not actually name each right , instead setting industry , the bar , and commentators to that task .

consistency of terminology has not been a hallmark of this collective project .

in particular , some sources employ the terms "marketing exclusivity" and "data protection" synonymously with "regulatory exclusivity" in order to reference the entire constellation of fda - administered proprietary rights .

however , others distinguish between these terms .

under this usage , "data protection" merely prohibits generic firms from referencing the data package submitted by sponsors , while a "marketing exclusivity" provides a more patent - like protection against all competition .

the confusion has reached the point where members of congress have written to the fda in order to advise the agency of the distinction between these two sorts of exclusionary interests .

legislation could assign a specific name to each of the exclusivities .

in addition , incidents such as the ongoing colchicine matter remind us that the award of regulatory exclusivities does not explicitly account for the interests of patients and other enterprises who had believed the drug to be available within the public domain .

congress may wish to ensure that regulatory exclusivities incorporate exceptions that provide for the continued sale of safe and effective medicines that are currently available to the public .

should the fda desire clinical testing on old drugs to confirm their safety and efficacy , publicly funded trials may provide an alternative financing mechanism .

one comparative advantage of regulatory exclusivities is that their term is more certain than that of patents .

courts may invalidate patents during litigation .

patents are also subject to post - grant proceedings at the uspto that may result in their rejection .

in contrast , the grant of a regulatory exclusivity is a more straightforward and virtually uncontestable determination .

this certainty is undermined to a degree by certain regulatory exclusivities that act to prohibit generic firms from filing paperwork at the fda necessary to obtain marketing approval .

for these regulatory exclusivities — notably the five - year new chemical entity exclusivity — the effective term of the exclusivity consists of the sum of ( 1 ) the specified statutory period during which generic firms may not file applications for marketing approval ; and ( 2 ) the period of time the fda requires to determine whether the application complies with regulatory requirement .

as agency workloads vary so too will the effective period of the exclusivity .

congress may wish to consider whether regulatory exclusivities should uniformly bar fda approval of a competing application , rather than submission of the application in the first place .

increasing congressional reliance upon regulatory exclusivities to promote innovation within the pharmaceutical innovation marks an important shift in the intellectual property landscape of the united states .

these specialized rights may be tailored to the particular industry they serve without impact upon the patent regime as a whole , an advantage that in turn may make consensus over reforms to the patent system more achievable .

some commentators have expressed concern , however , that regulatory exclusivities may expand the intellectual property rights given to brand - name firms to the detriment of public health .

obtaining a balance between providing incentives for pharmaceutical innovation , on one hand , and ensuring public access to medications , on the other , remains an important legislative determination .

