this report explains the clean air act requirement that federal departments and agencies demonstrate that their activities — including projects that they fund — "conform" to state plans for achieving air quality standards .

the report explains the statutory requirements , reviews the recent history of their implementation , and examines how conformity requirements might affect areas designated "nonattainment" for a revised ozone air quality standard .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) proposed such a revision in december 2014 , and is under court order to finalize its review by october 1 , 2015 .

transportation conformity , which is required by section 176 ( c ) of the clean air act ( caa ) , was established by congress as a means of insuring that federal actions , including the provision of federal funds for transportation projects , not undermine air quality in areas that have not attained national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) and in areas that were nonattainment , but have been redesignated as maintenance areas under caa section 175a .

by potentially withholding federal funds for non - conforming projects , conformity serves as an important stimulus for state and local governments to assess potential air quality impacts of projects and , if necessary , modify them to assure that they not interfere with progress toward or maintenance of clean air .

under section 176 ( c ) , departments and agencies of the federal government are prohibited from engaging in , supporting or providing financial assistance for , licensing , permitting , or approving any activity that does not conform to a state implementation plan ( sip ) after such a plan has been submitted and approved .

sips are a key element in achieving caa standards .

under the act , depending on the naaqs and the classification of the nonattainment area , states are required to develop sips within 18 months to four years of epa's designation of an area as nonattainment .

in general , in areas that have not attained one or more of the six naaqs established by epa ( currently more than 100 areas with a combined population of 143 million ) the state must develop a sip providing for implementation , maintenance , and enforcement of the naaqs .

in most cases , a sip contains an inventory of existing emissions , projections of future emissions ( generally including a motor vehicle emissions budget ) , and an identification of measures that will be taken to reduce the emissions in order to reach attainment by the statutory deadline .

deadlines vary , depending on the severity of the pollution , but generally a nonattainment area must demonstrate that it is making annual emission reductions sufficient to reach attainment .

 ( for a more extended discussion of the requirements for nonattainment areas , see crs report rl30853 , clean air act: a summary of the act and its major requirements . ) .

once an area has attained the naaqs , it can be redesignated as a "maintenance" area if it revises its sip to demonstrate how it will maintain compliance over a 20-year period .

conformity requirements apply to both nonattainment and maintenance areas .

the act contains seven pages of detail regarding what constitutes a conforming project , and the requirements are further elaborated in the code of federal regulations at 40 c.f.r .

part 93 .

in general , conformity to a sip means that a proposed project or program "will not produce new air quality violations , worsen existing violations , or delay timely attainment of the national ambient air quality standards or delay interim milestones. .

although a wide range of federal funding and programs is subject to conformity , it is transportation planning ( and ultimately highway funding ) that is most commonly affected .

transportation makes a substantial contribution to ambient concentrations of four of the six naaqs pollutants: ozone , carbon monoxide , nitrogen dioxide , and particulate matter .

before a new transportation plan or transportation improvement program ( tip ) can be approved by the federal highway administration or federal transit administration or a new non - exempt project can receive federal funding , a regional emissions analysis must generally demonstrate that the emissions of these pollutants or their precursors projected from the entire transportation system , including the new projects , are consistent with the emissions ceilings established in the sip .

conformity must be demonstrated for the period ending on either the final year of the area's long range transportation plan , or at the election of the metropolitan planning organization ( mpo ) , after consultation with the air pollution control agency , the longest of: the first 10 years of the transportation plan ; the latest year in the sip that contains a motor vehicle emissions budget ; or the year after completion of a regionally significant project .

conducting this analysis can involve federal , state , regional , and local transportation and environmental planners .

ultimately , the federal highway administration and federal transit administration make conformity determinations for the transportation plan , tip , and / or project .

the conformity determinations are based on the most recent estimates of emissions , population , employment , travel , and traffic congestion provided by a variety of agencies .

combining these data , the mpo or state dot must estimate vehicle miles traveled and emissions , generally by using an approved epa mobile source emissions model .

these models are periodically updated to reflect the current mix of vehicles and their emission characteristics .

to reflect the changing nature of both economic and environmental inputs , both the statute and the regulations require that a nonattainment area's long - range transportation plan and its tip demonstrate conformity at least every four years .

the statute and regulations also require that mpos re - determine conformity of transportation plans and programs not later than two years after approval of a new state implementation plan or motor vehicle emissions budget .

in practice , many urban areas obtain a new determination that their tip conforms on an annual basis .

in general , the statute and regulations assume that projects requiring a conformity determination will be located in urban or suburban areas , because most nonattainment areas have an urban or suburban core .

but there are some nonattainment areas that are not urban or suburban .

these areas would only need to demonstrate conformity if they had a non - exempt project that required federal funding or approval — a rare occurrence .

unlike areas with mpos , they are not required to demonstrate conformity every four years .

for the few rural areas that may have a federally funded project , epa has developed separate procedures in 40 c.f.r .

93.109 ( f ) that may deal with conformity .

the section , which addresses "areas with insignificant motor vehicle emissions," states: ... an area is not required to satisfy a regional emissions analysis ... for a given pollutant / precursor and naaqs , if epa finds through the adequacy or approval process that a sip demonstrates that regional motor vehicle emissions are an insignificant contributor to the air quality problem for that pollutant / precursor and naaqs .

the sip would have to demonstrate that it would be unreasonable to expect that such an area would experience enough motor vehicle emissions growth in that pollutant / precursor for a naaqs violation to occur .

such a finding would be based on a number of factors , including the percentage of motor vehicle emissions in the context of the total sip inventory , the current state of air quality as determined by monitoring data for that naaqs , the absence of sip motor vehicle control measures , and historical trends and future projections of the growth of motor vehicle emissions .

most rural areas are unlikely to need to demonstrate conformity: the absence of monitoring data will mean that epa cannot designate a rural area nonattainment in most cases .

a nonattainment designation is based on the availability of three years of quality - controlled data from epa - certified monitors .

approximately 814 u.s. counties ( 26% of the total ) had ozone monitors reporting data to epa in 2013 ; 2330 counties ( 74% ) , generally in less - populated areas , had no ozone monitoring .

as a result , the majority of the nation's counties are termed "unclassifiable" by epa , and are not subject to conformity .

nonattainment areas that have not demonstrated conformity by the applicable deadline fall into one of two groups: those in a grace period , and those in a conformity lapse .

when crs wrote on transportation conformity in 2004 , the report stated that the impact of conformity requirements might be expected to grow in the next few years for several reasons .

first , the growth of emissions from sport utility vehicles and other light trucks and greater than expected increases in vehicle miles traveled appeared to be making it more difficult to demonstrate conformity .

second , recent court decisions ( noted above ) had tightened the conformity rules , making it more difficult to grandfather new projects .

and third , the implementation of more stringent air quality standards for ozone and particulate matter ( pm ) in 2004 would mean that additional areas would be subject to conformity , many for the first time .

thus , the report concluded , numerous metropolitan areas would face a temporary suspension of highway and transit funds unless they imposed sharp reductions in vehicle , industrial , or other emissions .

crs was not alone in this expectation: about one - third of local transportation planners responding to a gao survey expected to have difficulty demonstrating conformity in the future .

instead , in the time period since then , for a variety of reasons , conformity appears to have been a routine matter in most areas .

what happened ? .

a combination of higher fuel cost and the economic recession led to a reduction in vehicle miles traveled and a smaller share of new vehicle sales in the suv and light truck categories .

new emission control requirements for motor vehicles , power plants , and other sources also kicked in , substantially reducing emissions of ozone - forming compounds .

air quality data from before and after the promulgation of epa's 2008 ozone naaqs show the effect of these factors ( see table 3 ) .

in july 2007 , when epa proposed lowering the ozone naaqs from what was effectively 84 parts per billion ( ppb ) to 75 ppb , the agency identified 398 counties with monitoring data exceeding the proposed standard , based on the most recent three years of data ( 2003-2005 ) .

the regulatory impact analysis that accompanied the final standard in march 2008 , using data for 2004-2006 , identified 345 counties exceeding the 75 ppb naaqs .

by may 2012 , when the nonattainment areas were actually designated , the number of counties in nonattainment had fallen to 232 , based mostly on data for 2008-2010 .

as epa stated in 2012 , in the materials accompanying the formal designations: air quality continues to improve across the nation as a result of successful federal , state and local pollution reduction efforts .

epa designated 113 areas as not meeting the 1997 ozone standards set at 84 parts per billion .

less than half that number are not meeting the 2008 standards .

in addition , many of the areas designated today cover a smaller geographic area than the previous standards.... only three areas in two states ( california and wyoming ) have not been nonattainment for previous ozone standards .

wyoming is the only state that has not previously had an area designated nonattainment for ozone .

epa is currently considering a more stringent naaqs for ozone again: a revised naaqs was proposed in december 2014 , and epa is under court order to make a final decision by october 1 , 2015 .

during the public comment period on the proposed rule , concerns regarding the extent of ozone nonattainment and thus the burden of demonstrating conformity have been raised , much as they were when epa proposed previous naaqs revisions .

in the support documents that accompanied the december 2014 proposal , epa identified 358 counties currently exceeding a proposed 70 ppb standard , using data for 2011-2013 — or 558 counties if the naaqs is set at 65 ppb .

because of continuing air quality improvements , the number of counties with monitors exceeding the standard is almost certain to decline before the nonattainment areas are formally designated .

at the earliest , designation of nonattainment areas will occur in late 2017 .

by that time , new ( tier 3 ) standards for motor vehicles and their fuels will have taken effect .

in promulgating tier 3 last year , epa estimated that tier 3 alone would reduce ozone - forming emissions of nox from motor vehicles by 10% in 2018 .

beginning in 2015 , power plants are required to reduce ozone - forming nox emissions , as a result of implementation of the cross - state air pollution rule ( csapr ) .

the oil and gas industry , whose emissions of nox doubled and whose voc emissions increased fivefold between 2005 and 2013 , are now subject to new source performance standards that will reduce their emissions of ozone - forming volatile organic compounds ( vocs ) .

standards for stationary engines used for irrigation pumps and backup power supplies , which went into effect in 2013 , will reduce emissions of both vocs and nox .

these and other emission standards are likely to reduce the number of counties with ambient concentrations above the proposed new ozone standard ( as compared to the list based on 2011-2013 monitoring data that was included in the support documents for epa's proposed rule ) .

in areas that will be formally designated nonattainment , the emission standards cited above will facilitate the demonstration of conformity .

epa's analysis projects the effects of these standards on ozone nonattainment areas .

the agency's modeling shows only nine counties outside of california exceeding a 70 ppb ozone naaqs in 2025 , without any emission control measures additional to those already promulgated .

a 65 ppb standard imposes a somewhat greater burden , but in that case , too , the modeling shows most areas reaching attainment without additional controls .

this would seem to imply that epa expects most areas would not have difficulty demonstrating conformity despite a more stringent ozone standard .

if congress were to consider legislation to amend the transportation conformity requirements , the most likely vehicle for doing so would be legislation reauthorizing the surface transportation program .

funding expires at the end of may 2015 .

as of this writing ( mid - may ) , reauthorization legislation had not begun to move , although there has been much talk of a temporary extension of funding .

it is generally thought that any short - term extension would not include policy provisions .

it is unclear , at this time , when congress may consider broader reauthorization legislation .

the following bills have been introduced that would have indirect effects on conformity determinations for ozone nonattainment areas by modifying the dimensions of nonattainment areas or preventing or delaying epa's proposed strengthening of the ozone naaqs: h.r .

1044 would require each state to revise the boundaries of ozone and carbon monoxide nonattainment areas that include entire metropolitan or consolidated metropolitan statistical areas , to exclude counties that are not in violation of the naaqs , as determined by air quality monitoring ; h.r .

1327 / s. 640 would delay the review and revision of the ozone naaqs for three years and require future reviews at 10-year rather than 5-year intervals ; h.r .

1388 / s. 751 would prohibit a more stringent standard until at least 85% of the counties in nonattainment areas as of july 2 , 2014 , attained the current standard , and would require epa to consider feasibility and cost in setting an ozone naaqs , among other provisions ; and h.r .

2111 would provide that no funds made available under any act may be used by epa to implement any ozone standard promulgated after its date of enactment .

