on march 4 , 2015 , the supreme court heard oral arguments in king v. burwell .

a final decision is expected by the end of june .

the central issue in the case is whether the affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) gave authority to the u.s. department of the treasury to make premium tax credits available to eligible individuals in every state ( including the district of columbia ) or just the states that chose to establish their own health insurance exchanges ( state - based exchanges , or sbes ) .

while the direction and scope of the court decision is not known , if the court decides that tax credits may be made available only in sbes , such a decision may lead to the loss of tax credits in a majority of states where the federal government established the exchanges ( federally facilitated exchanges , or ffes ) .

given that several million individuals currently receive tax credits through ffes , the court decision could have major implications for individual consumers , exchanges , insurers , and other stakeholders .

loss of premium tax credits would directly affect the affordability of health insurance for the consumers who no longer have the credits .

some individuals may choose to drop coverage as a consequence or seek more affordable insurance , if available .

others may be motivated to continue to purchase coverage , even without a subsidy , either because the credit amounts they received were minimal or they have serious health care needs .

insurers may decide to change plan offerings or discontinue offering individual health insurance policies in a given state in anticipation of a reduction in overall enrollment .

consumers and insurers that continue to participate in exchanges and the market outside of exchanges may see premiums increase in response to the changes to the insurance risk pool .

these consumer and insurer actions may , in turn , motivate congress , the administration , and / or states to address perceived adverse effects of the court decision and address other related issues , such as the tax credit program's interaction with the aca's other coverage provisions .

given that a court decision favoring the plantiffs would directly affect the health insurance options of millions of consumers , which , in turn , may motivate insurers , legislators , and policymakers to act , this report provides the time frame in which decisions concerning exchanges and health insurance more broadly may occur , given current regulations and guidance .

to the extent that consumers and others ( referred to as stakeholders in this report ) may be motivated to respond to the court decision ( and respond to other stakeholder actions ) , this report provides a timeline that identifies selected 2015 dates related to exchange establishment and operation , legislative calendars , and regulation of the individual health insurance market , among other issues .

the report concludes with a table that augments the 2015 timeline by identifying relevant sources of information , such as statutory or regulatory citations related to exchanges .

while this information may be useful to set parameters around certain stakeholder actions , this report is not meant as a guide to decisionmaking , nor does it attempt to identify all possible stakeholder responses to the upcoming court decision .

while crs does not predict a particular direction of the court decision , certain underlying assumptions were made to simplify identification of important dates .

those assumptions include no retroactive effect of the decision and no delay for when the decision would go into effect .

as indicated above , the direction and scope of the court decision is not known .

implications of the decision beyond issues related to private health insurance are outside the scope of this report .

moreover , the court decision may maintain the status quo .

nonetheless , legislators and policymakers may be interested in addressing other issues related to the credits or the aca more broadly .

the dates and potential stakeholder actions included in this report may still apply under such a scenario .

the potential for the court decision to affect a number of different stakeholders reflects the current structure of the private market for health insurance and the interplay among key participants in the overall market .

at the most basic level , the health insurance "market" works like any other market: with sellers and buyers of products .

in this case , insurers sell health insurance plans for purchase by consumers and employers .

the market for health insurance , like other forms of insurance , is regulated primarily at the state level .

however , the federal government has expanded its role in the regulation of this industry , most recently with the enactment and continuing implementation of the aca .

the aca itself contains multiple provisions that impose requirements on most of these stakeholders , create new stakeholders ( eg , exchanges ) , and link requirements across stakeholders .

the stakeholders are identified below , and their role in or potential to affect the private health insurance market is briefly described .

to the extent any of the stakeholders respond to the court's decision , their motivation and ability to do so is subject to a variety of parameters , including requirements and flexibilities under current law and the actions taken by other stakeholders .

for example , if a state wanted to change its exchange type ( i.e. , from an sbe to an ffe or vice versa ) , it must follow a set process .

the process includes submitting required documents to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) by certain dates and , in some cases , enacting a state law indicating that the activity is allowed by the state .

congress may be motivated to respond to the court's decision through legislation .

consumers are expected to comply with the terms of their health insurance coverage , such as paying premiums .

changes to the conditions under which the consumer obtains health insurance may result in changes in how and whether consumers obtain coverage .

employers that are considered large are expected to comply with the aca's employer mandate .

the penalty associated with noncompliance is triggered only if an employee receives a premium tax credit .

hhs , as the entity primarily responsible for issuing exchange - related regulations and guidance , defines the parameters under which all exchanges operate .

for example , hhs is responsible for determining the process by which a state can elect to operate a state - based exchange .

additionally , hhs administers the federally facilitated exchanges .

health i nsurance e xchanges ( also referred to as marketplaces ) , whether state - based or federally facilitated , are expected to operate within the parameters established under the aca and its implementing regulations , such as adhering to the annual and special open enrollment periods set in regulations .

however , the aca and its implementing regulations give exchanges some discretion over certain operational decisions , particularly with respect to how exchanges interact with insurers .

private h ealth i nsurers offering coverage through exchanges must ensure that the coverage they offer complies with state and federal regulations and all exchange - related requirements , whether set by hhs or the exchange .

states , in general , have the authority to regulate their private health insurance markets .

depending on the state , the authority may be more or less under the control of the state legislature .

with respect to exchanges , a state that elects to operate an exchange must do so within established exchange parameters .

these parameters are included in statute and described in regulations and guidance issued by hhs .

the supreme court is expected to issue a decision in king v. burwell by the end of its term in june 2015 .

figure 1 and table 1 show selected activities currently required to be carried out by one or more of the stakeholders and the time frame in which the activities are expected to occur .

these activities are not dependent on the court decision ; instead , they represent the current status of regulations , guidance , and other time - sensitive rules that stakeholders may consider if and when they decide to respond to the decision .

