advances in genomics technology and information technology infrastructure , together with policies regarding the sharing of research data , support expanded genomic research efforts but also raise new issues with respect to privacy , and specifically the effort to balance "the potential of scientific progress with privacy and respect for persons. .

the development of new genomic sequencing technologies has allowed for the generation of big data , and recent changes in information technology infrastructure — including , for example , cloud data storage — have facilitated big data storage and analytics .

these developments are expected to support significant changes in health research and , eventually , in health care delivery .

specifically , researchers hope to leverage big data by combining genetic , environmental , clinical , behavioral , and other data to facilitate precision medicine .

precision medicine is the idea of providing health care to individuals based on specific patient and disease characteristics , and is a priority of the national institutes of health ( nih ) .

genetic and genomic research have generated large amounts of genetic data .

if these "large - scale genomic data" are generated as a part of research funded by the national institutes of health ( nih ) , then they are subject to specific data sharing policies and are often held in publicly available databases .

"large - scale genomic data," as defined for the purposes of nih's data sharing policy , include genome - wide association studies ( gwas ) , as well as genome sequence , gene expression , and other data .

among other things , advances in sequencing technology have enabled this research , and have made available large amounts of data at a rate that has generally outpaced the ability to both store and analyze that data ( see "what is dna sequencing ? .

text box , above ) .

sequencing output has been increasing at approximately a fivefold rate per year in recent years , and the sequence data from a single individual's genome uses about 100 gigabytes of storage space .

as a result , "[g]enomic databases increasingly surpass the storage abilities of individual researchers — and even of large institutions — and consequently are stored increasingly frequently in the 'cloud.' .

 , for example , the national cancer institute ( nci ) at nih has launched and funded its cancer genomics cloud pilots , an initiative to develop up to three public cancer genomics cloud pilots , where large data repositories will be colocated with computing resources .

storage of sequence data in "clouds" facilitates faster , more widespread , and increased access to this information .

nih's genomic data sharing ( gds ) policy addresses both the submission of genomic data by nih - funded researchers to an nih data repository and the subsequent access and use of that data by other investigators .

generally , nih - funded researchers conducting human genomic research must adhere to the common rule and have their studies approved by an institutional review board ( irb ) .

for research that falls under the scope of the gds policy , the irb must review the informed consent materials to ensure that they explain to research participants the risks and benefits of submitting genomic data to nih so that it can be shared with other investigators for secondary research use .

nih has developed a set of points for irbs to consider when reviewing such genomic research proposals .

investigators seeking to download controlled - access data from an nih data repository must sign a data use certification agreement and abide by the nih genomic data user code of conduct .

the data use certification includes a series of data privacy and security requirements to which an investigator and his or her institution must agree .

this section of the report discusses the privacy and security safeguards incorporated in the gds policy .

first , it provides some background on the common rule as well as the hipaa privacy and security rules , with which the common rule intersects .

both sets of standards have been criticized for their treatment of research data .

some privacy advocates complain that neither the common rule nor hipaa adequately protects patient privacy , while researchers claim that hipaa impedes their access to data and places limitations on its secondary use .

there are also concerns about inconsistencies between the two sets of standards .

some of these concerns were addressed by hhs in a 2013 final rule that made numerous other amendments to the privacy rule pursuant to the health information technology for economic and clinical health ( hitech ) act .

in 1966 , congress enacted the freedom of information act ( foia ) , which provides the public presumed access to executive branch information .

foia established , for any person — corporate or individual , citizen or otherwise — presumptive access to existing , unpublished agency records on any topic .

in a "points to consider" memorandum regarding data sharing concerns , the nih stated that "datasets submitted to nih" will be "u.s. government records that are subject to" foia .

foia , however , specifies nine categories of information that may be exempted from the rule of disclosure , including trade secrets and information related to national security .

disputes between requesters and agencies over the accessibility of requested records may be settled in federal court or may be mediated in the office of government information services ( ogis ) .

the sharing of genetic and genomic data among private individuals , researchers , and the federal government has , at times , prompted concerns that the information , if collected or retained by a federal executive branch agency , could be subject to public release pursuant to foia .

as noted above , although the information submitted to nih is considered de - identified , researchers have demonstrated an ability to identify individual genomic or genetic material despite attempts to anonymize the data .

public release of the de - identified data , therefore , may generate unease about personal privacy protection as well as lead to calls for legislation further clarifying public access to such information .

among foia's nine exemptions that permit agencies to withhold applicable records , two categories are more likely to affect the disclosure of genetic or genomic material: exemption 3: data specifically exempted from disclosure by a statute other than foia if that statute meets criteria laid out in foia ; and exemption 6: personnel , medical , or similar files , the disclosure of which would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy .

an example exemption 3 statute , in the context of potentially withholding genetic material , might include 42 u.s.c .

§242m ( d ) ( a provision of the public health service act , as amended ) , which protects from public release certain information that would allow an individual to be identified if that information was collected for epidemiological or statistical activities .

these types of exemption 3 statutes are often referred to as b ( 3 ) exemptions because they are authorized in 5 u.s.c .

§552 ( b ) ( 3 ) .

a second potentially applicable b ( 3 ) exemption is provided in 15 u.s.c .

§3710a ( c ) ( 7 ) ( a ) ( a provision of the national defense authorization act for fiscal years 1990 and 1991 ) , which protects from public release "trade secrets or commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential ... obtained in the conduct of research ..." also , exemption 3 would prohibit the disclosure of any information that is covered by future statutes passed by congress .

as a result , legislation enacted at any time that would specifically prohibit the release of genetic and genomic data may qualify as a b ( 3 ) exemption and could be used to withhold qualifying genetic material .

exemption 6 of foia provides for the withholding of information that relates to personally identifiable information in "personnel and medical files , and similar files. .

the intention of this exemption is to allow agencies to withhold records that contain personally identifiable information , provided that the individual's interest in privacy outweighs the public interest in the record's release .

according to the nih "points to consider" memorandum , nih "believes that the release of unredacted gwas datasets ... would constitute an unreasonable invasion of personal privacy under foia exemption 6. .

moreover , exemption 6 has been read historically as applying to information that can be linked to a particular individual .

as discussed above , the ability to identify an individual using genetic research material that was previously not thought to be identifiable has been demonstrated .

where this data could be traced to specific individuals , it is possible that the potential release of the information would trigger a privacy interest of a degree that might warrant withholding under exemption 6 .

the federal government , however , has maintained that the data collected are currently not identifiable , possibly removing any ability for an agency to apply an exemption that relies on the personal identification of an individual .

moreover , a determination that the data allows for an individual's identification would not necessarily permit the withholding of information ; pursuant to foia , the privacy interests of the individuals who may be affected by the information's release would still need to be weighed against the public's interest in the information's disclosure .

in addition to these two exemptions , the specific facts surrounding each information request could trigger a number of other foia exemptions .

for instance , genetic and genomic records could potentially relate to ongoing law enforcement activities ( exemption 7 ) , inter - agency and intra - agency memorandums ( exemption 5 ) , or confidential commercial and financial information ( exemption 4 ) .

in terms of the reidentification of research subjects , the genetic information nondiscrimination act of 2008 ( gina , p.l .

110-233 ) would protect against discrimination based on information discovered about a research subject subsequent to his or her reidentification ( eg , genetic test results or family history ) .

as described previously , one way to consider the security of data from a policy perspective is to consider it in terms of both controls on access to , and designation of appropriate uses of , the data .

with respect to genetic information , gina establishes prohibitions that affect primarily the appropriate use of genetic information , but that also address — to a lesser extent — access to genetic information .

specifically , gina prohibits discrimination based on genetic information by both health insurers and employers .

the reach of gina's prohibitions is in part governed by its definition of the term "genetic information" ( see " how does gina define genetic information ? .

text box , above ) .

genomic sequence data would not necessarily be protected under gina ; instead , it would be the information uncovered secondary to analysis of the sequence data ( i.e. , a specific genetic test result ) that would be protected under this statute .

gina is divided into two main parts: title i , which prohibits discrimination based on genetic information by health insurers , and title ii , which prohibits discrimination in employment based on genetic information .

title i of gina amends the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) , the public health service act ( phsa ) , and the internal revenue code ( irc ) , through the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) , as well as the social security act ( ssa ) , to prohibit group health plans and health insurance issuers from engaging in genetic discrimination .

broadly , gina prohibits group health plans and health insurance issuers from engaging in three practices: ( 1 ) using genetic information about an individual to adjust a group plan's premiums , or , in the case of individual plans , to deny coverage , adjust premiums , or impose a preexisting condition exclusion ; ( 2 ) requesting , requiring , or purchasing genetic information for underwriting purposes or prior to enrollment ; and ( 3 ) requiring or requesting genetic testing .

while the first prohibition addresses the use of the information , the second addresses both access to and use of the information , and the last addresses access to the information .

the health reform law ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) contains provisions that may overlap to some extent with those in title i of gina .

in evaluating the interaction of these two statutes , one may argue that it is possible to read these statutes together as establishing non - conflicting limitations on insurance premiums .

although gina prohibits using genetic information to determine health coverage and insurance premiums for individuals or groups , the aca specifically defines the factors on which insurers may predicate issuance of coverage or determination of premiums .

the relevant provisions in gina and the aca are not identical in scope ; however , the provisions of the aca may obviate some of the requirements of gina .

importantly , in terms of access to genetic information , there does not seem to be a comparable provision in the aca to gina's prohibition on group health plans and health insurers from requiring an individual or family member to undergo a genetic test .

title ii of gina includes provisions that address both access to and appropriate use of genetic information by employers .

specifically , title ii of gina prohibits discrimination in employment because of genetic information and , with certain exceptions , prohibits an employer from requesting , requiring , or purchasing genetic information .

the law prohibits the use of genetic information in employment decisions — including hiring , firing , job assignments , and promotions — by employers , unions , employment agencies , and labor - management training programs .

title ii outlines exceptions whereby an employer may lawfully acquire genetic information ( eg , through inadvertent requests , wellness programs , or dna analysis for law enforcement purposes , among others ) .

however , even if genetic information is acquired through these exceptions , the employer may not use it to discriminate .

if genetic information , as defined by gina , becomes more easily accessible because of the ability to link genomic sequence data with specific individuals , then policymakers may consider expanding gina's applicability to broaden its protections regarding the use of genetic information .

in other words , if access to the data is becoming more difficult to control due to advances in technology or the favoring of countervailing policy goals ( eg , promoting advances in research ) , then an alternative policy approach is to strengthen requirements governing how the data are able to be used lawfully .

this may be done by adjusting the requirements themselves to make them stricter , by broadening the applicability of the existing requirements to additional settings or arrangements , or by a combination of both of these approaches .

gina , for example , does not apply to life , disability , or long - term care insurance , nor does it apply to tricare , the indian health system ( ihs ) , the veterans health administration , or the federal employees health benefits program ( fehb ) .

