the obama administration released its fy2016 budget request on february 2 , 2015 .

it requested $93.7 billion for the department of transportation ( dot ) , $22 billion ( 31% ) more than dot received in fy2015 .

this request reflected the administration's proposal for reauthorizing the federal surface transportation program and restructuring accounts and funding sources in several dot sub - agencies .

around 75% of dot's funding is mandatory budgetary authority , and the administration's request maintained this split , with $24 billion of the request coming from discretionary budgetary authority — $6 billion ( 33% ) more than provided in fy2015 .

dot's discretionary budget allocation is shared with the department of housing and urban development , as the allocation is given to the transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies ( thud ) appropriations bill .

the discretionary funding allocation given to the house thud subcommittee for fy2016 was $55.27 billion , $1.5 billion ( 3% ) higher than the enacted fy2015 funding ; most of that increase would cover a decline in offsetting receipts to hud accounts in fy2016 .

with other changes in offsets recommended by the house appropriations committee , the net increase in discretionary funding is $25 million , and the committee recommended a $25 million reduction in mandatory funding , so there is no net change in actual funding in the committee - recommended house thud bill from fy2015 .

the senate thud allocation was $55.646 billion , $376 million more than the house level .

there is little prospect for significantly increasing dot's overall funding .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) was signed into law on november 2 , 2015 , increasing the overall fy2016 discretionary budget authority for nondefense accounts by $25 billion .

that increase could be divided among 12 appropriations bills ; the amount of the increase that will be made available for transportation , if any , is not yet known .

and while the house and senate are currently negotiating the differences between their versions of surface transportation authorization legislation ( h.r .

22 ) , the fy2016 funding levels provided in both the house and senate bills are not significantly higher than the fy2015 levels .

dot's funding arrangements are unusual compared to those of most other federal agencies .

most of dot's funding comes from trust funds rather than the general fund of the treasury and most of dot's funding is mandatory rather than discretionary .

also , most of dot's funding is passed through to state and local governments through formula grants .

dot's nonemergency annual funding peaked in fy2010 at $82.7 billion ( in constant 2015 dollars ) and has been declining since ( see figure 1 ) .

starting in fy2013 , it has received less funding each year , in real terms , than it received in fy2006 .

on november 10 , 2015 , the house and senate went to conference to resolve their differences on h.r .

22 , legislation to reauthorize surface transportation programs , which would set funding levels for surface transportation programs for fy2016 and subsequent years .

congress passed a revised budget agreement ( p.l .

114-74 ) on october 30 , 2015 , which increased the amount of budget authority available for nondefense accounts for fy2016 by $24.6 billion .

depending on how this additional funding is divided among nondefense accounts , this may allow appropriators to increase funding for transportation programs .

table 4 presents a selected account - by - account summary of fy2016 appropriations for dot , compared to fy2015 .

roughly three - fourths of dot's budget is mandatory budget authority ( contract authority ) derived from the highway trust fund .

the authorizations for that funding were scheduled to expire at the end of fy2014 , but have been extended .

the highway trust fund was projected to fall below the level needed to make timely payments to grantees during fy2015 , but congress transferred $8 billion to the trust fund by means of spending offsets in july 2015 ( p.l .

114-41 ) in order to maintain the fund's solvency .

overall , the fy2016 budget request totals $93.7 billion in new budget resources for dot .

the requested funding is $22 billion more than that enacted for fy2015 .

the administration request reflected its surface transportation reauthorization proposal , which called for significant increases in funding for highways , transit , and intercity rail .

transportation authorization is outside the jurisdiction of the appropriations committees , but since most of dot's appropriations come from the highway trust fund , the status of the fund is a key concern .

virtually all federal highway funding , and most federal transit funding , comes from the highway trust fund , whose revenues come largely from the federal motor fuels excise tax ( "gas tax" ) .

for several years , expenditures from the fund have exceeded revenues ; for example , in fy2015 , revenues are projected to be approximately $39 billion , while authorized outlays are projected to be approximately $52 billion .

congress transferred more than $62 billion , mostly from the general fund of the treasury , to the highway trust fund during the period fy2008-fy2015 to keep the trust fund solvent .

one reason for the shortfall in the fund is that the federal gas tax has not been raised since 1993 .

the tax is a fixed amount assessed per gallon of fuel sold , not a percentage of the cost of the fuel sold: whether a gallon of gas costs $1 or $4 , the highway trust fund receives 18.3 cents for each gallon of gasoline and 24.3 cents for each gallon of diesel .

meanwhile , the value of the gas tax has been diminished by inflation ( which has reduced the purchasing power of the revenue raised by the tax ) and increasing automobile fuel efficiency ( which reduces growth in gas sales as more efficient vehicles are able to travel farther on a gallon of fuel ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has forecast that gasoline consumption will be relatively flat through 2024 , as continued increases in the fuel efficiency of the u.s. passenger fleet are projected to offset increases in the number of miles driven .

consequently , cbo expects highway trust fund revenues of $37 billion to $38 billion annually from fy2014 to fy2024 , well short of the current $53 billion annual level of authorized expenditures from the fund .

the transportation investments generating economic recovery ( tiger ) grant program originated in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) , where it was referred to as "national infrastructure investment" ( as it has been in subsequent appropriations acts ) .

it is a discretionary grant program intended to address two criticisms of the current structure of federal transportation funding: that virtually all of the funding is distributed to state and local governments , which select projects based on their individual priorities , making it difficult to fund projects that have national or regional impacts but whose costs fall largely on one or two states ; and that federal transportation funding is divided according to mode of transportation , making it difficult for major projects in different modes to compete on the basis of comparative benefit .

the tiger program provides grants to projects of national , regional , or metropolitan area significance in various modes on a competitive basis , with recipients selected by u.s .

dot .

although the program is , by description , intended to fund projects of national , regional , and metropolitan area significance , in practice its funding has gone more toward projects of regional and metropolitan area significance .

in large part this is a function of congressional intent , as congress has directed that the funds be distributed equitably across geographic areas , between rural and urban areas , and among transportation modes , and has set relatively low maximum ( $15 million ) and minimum ( $1 million for rural projects ) grant limits .

congress has continued to support the tiger program through annual dot appropriations .

there have been seven rounds of tiger grants ( from arra funding and from fy2010-fy2015 annual appropriations ) .

after the restructuring of dot programs in the 2012 surface transportation reauthorization , the tiger program is virtually the only remaining discretionary grant program for surface transportation other than the federal transit administration's capital investment grant program ( popularly referred to as new starts ) , discussed below .

it is heavily oversubscribed ; for example , dot announced that it received a total of $10.1 billion in applications for the $500 million available for fy2015 grants .

the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) has reported that , while dot has selection criteria for the tiger grant program , it has sometimes awarded grants to lower - ranked projects while bypassing higher - ranked projects without explaining why it did so , raising questions about the integrity of the selection process .

dot has responded that its project rankings are based on transportation - related criteria ( eg , safety , economic competitiveness ) , but that it must sometimes select lower - ranking projects over higher - ranking ones to comply with other selection criteria established by congress , such as geographic balance and a balance between rural and urban awards .

there has also been criticism that tiger grants go disproportionately to urban areas compared to rural areas .

however , for several years congress has directed that at least 20% of tiger funding should go to projects in rural areas .

according to the 2010 census , 19% of the u.s. population lives in rural areas .

as table 5 illustrates , the tiger grant appropriation process has followed a pattern for several years: the administration requests as much as or more than congress has previously provided ; the house zeroes out the program or proposes a large cut ; the senate proposes an amount similar to the previously enacted figure ; and the final enacted amount is similar to the previously enacted amount .

in addition to the reduced funding , the house - passed bill would reduce the federal matching share for tiger grants from 80% to 50% ( though it could go higher for projects in rural areas ) .

the senate - reported bill keeps the matching share at 80% ( or more , in the case of rural areas ) , and directs that at least 30% of funding go to projects in rural areas .

the eas program seeks to preserve commercial air service to small communities by subsidizing service that would otherwise be unprofitable .

the cost of the program in real terms has doubled since fy2008 , in part because route reductions by airlines resulted in new communities being added to the program .

congress made changes to the program in 2012 , including allowing no new entrants , capping the per - passenger subsidy for a community at $1,000 , limiting communities less than 210 miles from a hub airport to a maximum average subsidy per passenger of $200 , and allowing smaller , less expensive planes to be used for communities with few daily passengers .

supporters of the eas program contend that preserving airline service to small communities was a commitment congress made when it deregulated airline service in 1978 , anticipating that airlines would reduce or eliminate service to many communities that were too small to make such service economically viable .

supporters also contend that subsidizing air service to smaller communities promotes economic development in rural areas .

critics of the program note that the subsidy cost per passenger is relatively high , that many of the airports in the program have very few passengers , and that some of the airports receiving eas subsidies are little more than an hour's drive from major airports .

in addition to the annual discretionary appropriation for the program , there is a mandatory annual authorization , $108.4 million in fy2016 , financed by overflight fees collected from commercial airlines by faa .

these overflight fees apply to international flights that fly over , but do not land in , the united states .

the fees are to be reasonably related to the costs of providing air traffic services to such flights .

as table 7 shows , the administration requested $175 million for the eas program in fy2016 , in addition to $108 million in mandatory funding for a total of $283 million .

the house bill would provide $155 million in discretionary funding and $263 million overall , the same amounts as in fy2015 .

the senate - reported bill would provide a total of $283 million , the requested amount .

on may 12 , 2015 , an amtrak passenger train derailed in philadelphia ; 8 passengers died and over 200 were injured .

the incident is still being investigated , but preliminary findings indicate that the derailment resulted from the train traveling at nearly twice the speed prescribed for that section of track .

national transportation safety board officials have stated that the incident could have been prevented if positive train control technology had been operating on that section of track .

in 2008 , congress directed railroads to install positive train control ( ptc ) on certain segments of the national rail network ( including the segment where this incident occurred ) by the end of 2015 .

amtrak had installed the necessary equipment but had not yet put it into operation .

it is unclear whether greater federal funding for amtrak would have led positive train control to be implemented earlier on this section of track .

freight railroads have reportedly spent billions of dollars thus far to meet this requirement , but most of the track required to have ptc installed will not be in compliance by the end of 2015 ; congress extended the deadline to the end of 2018 — with an option for individual railroads to extend to 2020 with federal railroad administration ( fra ) approval — in october 2015 .

congress provided $50 million in fy2010 for grants to railroads to help cover the expenses of installing ptc .

the administration's fy2016 budget request included $875 million for the cost of positive train control implementation on commuter railroad routes ; neither the house - passed nor senate - reported bill included funding specifically for this purpose , though the senate - reported bill recommends $50 million for rail safety grant programs .

h.rept .

114-129 directs the administrator of fra to require all states to prepare railroad - highway grade crossing safety action plans identifying specific solutions to improve safety at high - risk crossings .

currently only the 10 states that had the highest number of grade crossing collisions during the period 2006-2008 are required to have such plans .

s.rept .

114-75 notes that the committee's recommendations included an increase of $1.9 million to improve passenger rail safety ( by hiring staff to develop and implement passenger rail risk reduction system safety programs , and additional inspectors ) and $10 million for grants to states for highway - rail grade crossing safety , plus an additional $1 million to reduce grade crossing incidents and improve pedestrian safety .

reflecting the administration's surface transportation reauthorization proposal , the budget proposed a total of $4.8 billion for a new national high performance rail system program within fra , consisting of two grant programs: $2.45 billion for a current passenger rail service grant program ( which would primarily fund maintenance and improvement of existing intercity passenger rail service , i.e. , amtrak ) and $2.325 billion for a rail service improvement grant program ( which would fund new intercity passenger rail projects as well as some improvements to freight rail ) .

the funding would come from a new transportation trust fund rather than discretionary funding .

the administration made a similar proposal in fy2014 and fy2015 .

funding provided in h.r .

2577 follows the existing fra structure , taking the form of grants to amtrak .

the senate - reported bill does recommend rescinding $17 million in unobligated balances and making that funding available for improvements to the northeast corridor .

the 111 th congress ( 2009-2010 ) provided $10.5 billion for dot's high - speed and intercity passenger rail grant program , beginning with $8 billion in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 .

since then , congress has provided no additional funding and in fy2011 rescinded $400 million of the unobligated portion of the $10.5 billion already appropriated .

this program has provided funding mainly to develop intercity passenger rail service with top speeds of 90 or 110 miles per hour .

one state , california , is actively pursuing development of a high - speed rail line that would provide dedicated tracks for passenger trains traveling at speeds greater than 150 miles per hour .

california has received $3.6 billion in federal funding for this project , but the total cost of constructing the line is estimated at more than $70 billion , and the prospects for financing the full project are uncertain .

the administration proposal for a new current passenger rail service account would almost double the amount congress provided amtrak in fy2015 .

amtrak submits a grant request to congress each year , separate from the administration's budget request .

amtrak requested $2.0 billion for fy2016 , $450 million less than the administration's request for amtrak .

amtrak's request used different categories than the administration budget , making a comparison difficult .

the house - passed bill would provide $1.148 billion for amtrak for fy2016 , 17% below the fy2015 amount .

the senate - reported bill recommended $1.39 billion for amtrak , the same amount as in fy2015 .

table 8 shows the amount of funding provided for amtrak grants in fy2015 and the amounts requested and proposed for fy2016 .

amtrak's operating grant request totals $732 million , reflecting projected operating losses of its state - supported routes and long - distance routes .

it projects a $367-million operating profit on the northeast corridor ( nec ) , but plans to apply that toward capital investment on the corridor , the capital needs of which are far greater than can be covered by its operating profits .

because amtrak's budget request applies that operating revenue to its capital needs and also requests $556 million for matching grants to states for contributions to nec infrastructure per priia section 212 , which would offset a portion of amtrak's capital needs , comparing amtrak's budget request to the funding proposed in the house bill can be confusing ; a more direct comparison is shown in table 9 .

the majority of fta's almost $11-billion funding is funneled to state and local transit agencies through several formula programs .

the largest transit discretionary grant program is the capital investment grants program ( commonly referred to as the new starts and small starts program ) .

it funds new fixed - guideway transit lines and extensions to existing lines .

before 2012 , the program had two components , new starts and small starts , based on project cost .

the new starts component funds capital projects with total costs over $250 million that are seeking more than $75 million in federal funding , and the small starts component funds capital projects with total costs under $250 million that are seeking less than $75 million in federal funding .

in the transit program reauthorization enacted in 2012 , congress added a third component , core capacity .

this component funds expansions to existing fixed - guideway systems that are at or near capacity .

the capital investment grants program provides funding to large projects over a period of years .

much of the funding for this program each year is committed to existing new starts projects with multi - year grant funding agreements .

fta reports that its existing grant agreements will require $1.25 billion in new starts funding in fy2016 .

for fy2016 , the administration requested $3.25 billion for the program , $1.13 billion ( 53% ) more than the $2.12 billion provided in fy2015 .

the house - passed bill would provide $1.92 billion , roughly $200 million ( 9% ) less than the fy2015 level .

according to the committee , that amount would fully fund all projects with existing grant agreements and would provide $250 million for projects expected to sign a full funding grant agreement during fy2016 , plus $353 million for nine small starts projects included in the administration request .

the senate - reported bill recommends $1.585 billion , 25% ( $535 million ) below the fy2015 level .

the federal share for new starts projects , by statute , can be up to 80% .

since fy2002 , dot appropriations have included a provision directing fta not to sign any full funding grant agreements that provide a federal share of more than 60% .

the house - passed bill lowers the maximum federal share to 50% .

the senate - reported bill does not lower the share , but directs fta to give priority to projects requesting a lower federal share .

critics of lowering the federal share provided for new starts projects note that the federal share for highway projects is typically 80% and in some cases is higher .

they contend that , by providing a lower share of federal funding ( and thus requiring a higher share of local funding ) , this provision makes highway projects relatively more attractive for communities considering how to address transportation problems .

advocates of this provision note that the demand for new starts funding greatly exceeds the amount available , so requiring a higher local match allows fta to support more projects with the available funding .

they also assert that requiring a higher local match likely encourages communities to estimate the costs and benefits of proposed transit projects more carefully , reducing the risk of subsequent cost overruns .

the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 authorized $1.5 billion over 10 years in grants to the washington metropolitan area transit authority ( wmata ) for preventive maintenance and capital grants , to be matched by funding from wmata's three jurisdictions: the district of columbia and the states of maryland and virginia .

under this agreement , congress has provided $150 million in each of the past six years to wmata .

wmata faces a number of difficulties .

it is dealing with a backlog of maintenance needs due to inadequate maintenance investment years ago ; it has experienced several fatal incidents , most recently in january of this year , that have raised questions about the safety culture of the agency ; and an investigation that found numerous instances of mismanagement of federal funding has led fta to restrict wmata's use of federal funds .

an fta audit of wmata's safety practices in 2015 produced many recommendations for change , and in october 2015 fta assumed oversight of wmata's safety compliance practices from the tri - state oversight commission , the agency created by the governments of the district of columbia , maryland , and virginia to oversee wmata safety performance .

richard sarles , wmata's general manager since january 2011 , retired in january 2015 ( he had announced his retirement date in september 2014 ) , and a new manager was not appointed until november 2015 after other candidates chosen by the board backed out .

for fy2016 , the house - passed h.r .

2577 would provide $100 million , $50 million less than in previous years .

the house committee on appropriations had initially recommended $75 million , and in the committee report accompanying h.r .

2577 , the committee noted that if it sees evidence that wmata is addressing its safety and financial issues , the committee would reevaluate its funding recommendation .

during committee markup , an amendment was approved adding $25 million to the wmata funding .

the senate committee on appropriations recommended $150 million , the same amount as in previous years .

both the house - passed and senate - reported bills would increase the length of trucks permitted on the interstate system and national network by amending 49 u.s.c .

section 31111 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) to increase the maximum length of twin trailers from 28 feet to 33 feet .

dot has published technical reports as part of a comprehensive truck size and weight limits study mandated by congress .

in the reports the department found that this particular configuration — a tractor unit towing twin 33-foot trailers — caused increased damage to road surface and increased costs for bridge maintenance , while reducing enforcement costs and truck vehicle miles traveled ( since fewer trucks would be needed for the same amount of cargo ) .

its safety impacts could not be estimated because such configurations are not currently in use ( other than in limited use on one route in one state ) .

some trucking industry interests support the increased length on the grounds of improved productivity ; it would enable a driver to haul a larger load .

both the house - passed and the senate - reported bills continue a provision from the fy2015 thud act that suspends portions of commercial driver hours - of - service rules pending a study of their costs and benefits .

these rules were imposed by the federal motor carrier safety administration in june 2013 .

drivers are required to take at least 34 hours off duty , covering two consecutive 1 a.m. - 5 a.m. periods , after working for 60 hours in a seven - day period ( or 70 hours in an eight - day period ) .

and drivers are only allowed to take this 34-hour "restart" once in a 168-hour ( seven - day ) span .

if drivers work for less than 60 hours in a week , they do not have to take the 34-hour restart ; for example , if a driver worked eight hours every day , for a total of 56 hours in a seven - day period , that driver could continue to work every day without taking a 34-hour rest period .

the purpose of the 2013 change in the hours - of - service rules was to promote highway safety by reducing the risk of driver fatigue .

under the previous rules , drivers had to take a 34-hour restart period after working for 60 hours in a seven - day period ( or 70 hours in an eight - day period ) .

but drivers could start this rest period at any time , and could take more than one such rest period per week .

thus a driver was able to work the maximum permitted time per day ( 14 hours ) and take the 34-hour restart after five days , and then , after a rest period of as little as one night and two daytime periods , work 14 hours a day for another five consecutive days .

fmcsa asserted that this schedule allowed a driver to work up to 82 hours over a seven - day period , which it judged to be insufficient to prevent the driver being fatigued while driving .

by limiting the use of the 34-hour restart to once in a seven - day ( 168-hour ) period , fmcsa sought to limit drivers to a maximum of 70 hours of work in any seven - day span .

and by requiring that the 34-hour restart period cover two 1 a.m. - 5 a.m. periods , the current rule allows drivers to get more sleep during the 1 a.m. - 5 a.m. period , when studies indicate that sleep is most restorative ( compared to sleeping during other times of the day ) .

the provision in section 132 of the house bill prohibits enforcement of the new requirement , returning the requirement to what it was prior to june 2013 , unless the study required by section 133 of division k of p.l .

113-235 ( the fy2015 thud act ) finds that commercial drivers operating under the new restart provisions showed "statistically significant improvement in all outcomes related to safety , operator fatigue , driver health and longevity , and work schedules. .

this is slightly different than the original standard in p.l .

113-235 , which looked for whether the study showed a "greater net benefit for the operational , safety , health and fatigue impacts of the restart provisions. .

the provision in the senate - reported bill ( §134 ) is similar to this original standard , looking for "statistically significant net safety benefits. .

fmcsa published a cost - benefit analysis in the final rule that implemented the change , which found that the change was cost - beneficial , but critics of the change said that the impacts were greater than fmcsa had estimated .

