the 114 th congress opened with the introduction of a number of proposals that address human trafficking , particularly sex trafficking .

among them were proposals to amend existing federal criminal law , which would expand the coverage of federal sex trafficking laws ; amend bail provisions ; raise the limits on supervised release ; authorize more extensive wiretapping ; and adjust the application of federal forfeiture and restitution laws .

the legislation includes the following: justice for victims of trafficking act ( h.r .

181 ) ( representative poe ) ( house passed ) ; justice for victims of trafficking act ( s. 178 ) ( senator cornyn ) ( p.l .

114-22 ) ; justice for victims of trafficking act ( h.r .

296 ) ( representative poe ) ; stop advertising victims of exploitation act ( save act ) ( h.r .

285 ) ( representative wagner ) ( house passed ) ; stop advertising victims of exploitation act ( save act ) ( s. 572 ) ( senator kirk ) ; combat human trafficking act ( h.r .

1201 ) ( representative granger ) ; combat human trafficking act ( s. 140 ) ( senator feinstein ) ; human trafficking fraud enforcement act ( h.r .

1311 ) ( representative carolyn b. maloney ) ; military sex offender reporting act ( s. 409 ) ( senator burr ) ; and military track register and alert communities act ( military trac act ) ( h.r .

956 ) ( representative speier ) .

the legislation would amend federal substantive law in three areas: commercial sex trafficking ( 18 u.s.c .

1591 ) ; the mann act , which outlaws transportation and travel for unlawful sexual purposes ; and federal tax crimes .

all but the tax crime proposal appears in p.l .

114-22 .

forfeiture is the confiscation of property based on its proximity to a criminal offense .

confiscation may be accomplished either as a consequence of the property owner's conviction ( criminal forfeiture ) or in a civil proceeding conducted against the property in rem ( civil forfeiture ) .

in either case , the proceeds from most federal forfeitures are deposited either in the justice department's asset forfeiture fund or the department of the treasury's forfeiture fund , and are available for law enforcement purposes .

the forfeiture - triggering relationship between property and confiscation varies from one crime to another .

forfeitures relating to financial crimes sometimes apply to property "involved in" the offense .

for example , property "involved in" a money laundering transaction is subject to confiscation .

in the case of human trafficking , property that constitutes the proceeds from , that was used , or that was intended for use , to commit or facilitate , a trafficking offense is subject to criminal and civil forfeiture .

as s. 178 and h.r .

296 suggested , p.l .

114-22 makes property "involved in" or proceeds "traceable to" a trafficking offense subject to criminal and civil forfeiture as well .

defendants convicted of human trafficking offenses must be ordered to pay victim restitution .

as a general rule , the attorney general may transfer forfeited property to pay victim restitution .

s. 178 and h.r .

296 proposed , and p.l .

114-22 requires , such a transfer , without reducing or mitigating the defendant's restitution obligations .

subject to annual appropriations , the attorney general may use the justice department asset forfeiture fund for informants' fees in drug and money laundering cases .

the secretary of the treasury enjoys comparable authority with respect to the treasury fund , although apparently without the need for annual appropriations .

p.l .

114-22 , as s. 178 and h.r .

296 proposed , expands the authority to include access to the justice department fund for informants' fees in human trafficking cases , and to the department of the treasury fund for informants' fees paid by immigration and customs enforcement in human trafficking cases .

existing federal law states that an individual charged with a federal offense should be released on his own recognizance , unless the magistrate is convinced that certain conditions must be imposed to insure individual or community safety or to insure the appearance of the accused at subsequent judicial proceedings .

the government may seek pretrial detention of an accused charged with a crime of violence , a federal crime of terrorism , or with commercial sex trafficking .

h.r .

296 , s. 178 , and ultimately p.l .

114-22 amended the definition of "a crime of violence" for these purposes to include any of the human trafficking offenses .

in the investigation of certain serious federal and state crimes , the electronic communications privacy act , sometimes referred to in part as title iii , authorizes federal and state law enforcement officials to engage in court - supervised surreptitious interception of telephone , face - to - face , or electronic communications .

the list of these federal crimes includes commercial sex trafficking ( 18 u.s.c .

1591 ) , but not the other offenses outlawed in the slavery , peonage , and forced labor chapter of the federal criminal code .

the list of state crimes includes murder , robbery , kidnaping , etc. , but not prostitution or human trafficking .

p.l .

114-22 , as proposed in s. 178 and h.r .

181 , permits federal court - ordered interceptions in connection with investigations involving peonage ( 18 u.s.c .

1581 ( peonage ) , 1584 ( involuntary servitude ) , 1589 ( forced labor ) , and 1592 ( trafficking - related document misconduct ) ) .

it also permits state prosecutors to engage in state court - supervised interceptions in cases of human trafficking , child pornography production , and child sexual exploitation to the extent that state law permits .

the federal sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) , as the name implies , requires individuals convicted of a federal , state , tribal , foreign , or military sex offense to register with , and continue to provide current information to , state or tribal authorities ( jurisdictions ) in any location in which they live , work , or attend school .

the reporting obligations apply to those convicted of qualifying sex offenses either before or after the enactment of sorna .

sorna accomplishes its notification goal through the creation of a system which affords public online access to state and tribal registration information .

the system allows the public to determine either where a particular sex offender lives , works , and attends school , or the names and location of sex offenders who live , work , or attend school within a particular area .

sorna requires jurisdictions to satisfy minimum standards for the information they collect and maintain .

section 114 of sorna requires registrants to provide ( 1 ) their name and any alias ; their social security number ; ( 2 ) their place of residence ; ( 3 ) the name and address of their employer ; ( 4 ) the name and address of any school they are attending ; ( 5 ) the description and license plate number of any vehicle they own or operate ; and ( 6 ) any other information the attorney general requires .

section 114 requires jurisdictions to include within their registries ( 1 ) a physical description of the offender ; ( 2 ) the text of the statute defining the crime which requires the offender to register ; ( 3 ) the offender's criminal history ; ( 4 ) a current photograph of the offender ; ( 5 ) a set of the offender's fingerprints ; ( 6 ) a sample of the offender's dna ; ( 7 ) a copy of the offender's driver's license or other identification card ; and ( 8 ) any other information the attorney general requires .

as previously proposed in s. 178 ( senator cornyn ) , s. 409 ( senator burr ) , and h.r .

956 ( representative speier ) , p.l .

114-22 directs the secretary of defense to provide the attorney general with information described in ยง114 relating to military sex offenders whom sorna requires to register with state or tribal authorities .

the requirement would presumably apply to those convicted of registration - requiring offenses both before and after the enactment of sorna .

h.r .

956 ( representative speier ) would further amend sorna to increase the role of the department of defense ( dod ) by establishing a separate sex offender registry .

military sex offenders , who are obligated to maintain current registration information with state or tribal authorities any place where they live , work , or attend school , would also be required to register with the secretary of defense upon their release from custody or entry into the united states .

the proposal makes no explicit provision for military sex offenders convicted prior to the enactment of sorna .

sorna requires states and certain tribes to maintain a jurisdiction - wide sex offender registry that meets sorna requirements .

h.r .

956 would impose the same obligation on the secretary of defense , but without the fiscal sanctions which attend a state's failure to comply .

in addition to the demand to register where they live , work , or attend school , sex offenders being released from custody must also register with the jurisdiction in which they were convicted .

h.r .

956 would require military sex offenders to register upon release in addition with the secretary of defense .

h.r .

956 , like s. 178 and s. 409 , would require the secretary of defense to include the same information within his registry regarding a recently released sex offender that states and tribes are required to capture: physical description of the sex offender ; text of the law proscribing the conduct for which the sex offender was convicted ; the sex offender's criminal history ; fingerprints , a dna sample , and a photograph of the sex offender ; a copy of the offender's driver's license or other official identification of the sex offender ; and any additional information required by the attorney general .

the secretary would have to make this information publicly available online , and would be required to report the information to the attorney general , appropriate law enforcement , and educational , public housing , social service officials , as well as assorted related public and private entities .

the attorney general would be required to include the information in the national registry and to forward updated information received from various jurisdictions relating to a military sex offender to the secretary of defense .

the national registry would be required to include military sex offender information available on the secretary's website .

sorna mandates that "appropriate officials" and "appropriate law enforcement agencies" take action when a sex offender fails to comply with the requirements of a state or tribal registry .

h.r .

956 would establish a comparable command for action when a military sex offender fails to comply with the requirements of the dod registry .

it is unclear whether the amendment is intended to expand the terms "appropriate official" and "appropriate law enforcement agencies" to encompass dod officials and law enforcement agencies , giving them authority over discharged military sex offenders over whom they would otherwise have no jurisdiction .

sorna obligates the attorney general to develop and support the computer software necessary for jurisdictions to comply with sorna's standards .

h.r .

956 would enlarge the obligation to enable establishment and maintenance of a dod registry .

finally , h.r .

956 would require military sex offenders entering the united states to register with the secretary of defense .

