t his report compares two house bills and one senate bill that address information sharing and related activities in cybersecurity .

it also discusses some of the issues that those and other legislative proposals address .

the three bills compared are the protecting cyber networks act ( pcna , h.r .

1560 as passed by the house ) , the national cybersecurity protection advancement act of 2015 ( ncpaa , h.r .

1731 as passed by the house ) , and the cybersecurity information sharing act of 2015 ( cisa , s. 754 , as passed in the senate ) .

all three bills focus on information sharing among private entities and between them and the federal government .

they address the structure of the information - sharing process , issues associated with privacy and civil liberties , and liability risks for private - sector sharing , and they also address some other topics in common .

in addition to other provisions , ncpaa would explicitly amend portions of the homeland security act of 2002 ( 6 u.s.c .

§101 et seq .

 ) , and pcna would amend parts of the national security act of 1947 ( 50 u.s.c .

§3021 et seq. ) .

cisa has many similarities to a bill with a similar name introduced in the 113 th congress and shares many provisions with pcna , although there are also significant differences between them .

this report consists of an overview of the three bills , other legislative proposals , and an executive order on information sharing , along with selected associated issues , followed by a side - by - side analysis of ncpaa , pcna , and cisa .

for information on economic aspects of information sharing , see crs report r43821 , legislation to facilitate cybersecurity information sharing: economic analysis , by [author name scrubbed] .

for discussion of legal issues , see crs report r43941 , cybersecurity and information sharing: legal challenges and solutions , by [author name scrubbed] .

for an overview of cybersecurity issues , see crs report r43831 , cybersecurity issues and challenges: in brief , by [author name scrubbed] note: revisions in this update focus on changes to cisa resulting from senate floor consideration of the bill .

future updates will include further analysis .

barriers to the sharing of information on threats , attacks , vulnerabilities , and other aspects of cybersecurity — both within and across sectors — have long been considered by many to be a significant hindrance to effective cybersecurity , especially with respect to critical infrastructure , such as the financial system and the electric grid .

private - sector entities often claim that they are reluctant to share such information among themselves because of concerns about legal liability , antitrust violations , and potential misuse , especially of intellectual property , including trade secrets and other proprietary business information .

perceived barriers to sharing with government agencies include concerns about risks of disclosure and the ways governments might use the information provided .

in addition , some private - sector entities complain that the federal government does not share its information — especially classified information — effectively with the private sector , and that there is little reciprocity or other incentives for such entities to share information with the government .

institutional and cultural factors have also been cited — traditional approaches to security tend to emphasize secrecy and confidentiality , which would necessarily impede sharing of information .

while reduction or removal of such barriers may provide cybersecurity benefits , concerns have also been raised about potential adverse impacts , especially with respect to privacy and civil liberties .

a few sectors are subject to federal notification requirements , but most such information sharing is voluntary , often through sector - specific information sharing and analysis centers ( isacs ) or programs under the auspices of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , sector - specific agencies , or private - sector organizations .

in 2009 , the obama administration established the national cybersecurity and communications integration center ( nccic ) "to bolster information sharing and incident response" with respect to critical infrastructure in particular .

legislation focusing specifically on alleviating obstacles to information sharing in cybersecurity were first considered in the 112 th congress .

the cyber intelligence sharing and protection act ( cispa , h.r .

3523 ) passed the house in the second session but received no action in the senate .

the cybersecurity information sharing act ( cisa , s. 2102 ) of 2012 was largely incorporated into the cybersecurity act of 2012 ( s. 3414 ) , which was debated in the senate but failed two attempts at cloture .

the obama administration also proposed legislation during the 112 th congress that included provisions on information sharing .

cispa was reintroduced with little change in the 113 th congress as h.r .

624 .

an amended version passed the house but once again received no action in the senate .

a substantially amended version of cisa was reintroduced and reported in the senate ( s. 2588 ) but also received no further action .

however , a bill authorizing nccic was enacted ( s. 2519 , p.l .

113-282 ) , along with four other cybersecurity bills with provisions on the protection of critical infrastructure and federal information systems , research and development , and the cybersecurity workforce .

several issues appear to be particularly relevant to the debate over information - sharing legislation .

among them are the following: kinds of information .

what are the kinds of information for which barriers to sharing exist that make effective cybersecurity more difficult , and what are those barriers ? .

information - sharing process .

how should the gathering and sharing of information be structured in the public and private sectors to ensure that it is efficient , effective , and appropriate ? .

uses of information .

what limitations should be placed on how shared information is used ? .

standards and practices .

what improvements to current standards and practices are needed to ensure that information sharing is useful and efficient for protecting information systems , networks , and their contents ? .

privacy and civil liberties .

what are the risks to privacy rights and civil liberties of individual citizens associated with sharing different kinds of cybersecurity information , and how can those rights and liberties best be protected ? .

liability protections .

what , if any , statutory protections against liability are needed to reduce disincentives for private - sector entities to share cybersecurity information with each other and with government agencies , and how can the need to reduce such barriers best be balanced against any risks to well - established protections ? .

an in - depth discussion of these issues is beyond the scope of this report .

however , the points described below may be relevant for congressional debate .

for discussion of legal issues associated with privacy , civil liberties , and liability protections , see crs report r43941 , cybersecurity and information sharing: legal challenges and solutions , by [author name scrubbed] .

information that may be usefully shared can be complex in type and purpose , which may complicate determining the best methods and criteria for sharing .

information sharing can involve a broad variety of material communicated on a wide range of timescales , from broad cybersecurity policies and principles to best practices to information on threat intelligence , vulnerabilities , and defenses to computer - generated data transmitted directly from one information system to another electronically .

the level of sensitivity of information can also vary — for example , it may be classified , proprietary , or personal .

information of any class will also vary in its value for cybersecurity and the degree to which it needs human processing to be useful .

shared information can be used for a variety of purposes relating to cybersecurity .

a widely recognized objective is to inform situational awareness — an understanding of the components , operational roles , and current and projected states of systems and networks being protected ; events occurring within and across them ; and threats , vulnerabilities , and other elements of risk , all in the context of the larger cyberspace environment .

shared information may also be used for identifying specific defensive actions or measures , and for planning and capacity - building , among other objectives .

in addition , the same information may have different utility for different users — for example , threat signatures relating to attacks on one critical infrastructure sector may be of marginal concern for another , and best practices may be much more useful for small businesses than signatures associated with advanced targeted threats .

also , shared information may prove of little use if it is delayed , provided without relevant contextual detail , or provided in a form that requires substantial additional processing to determine its applicability .

if recipients find that the information they are provided is of little use to them , they may be less likely to participate in or continue with information - sharing initiatives .

the timescale during which shared information will be most useful varies with the kind of information shared and its purpose .

to the extent that the goal of information sharing is to defend systems and networks against cyberattacks , there appears to be a consensus that shared information needs to be actionable — that is , it should identify or evoke a specific response aimed at mitigating cybersecurity risks .

to be meaningfully actionable , information may often need to be shared very quickly or even in an automated fashion .

such rapid communication , for example by machine - to - machine transmission and processing , is sometimes called "real - time" or "near real - time" sharing .

the relevance of timing for shared information may be measured in seconds or even milliseconds in many cases .

there may be little or no time for human operators to examine a specific parcel of data to determine whether sharing it could raise privacy , liability , or other concerns .

therefore , the way that such sharing is implemented may affect not only operational effectiveness , but also other interests and goals such as privacy .

a large increase in information sharing could potentially lead to information overload , reducing the effectiveness of the sharing in reducing cybersecurity risks .

the relationship between the volume of information shared and improved cybersecurity is not straightforward .

given the broad classes of information that might be candidates for sharing , and the sheer volume of available data , an entity could receive much more information than it can reasonably process with available resources .

both providers and recipients — whether they are businesses , isacs , isaos , or government agencies — will incur various costs , including developing , assessing , processing , sharing , and applying the information .

for sharing to be effective , information from the provider must be relevant to recipients' needs and in forms that can be readily applied in their information technology and security environments .

recipients must also have the capacity and willingness to assess and use the information received in a timely fashion .

a large increase in the amount of information received may be counterproductive , especially if much of the information proves to be of little use to the recipient .

that could include not only information of uncertain quality and use , but also similar or redundant information from a variety of sources , which could lead to misdirection and waste of resources and could result in important information being overlooked .

however , determining a priori what information is useful to share may be difficult .

the current structure for information sharing is fairly complex but arguably limited in scope .

several federal entities in addition to nccic and ctiic are involved .

for example , the national cyber investigative joint task force ( ncijtf ) , which is operated by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , shares information on investigations related to domestic cyberthreats with national security and criminal law - enforcement programs .

other entities with broader missions may also be involved in cybersecurity information sharing — for example , the federal information sharing environment , and state and local fusion centers .

there are also many private - sector entities with information - sharing missions , most notably the isacs , of which 19 are members of the national council .

currently , there appear to be two general models for information sharing — a decentralized , "peer - to - peer," often informal approach between entities with complementary needs , and a more centralized "hub - and - spoke" model such as the isacs .

organizations such as isacs are generally sector - specific .

not all sectors have such organizations , and affiliations other than sector may also be important for some kinds of information sharing .

filling such gaps appears to be part of the rationale behind the administration's isao proposal to broaden the scope of isaos beyond that described in the homeland security act .

on the one hand , the absence of an appropriate mechanism can be a barrier to information sharing for an entity .

on the other hand , a proliferation of mechanisms , such as some observers fear the administration's isao model might result in , could also serve as a barrier if it makes information sharing inefficient or confusing for possible participants .

a proliferation of sharing mechanisms could improve coverage for information sharing among sectors but might also lead to duplication or overspecialization .

those could lead to a reduction in effective sharing across sectors , for example , and lack of clarity with respect to responsibilities .

it also creates the possibility that entities could receive conflicting information or even incompatible recommendations from different sharing organizations .

however , the potential for duplication creates the potential for market competition , and such market forces would ideally yield more innovation and more rapid improvement in information sharing than would a more restricted approach .

market forces might also lead to lower costs , and cost can be an impediment to improved information sharing , especially for small businesses .

yet market forces might also lead to higher costs , and a proliferation of sharing mechanisms might also make decisions about which one or ones to join more difficult for potential participants .

in contrast , a narrow , tightly defined structure for information sharing could lead to logjams or impede innovation in response to the continuing evolution of cyberspace .

development of consensus standards and best practices may improve the effectiveness and efficiency of information sharing .

the adoption of standards for information sharing is one way to help address concerns about reliability and utility of information received .

such an effort may be especially useful if the number and scope of isaos grows significantly , as may be the case under the obama administration proposal and eo 13691 .

dozens of standards currently exist relating to information sharing .

the department of homeland security has been developing a single set applicable to sharing of threat intelligence .

however , the large variation in sharing requirements and benefits among different entities and sectors may pose a significant challenge to the development of a useful common set of standards and practices .

nevertheless , experience with the development of the nist cybersecurity framework suggests that it may be possible to create a sufficiently flexible structure that entities can use to identify and develop appropriate standards and practices .

protection of confidentiality , privacy , and civil liberties in information sharing remains an area of controversy .

concerns relating to privacy and civil liberties , especially the protection of personal and proprietary information and uses of shared information , have been a subject of considerable debate in the development of legislation on information sharing .

the bills contain provisions aimed at reducing risks of inappropriate sharing and use of such information .

observers vary significantly in assessments about the adequacy of those safeguards , both in general and with respect to the house and senate bills .

some observers argue that shared cybersecurity information seldom needs to include privacy - related information , which suggests that privacy concerns may be limited and comparatively easy to address .

however , the issue is complicated by various factors , including potential impacts of advances in data analytic capabilities , often referred to as "big data. .

according to a presidential advisory panel , "by data mining and other kinds of analytics , nonobvious and sometimes private information can be derived from data that , at the time of their collection , seemed to raise no , or only manageable , privacy issues. .

there are many potential sources , unrelated to the information - sharing activities addressed in the bills , from which an individual's personal information in cyberspace can be identified and acquired by various entities .

the impacts of data mining and analytics do not appear to have generally been analyzed with respect to the potential risks to confidentiality and privacy of private - and public - sector information - sharing activities in comparison to risks from other kinds of activities .

sharing of information among private - sector entities might not be substantially increased by the actions contemplated in the legislation .

most observers appear to believe that legislation on information sharing is either necessary or at least potentially beneficial — provided that appropriate protections are included .

some observers have noted that the benefits of receiving cybersecurity information tend to outweigh the benefits of providing such information for many organizations .

this may be especially true for information shared with the federal government .

timely and actionable information that an entity receives can help it prevent or mitigate an attack .

in the absence of incentives for reciprocity , however , it is hard to see what benefit an organization would gain from providing information , unless it is a government entity whose mission is to provide such data or a provider of cybersecurity services .

more indirect benefits might occur , for example , if a pattern of reciprocity develops among sharing entities , such as through isacs or isaos .

however , information sharing by itself is not sufficient to improve cybersecurity .

not only must the information be actionable , but the recipient must also have processes , including equipment and software , in place to use the information effectively .

if such processes are not in place and utilized properly , the net effect may be the same as if the information were not shared at all .

in addition to issues such as legal concerns that may be associated with providing information , businesses may be concerned about reputation costs , if they provide information showing that they have been victims of cyberattacks .

government measures such as requirements for data - breach notification , as enacted in most states , can provide incentives for organizations to share information that may be useful in attempts to prevent future attacks on other entities or to capture and prosecute cybercriminals .

while the legislative proposals on information sharing may reduce the risks to private - sector entities associated with providing information , none include explicit incentives to stimulate such provision .

in the absence of mechanisms to balance the asymmetry between incentives for receiving and providing information , the degree to which information sharing would increase under the provisions of the various legislative proposals may be uncertain .

information sharing is only one facet of cybersecurity .

information sharing is only one of many cybersecurity tools , and some observers have expressed concern about risks associated with an overemphasis on its role in cybersecurity .

sharing may be relatively unimportant for many organizations , especially in comparison with other cybersecurity needs .

entities must also have the resources and processes in place that are necessary for effective cybersecurity risk management .

for example , in the data breaches of information on federal employees revealed in june by the office of personnel management ( opm ) , it is not clear that specific information about the threat or even defensive measures would have resulted in effective defense against the attacks , given opm's reported shortcomings in implementation of requirements in the federal information security management act ( fisma ) .

in addition , information sharing tends to focus on immediate concerns such as cyberattacks and imminent threats .

while those must be addressed , that does not diminish the importance of other issues in cybersecurity such as education and training , workforce , acquisition , or cybercrime law , or major long - term challenges such as building security into the design of hardware and software , changing the incentive structure for cybersecurity , developing a broad consensus about cybersecurity needs and requirements , and adapting to the rapid evolution of cyberspace .

the remainder of the report consists of four tables comparing provisions in ncpaa and pcna as passed by the house and cisa as passed by the senate: table 1 provides a side - by - side comparison of sections with corresponding provisions in the three bills and includes all the provisions specifically related to information sharing .

the other three tables provide summaries of sections in ncpaa and cisa for which crs did not identify any corresponding provisions in either of the other bills: table 2 , on cybersecurity of federal agencies and systems , table 3 , on critical infrastructure cybersecurity , and table 4 , on other cybersecurity matters .

however , some sections in those tables are related to sections in table 1 .

for example , sec .

203 of cisa is included in table 1 rather than table 2 because some of its provisions correspond to provisions in sec .

216 of ncpaa , on the protection of federal information systems .

however , sec .

204 of cisa , on advanced cybersecurity defenses for federal agencies , is in table 2 , even though it relates to cybersecurity for federal systems , because there are no comparable provisions in either ncpaa or pcna .

in contrast , sec .

204 of ncpaa , on isaos , is in table 1 because it is on information sharing , even though there are no corresponding provisions in the other bills .

note that subsections that address topics not found in other bills are included in table 1 if other parts of the section have corresponding provisions in other bills .

for example , sec .

104 ( c ) in pcna , establishing the ctiic ( see p. 27 ) , has no corresponding provisions in the other bills but is included in table 1 because the other subsections have corresponding provisions .

entries describing provisions in a bill are summaries or paraphrases , with direct quotes enclosed in double quotation marks .

the tables use the following formatting conventions to aid in the comparison: in table 1 , related provisions in the bills are adjacent to each other , with ncpaa serving as the basis for comparison .

as a result , many provisions of pcna and cisa appear out of sequence in that table .

bold formatting denotes that the identified provision is the subject of the subsequent text ( eg , ( d ) or sec .

10 2 ( a ) ) .

numbers and names of sections , subsections , and paragraphs ( except definitions ) added to existing laws by the bills are enclosed in single quotation marks ( eg , 'sec .

111 ( a ) ' ) .

underlined text ( visible only in the pdf version ) is used in selected cases in table 1 as a visual aid to highlight differences with a corresponding provision in the other bills that might otherwise be difficult to discern .

the names of titles , sections , and some paragraphs are stated the first time a provision from them is discussed in the tables — for example , sec .

10 3 .

authorizations for preventing , detecting , analyzing , and mitigating cybersecurity threats — but only the number , to the paragraph level or higher , is used thereafter .

in cases where a provision of a bill is out of sequence from that immediately above it , as much of the provision number is repeated as is needed to make its origin clear .

for example , on p. 29 , a provision from sec .

103 of pcna is described immediately after an entry for sec .

109 and is therefore labelled sec .

103 ( c ) ( 3 ) .

that is followed immediately by an entry labelled ( a ) , which is a subsection of sec .

103 and therefore is not preceded by the section number .

page numbers cited within the table are hyperlinked to the provisions they reference in the table ; the page numbers themselves refer to pages in the pdf version of this report .

explanatory notes on provisions are enclosed in square brackets .

also , the entry "[similar to {bill}]" means that the text in that provision is closely similar in text , with no significant difference in meaning as interpreted by crs , to the corresponding provision in the named bill .

"[identical to {bill}]" means that there are no differences in language between the text of that provision and the corresponding provision in the named bill .

a double em - dash ( — — ) means that the bill has no provision corresponding to that described for other bills in that row of the table .

see the " glossary of abbreviations in the tables " for meanings of abbreviations used therein .

