this report describes and analyzes annual appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fy2016 .

it compares the enacted fy2015 appropriations for dhs , the administration's fy2016 budget request , the appropriations proposed by congress in response , and those enacted thus far .

this report identifies additional informational resources , reports , and products on dhs appropriations that provide additional context for the discussion , and it provides a list of crs policy experts whom clients may consult with inquiries on specific topics .

the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to dhs appropriations , with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the reports do not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor do they systematically follow other legislation related to the authorization or amending of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of specialized budgetary concepts .

the appendix to this report explains several of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act ( p.l .

112-25 ) .

a more complete discussion of those terms and the appropriations process in general can be found in crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] , and the government accountability office's a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process .

the following tables present comparisons of fy2015 enacted and fy2016 requested , house and senate appropriations committee - reported , and enacted appropriations for the department by thematic grouping .

references to titles refer to the organization of the funding in the fy2016 appropriations cycle , not the administration's budget request .

the tables summarize the appropriations provided for each component , subtotaling the resources provided through the appropriations legislation .

indented text and bracketed numbers indicate resources either provided through provisions separate from the base appropriations for the component , or that do not count as net discretionary budget authority ( see below ) .

a subtotal for each component of total estimated resources that would be available under the legislation and from other sources ( such as fees , mandatory spending , and trust funds ) for the given fiscal year is also provided .

at the bottom of each table , three totals indicate the total for the title on its own , the total for title's components in the entire bill , and the projected total fy2016 funding for the title's components from all sources ( such as fees not governed by the bill , trust funds , etc .

 ) .

for additional perspectives on fy2016 dhs appropriations , see the following: crs report r44186 , dhs appropriations fy2016: departmental management and operations ; crs report r44215 , dhs appropriations fy2016: security , enforcement and investigations ; crs report r44182 , dhs appropriations fy2016: protection , preparedness , response , and recovery ; crs report r44183 , dhs appropriations fy2016: research and development , training , and services ; crs report r44048 , trends in the timing and size of dhs appropriations: in brief ; crs report r44051 , comparing dhs appropriations by component , fy2016: fact sheet ; and crs report r44052 , dhs budget v. dhs appropriations: fact sheet .

readers also may wish to consult crs's experts directly .

the following table lists names and contact information for the crs analysts and specialists who contribute to crs dhs appropriations reports .

budget authority , obligations , and outlays federal government spending involves a multistep process that begins with the enactment of budget authority by congress .

federal agencies then obligate funds from enacted budget authority to pay for their activities .

finally , payments are made to liquidate those obligations ; the actual payment amounts are reflected in the budget as outlays .

budget authority is established through appropriations acts or direct spending legislation and determines the amounts that are available for federal agencies to spend .

the antideficiency act prohibits federal agencies from obligating more funds than the budget authority enacted by congress .

budget authority also may be indefinite , as when congress enacts language providing "such sums as may be necessary" to complete a project or purpose .

budget authority may be available on a one - year , multiyear , or no - year basis .

one - year budget authority is only available for obligation during a specific fiscal year ; any unobligated funds at the end of that year are no longer available for spending .

multiyear budget authority specifies a range of time during which funds may be obligated for spending , and no - year budget authority is available for obligation for an indefinite period of time .

obligations are incurred when federal agencies employ personnel , enter into contracts , receive services , and engage in similar transactions in a given fiscal year .

outlays are the funds that are actually spent during the fiscal year .

because multiyear and no - year budget authorities may be obligated over a number of years , outlays do not always match the budget authority enacted in a given year .

additionally , budget authority may be obligated in one fiscal year but spent in a future fiscal year , especially with certain contracts .

in sum , budget authority allows federal agencies to incur obligations and authorizes payments , or outlays , to be made from the treasury .

discretionary agencies and programs , and appropriated entitlement programs , are funded each year in appropriations acts .

discretionary and mandatory spending gross budget authority , or the total funds available for spending by a federal agency , may be composed of discretionary and mandatory spending .

discretionary spending is not mandated by existing law and is thus appropriated yearly by congress through appropriations acts .

the budget enforcement act of 1990 defines discretionary appropriations as budget authority provided in annual appropriations acts and the outlays derived from that authority , but it excludes appropriations for entitlements .

mandatory spending , also known as direct spending , consists of budget authority and resulting outlays provided in laws other than appropriations acts and is typically not appropriated each year .

some mandatory entitlement programs , however , must be appropriated each year and are included in appropriations acts .

within dhs , coast guard retirement pay is an example of appropriated mandatory spending .

offsetting collections offsetting funds are collected by the federal government , either from government accounts or the public , as part of a business - type transaction such as collection of a fee .

these funds are not considered federal revenue .

instead , they are counted as negative outlays .

dhs net discretionary budget authority , or the total funds that are appropriated by congress each year , is composed of discretionary spending minus any fee or fund collections that offset discretionary spending .

some collections offset a portion of an agency's discretionary budget authority .

other collections offset an agency's mandatory spending .

these mandatory spending elements are typically entitlement programs under which individuals , businesses , or units of government that meet the requirements or qualifications established by law are entitled to receive certain payments if they establish eligibility .

the dhs budget features two mandatory entitlement programs: the secret service and the coast guard retired pay accounts ( pensions ) .

some entitlements are funded by permanent appropriations , and others are funded by annual appropriations .

secret service retirement pay is a permanent appropriation and , as such , is not annually appropriated .

in contrast , coast guard retirement pay is annually appropriated .

in addition to these entitlements , the dhs budget contains offsetting trust and public enterprise funds .

these funds are not appropriated by congress .

they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority .

302 ( a ) and 302 ( b ) allocations in general practice , the maximum budget authority for annual appropriations ( including dhs ) is determined through a two - stage congressional budget process .

in the first stage , congress sets overall spending totals in the annual concurrent resolution on the budget .

subsequently , these totals are allocated among the appropriations committees , usually through the statement of managers for the conference report on the budget resolution .

these amounts are known as the 302 ( a ) allocations .

they include discretionary totals available to the house and senate committees on appropriations for enactment in annual appropriations bills through the subcommittees responsible for the development of the bills .

in the second stage of the process , the appropriations committees allocate the 302 ( a ) discretionary funds among their subcommittees for each of the appropriations bills .

these amounts are known as the 302 ( b ) allocations .

these allocations must add up to no more than the 302 ( a ) discretionary allocation and form the basis for enforcing budget discipline , since any bill reported with a total above the ceiling is subject to a point of order .

the 302 ( b ) allocations may be adjusted during the year by the respective appropriations committee issuing a report delineating the revised suballocations as the various appropriations bills progress toward final enactment .

no subcommittee allocations are developed for conference reports or enacted appropriations bills .

table a - 1 shows comparable figures for the 302 ( b ) allocation for fy2015 , based on p.l .

114-4 , the president's request for fy2016 , house and senate subcommittee allocations for the homeland security appropriations bills for fy2016 , and the allocation that would have been needed to accommodate the fy2016 enacted homeland security appropriations act , 2016 .

the budget control act , discretionary spending caps , and adjustments the fy2012 appropriations bills were the first appropriations bills governed by the budget control act , which established discretionary security and nonsecurity spending caps for fy2012 and fy2013 .

the bill also established overall caps that govern the actions of appropriations committees in both chambers .

subsequent legislation , including the bipartisan budget act of 2013 , amended those caps .

for fy2015 , the overall cap on discretionary spending is $1,014 billion .

separate limitations are made for defense and nondefense spending — roughly $521 billion and $492 billion , respectively .

most of the budget for dhs is considered nondefense spending .

in addition , the budget control act allows for adjustments that would raise the statutory caps to cover funding for overseas contingency operations / global war on terror , emergency spending , and , to a limited extent , disaster relief and appropriations for continuing disability reviews and control of health care fraud and abuse .

three of the four justifications outlined in the budget control act for adjusting the caps on discretionary budget authority have played a role in dhs's appropriations process .

two of these — emergency spending and overseas contingency operations / global war on terror — are not limited .

the third justification — disaster relief — is limited .

under the budget control act , the allowable adjustment for disaster relief is determined by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , using the following formula: limit on disaster relief cap adjustment for the fiscal year = rolling average of the disaster relief spending over the last ten fiscal years ( throwing out the high and low years ) + the unused amount of the potential adjustment for disaster relief from the previous fiscal year .

for fy2014 , omb determined the allowable adjustment for disaster relief was $12,143 million , of which only $5,717 million was exercised .

in february 2015 , omb noted the fy2015 allowable adjustment for disaster assistance was $18,430 million: $11,913 million from the rolling average and $6,517 million in carryover from fy2014 .

fy2015 was the first year in which more than $1 billion of allowable adjustment for disaster relief carried over from the previous fiscal year .

the disaster relief allowable adjustment for fy2016 was $14,125 million .

