the importance of early learning for children's healthy development and positive outcomes in school and the workforce has become a subject of increasing interest to the public , members of congress , and the adm inistration .

during recent congresses many bills have been introduced that would provide funding to states aiming to facilitate improvements in the quality of , and access to , early childhood education ( ece ) programs .

increased congressional interest in early childhood care and education issues has been driven , in part , by research on the role of ece programs in raising academic achievement and other desired student outcomes .

results have generally shown that quality early childhood care and education help improve outcomes , particularly for disadvantaged students .

the effectiveness of ece programs is usually measured by assessing children's cognitive functioning , school readiness , and / or social behavior .

in addition , there is a growing body of research exploring the cost - effectiveness of investments in high quality preschool .

the national institute for early education research ( nieer ) estimated the average lifetime benefits of universally available preschool for all three - and four - year - olds to be considerably larger than the costs for two years of prekindergarten .

nieer based its estimates on data from studies of two high quality preschool programs serving low - income children — the chicago child parent center ( ccpc ) and the perry preschool program .

these studies both found that for every dollar invested , the lifetime return on investment equaled seven dollars .

follow - up of the children who participated in the ccpc at age 20 found they were less likely to be held back in school , to have needed remedial help , or to have been arrested .

the follow - up study of the perry preschool participants found similar benefits .

at age 27 , perry preschool participants had higher monthly earnings and a higher level of schooling , as well as fewer arrests , than the children who did not take part in the program .

currently , access to high - quality preschool programs varies throughout the united states .

nationally , in school year ( sy ) 2014-2015 , 42 states and washington , dc , supported one or more state - funded preschool program , although the percentage of three - and four - year - olds served , and the number of hours provided by these programs , varied considerably .

in sy2014-2015 , approximately 29% of four - year - olds and 5% of three - year - olds were enrolled in state - funded preschool nationally .

one group that has established benchmarks for use in assessing program quality , nieer , found that only six states met all 10 of their benchmarks for quality in sy2014-2015 .

nationally , less than 4% of the children served in state - funded preschool in sy2014-2015 were enrolled in programs meeting all 10 of the nieer benchmarks for quality .

it is difficult to provide a clear picture of preschool programs in this country .

there is no formal , federally mandated system of preschool , and states and localities make their own decisions about whether or not to offer such programs .

in the absence of a cohesive public preschool system , a fragmented landscape of private and public providers has emerged , with funding coming from a combination of private , state , local , and federal sources , and with program eligibility and quality varying widely .

in part , this fragmentation has led to a lack of comprehensive national data on the supply and quality of existing preschool initiatives and the rules that govern them .

the primary focus of the pdg program is to expand access to high - quality preschool for low - income four - year - olds .

the program is intended to support state and local efforts to build , develop and expand high quality preschool programs .

in its fy2016 budget request , the administration states that the pdg program will lay the groundwork to help ensure that states are ready to participate in the administration's proposed preschool for all program — which would make high - quality preschool programs available for all four - year - olds from low - and moderate - income families .

the pdg program is subdivided into two grant programs: pdg - expansion grants and pdg - development grants .

states with small or no state - funded preschool programs are eligible to apply for development grants .

states that have more robust state funded preschool programs or have received a rtt - elc grant are eligible to apply for expansion grants .

according to ed's factsheet on the program , "preschool development grantees plan to: create or expand high - quality preschool programs in high - need communities ; implement state - level infrastructure and quality improvements ; collaborate with selected programs and ensure strong partnerships between school districts and other early learning providers ; align preschool programs within a birth - through - third - grade continuum of services ; and create sustainable programs by coordinating existing early learning funds. .

in the fy2014 president's budget , the obama administration requested $750 million in discretionary funding for the new pdg program , as well as $75 billion ( over 10 years ) in mandatory funding for a preschool for all program that would provide high - quality public preschool to all low - and moderate - income three - and four - year - olds .

no fy2014 funding was provided for the preschool for all program ; however , report language accompanying the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) directed that all $250 million in fy2014 race to the top ( rtt ) funding be used for a pdg program .

the administration subsequently requested $500 million in discretionary funding for pdg in fy2015 and $750 million in fy2016 .

ultimately , annual appropriations laws provided $250 million in both fy2015 and fy2016 for pdg through the elementary and secondary education act , title v - part d of the fund for the improvement of education .

fy2015 and fy2016 funding allowed existing grantees to receive a continuation award but was not sufficient to fund new grantees .

pdg grants are awarded for a period of up to four years .

in their application , states are required to specify their requested budget for the entire length of the grant .

however , states receive funding on an annual basis ; in order to continue receiving funds in subsequent years , states need to demonstrate "substantial progress toward meeting the goals and objectives of the program. .

funding in subsequent years is also contingent on continued appropriations for the program .

the one required use of funds , what ed refers to as an "absolute priority," that ed has established for states applying for pdg - development grants is that they develop and implement a plan to build capacity to deliver , and increase access to , high - quality preschool programs .

see table 5 for a list of all the priorities that states applying for pdg – development and pdg – expansion grants must address .

states are required to indicate in their application how they will ( 1 ) begin serving eligible children within the first two years after receiving a grant , ( 2 ) subgrant 65% of the funding to subgrantees for the implementation of high - quality preschool in one or more high - need areas in the state , and ( 3 ) use no more than 35% of funding for improving state preschool infrastructure and capacity to provide high - quality preschool at the state level .

ed's absolute priority that states applying for pdg - expansion grants must meet is a strategy to increase access to high - quality preschool programs in high - need areas .

states are required to indicate in their application how they will meet the following requirements: ( 1 ) begin serving eligible children within one year of receiving the grant , ( 2 ) subgrant at least 95% of funding for the implementation of high - quality preschool programs in two or more high - need areas , and ( 3 ) use no more than 5% of funding for improving preschool infrastructure .

there are also three "competitive priorities" ( applicable to both pdg - development grants and pdg - expansion grants ) , which represent allowable but not required uses of funds .

for each competitive priority a state may earn up to 10 points .

these priorities are ( 1 ) the provision of state , local , and / or other nonfederal matching funds ; ( 2 ) supporting a birth through grade 3 continuum ; and ( 3 ) using 50% or more of funding to expand the number of available high - quality preschool slots .

seven selection criteria are used to rate state applications .

subgrantees may use their funding for certain operational costs , including "staff salaries and benefits , instructional supplies , food , building operations and maintenance , in - service training and professional development , individualized accommodations and supports for eligible children with disabilities , comprehensive services , and program administration. .

the following early learning providers are eligible to apply for a subgrant under the program: "a local educational agency ( lea ) , charter school , educational service agency , head start program , licensed child care provider , municipality or other local government agency , tribe or indian organization , institution of higher education , libraries and museums , and other eligible licensed providers as defined by the state , or a consortium thereof , if defined as such by the state. .

non - lea subgrantees need to demonstrate that they have a strong partnership with the lea ( s ) the preschoolers served by the program will attend when they enter kindergarten .

all providers must offer preschool programs that meet the definition of a high - quality preschool program ( see text box , below ) .

in fy2014 , fy2015 , and fy2016 , $250 million was appropriated for the pdg program .

on december 10 , 2014 , ed and hhs announced that 18 of the 36 states and outlying areas that applied for a pdg grant would receive fy2014 funding .

fy2015 and fy2016 funding allowed existing grantees to receive continuation awards .

appropriations were not sufficient to fund new grantees .

the maximum funding available for each state is based on its population of four - year - olds living in families at or below 200% of the federal poverty level , and only these children may be served by the pdg program .

of the $250 million in fy2014 funding for pdg , $80 million was reserved for pdg - development grants and $170 million was reserved for pdg - expansion grants .

remaining funds were reserved for national activities and for peer review of state applications .

eight states and puerto rico submitted applications for pdg - development grants .

as has been noted , pdg - development grants are designed for states with fewer than 10% of their four - year - olds in state - funded preschool that have not received a rtt - elc grant .

as table 6 shows , in 2014 , five states were awarded these grants .

pdg - preschool expansion grants are designed for states that already serve 10% or more of their four - year - olds in state - funded preschools or received a rtt - elc grant .

twenty - seven states submitted applications for these grants and 13 states received them .

the amount of funding awarded to each state in year 1 ( fy2017 ) and year 2 ( fy2015 ) of the program is provided in table 6 .

recipients of pdg awards must submit an annual report to ed that describes the state's progress in achieving its goals , meeting its timelines , and staying within its requested budget .

in addition , for each of the state's performance measures , it must indicate how its performance compares to the annual targets it established in its application .

states are accountable for meeting the goals , timelines , budgets , and targets that they establish in their application .

ed reviews a state's adherence to these commitments on a regular basis .

if a state or its subgrantee does not meet the requirements that accompany acceptance of a grant , ed and hhs may take enforcement actions that can include withholding or suspending funds or recovering funds as the result of an audit .

appendix a. glossary of terms absolute priority : a term used by ed and hhs in the notices inviting applications for all rtt - elc and preschool development grant competitions to denote a priority that all applications must meet in order to be considered for funding .

children with high needs : children from birth through kindergarten entry who are from low - income families or are otherwise in need of special assistance or support .

"children with high needs" includes children with disabilities or developmental delays , english language learners , residents of "indian lands," and children who are migrants , homeless , or in foster care .

the single absolute priority that states applying for rtt - elc grants were required to address was "promoting school readiness for children with high needs. .

kindergarten entry assessments ( keas ) : a valid and reliable measure aligned with a state's early learning development standards administered to children within the first few months of kindergarten covering the essential domains of school readiness .

keas are part of the core reform area: a successful state system , one of two core reform areas that rtt - elc grantees are required to address in their annual performance reports .

tiered quality rating and improvement system ( tqris ) : a systemic approach to assessing , improving , and communicating the levels of quality in early learning and development programs ; sometimes described as being like a star - rating system for commercial products .

according to the definition from the rtt - elc notices inviting applications , a tiered quality rating and improvement system "consists of four components: ( a ) tiered program standards with multiple rating categories that clearly and meaningfully differentiate program quality levels ; ( b ) monitoring to evaluate program quality based on the program standards ; ( c ) supports to help programs meet progressively higher standards ( eg , through training , technical assistance , financial support ) ; and ( d ) program quality ratings that are publically available ; and includes a process for validating the system. .

workforce knowledge and competency framework : a set of expectations laid out in the rtt - elc notices inviting applications that describes what early childhood educators ( including those working with children with disabilities and english learners ) should know and be able to do .

the workforce knowledge and competency framework , "at a minimum , ( a ) is evidence - based ; ( b ) incorporates knowledge and application of the state's early learning and development standards , the comprehensive assessment systems , child development , health , and culturally and linguistically appropriate strategies for working with families ; ( c ) includes knowledge of early mathematics and literacy development and effective instructional practices to support mathematics and literacy development in young children ; ( d ) incorporates effective use of data to guide instruction and program improvement ; ( e ) includes effective behavior management strategies that promote positive social emotional development and reduce challenging behaviors ; and ( f ) incorporates feedback from experts at the state's postsecondary institutions and other early learning and development experts and early childhood educators. .

appendix b .

acronyms used in this report appendix c. differences between pdg programs on december 10 , 2015 , the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) was comprehensively reauthorized by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) .

the essa includes a standalone authorization for a new preschool development grant program that differs in a number of ways from the predecessor pdg program that has been in place for fy2014-fy2016 .

table c - 1 provides a comparison of different aspects of the two pdg programs .

