the railroad rehabilitation and improvement financing ( rrif ) program offers long - term , low - interest loans to railroad operators for improving rail infrastructure .

the program is intended to operate at no cost to the government and does not receive an annual appropriation .

congress has authorized $35 billion in loan a uthority for the program , but freight railroads have been relatively unenthusiastic .

since 2000 , rrif has made 37 loans to 29 operators for a total of $5.4 billion , representing $5.9 billion in 2018 dollars .

from 2000 through 2015 , private railroads' total investment in structures and equipment was approximately $154 billion ( $174 billion in 2016 dollars ) .

rrif supplied less than 1% of freight railroads' capital expenditures for track and other structures over that period .

in recent years , sponsors of intercity passenger rail projects have shown increasing interest in the program .

about 85% of the rrif program's nominal loan amount has gone to government - controlled entities for passenger rail projects rather than to freight operators ; loans to amtrak , the national intercity passenger rail provider , alone represent almost 60% of the total nominal loan amount .

part of this activity may be explained by a growing interest in passenger rail services at the state and local level and the scarcity of other funding assistance for such projects , which tend to be extremely costly .

the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ; p.l .

114-94 ) , enacted in december 2015 , included changes intended to make the rrif program more attractive to potential applicants , though one change — elimination of the requirement that the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) , which administers the program , refund borrowers' credit risk premiums — may make the program less attractive .

some of the changes may make the program more useful for funding passenger rail and transit - related projects .

the prospect of large loans for private intercity passenger rail and transit - related projects raises questions about potential risks to the rrif program , because such projects may have no source of earnings until and unless they are completed and , even then , may not be able to generate sufficient revenue to service their loans .

the railroad industry has changed significantly since congress created a forerunner of rrif in 1976 .

at that time , the nation's railroads were in great financial difficulty , investment in infrastructure and equipment had lagged , and there were questions about the future viability of the industry .

subsequently , congress significantly deregulated the railroad industry , making it easier for carriers to consolidate and to shed less profitable routes .

since that time , mergers have reduced a large number of regional railroads to a handful of companies that operate across many states ( known as class i carriers ) .

deregulation allowed the large railroads to focus their construction and maintenance efforts on heavily trafficked main lines and to stop service on routes that were not profitable .

some of this lightly used trackage was sold to smaller operators , which believed they could build business by working closely with shippers that used or might use the line .

these smaller railroads , collectively known as short line railroads , are classified by the federal railroad administration ( fra ) as class ii and class iii carriers .

although there are now only seven class i railroads operating in the united states , there are more than 560 short line railroads .

the class i freight railroads — large , profitable commercial entities — are able to finance improvements out of their considerable revenues , as well as by issuing stock and by borrowing in the commercial market .

class ii and class iii railroads have fewer financing options .

their revenues are smaller , their lines of business typically are more limited than those of the class i railroads , and their creditworthiness generally is lower .

however , nearly half of the nation's short line railroads have come under the control of 27 holding companies , potentially offering them easier access to private financing .

in addition , a number of short line railroads are terminal switching , port , or harbor rail lines that have a relationship with a class i railroad , which may help them obtain financing , and some short line railroads are owned by states .

these entities typically have easier access to the financial markets than do stand - alone short line railroads .

amtrak operates at a loss and relies on federal grants appropriated annually to continue operations .

amtrak's primary service corridor is the northeast corridor ( nec ) , a rail line running from washington , dc , through new york city to boston .

this line also is used heavily by commuter rail operations and also hosts freight service .

there is an estimated backlog of $38 billion in capital investment needed to restore the aging nec infrastructure to a state of good repair .

in july 2017 dot published a proposal for expanded and faster service on the nec , with a capital cost estimate of $121-$153 billion .

congress created the rrif program in 1998 and revised it in 2005 , 2008 , and 2015 .

the program allows dot to provide credit assistance for rail infrastructure by making low - cost direct loans or providing loan guarantees to project sponsors .

eligible recipients of this assistance include railroads , state and local governments , government - sponsored corporations , and joint ventures that include at least one railroad .

the rrif program replaced a railroad financing program that congress created in 1976 .

the original program allowed dot to provide financial assistance for rail infrastructure by purchasing preference shares or issuing loan guarantees .

the authorization to purchase preference shares expired in 1996 .

in the 1998 revision that renamed the program , congress authorized dot to make direct loans as well as loan guarantees , set an overall cap of $3.5 billion on the total amount of outstanding debt that the program could have at any one time , and reserved almost 30% of that ( $1 billion ) for projects benefiting short line railroads .

in 2005 , congress increased the limit on outstanding debt to $35 billion and increased the amount reserved for smaller freight railroads to $7 billion .

the increase was not due to demand for the program — the program had issued a total of less than $1 billion in loans at that point — but in hopes of boosting interest in the program .

in 2012 , congress provided that applicants could use future dedicated revenues as security for a rrif loan .

in 2015 , it added new types of security that applicants could use to reduce the amount of their credit risk premium , and moved the administration of the program from the fra to a newly created build america bureau .

projects eligible for rrif assistance include acquiring , improving , and rehabilitating track , bridges , rail yards , buildings , and shops ( or refinancing existing debt that was incurred for these purposes ) ; preconstruction activities ; positive train control ; transit - oriented development projects ; and new rail or intermodal facilities .

loans can be for up to 100% of the project cost , with repayment periods up to 35 years .

the rrif program is designed to operate at no cost to the government .

applicants are charged a fee of 0.5% of the amount requested to cover the cost of processing their applications .

borrowers are charged another fee ( the credit risk premium ) at the time a loan is issued to cover the potential cost to the government of the loan not being repaid .

the amount of the credit risk premium is based on several factors , including the financial condition of the applicant and the amount of collateral securing the loan .

this no - cost - to - the - government structure is why it was not controversial for congress to raise the maximum outstanding loan amount from $3.5 billion to $35 billion in 2005 .

but the up - front costs of a rrif loan may deter would - be applicants .

by contrast , the other major dot credit assistance program , established in the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) , covers the cost of the credit risk premium for loan recipients ( known as tifia's subsidy cost ) .

for private loans , the processing costs and credit risk premium typically are folded into the loan repayment schedule rather than being charged up front .

the policy rationales for the rrif program are that railroad companies , especially short line companies too small to raise money in the bond market , need better access to long - term , low - cost financing to maintain and expand their networks , and that the safety and efficiency of their networks is a public concern .

however , it is not clear that railroads , even short line railroads , have significant difficulty financing the maintenance and expansion of their networks .

fra looked at the safety record of short line railroads , taking accident rates as a proxy for the condition of the infrastructure ( that is , if the infrastructure were deteriorating , the accident rate likely would increase ) .

fra found that the number of infrastructure - related accidents per million train - miles on short line railroads declined significantly between 2001 and 2013 , from more than eight accidents per million train - miles to fewer than four accidents per million train - miles .

fra stated that "the positive trend , illustrated by a decreasing accident rate , suggests improving maintenance and investment.... " another measure of the condition of short line railroad infrastructure is its capability to handle 286,000-pound rail cars .

since the late 1980s , class i railroads have moved from maximum car weights of 263,000 pounds to 286,000 pounds .

track and bridges must be strengthened to handle these heavier loads .

according to the association of short line railroads , 39% of short line route - miles were able to handle the 286,000-pound cars in 2002 , whereas 57% of a larger number of total route - miles could handle the heavier cars in 2010 .

fra stated , after examining both the safety and capacity numbers , that "these data points and trends illustrate that these carriers in aggregate are maintaining their systems and enhancing infrastructure to meet their customer needs. .

on the basis of a 2013 survey of class ii and class iii railroads' estimated spending requirements for infrastructure and equipment , fra estimated that the total investment needs of short line railroads would be $6.9 billion over the five - year period from 2013 to 2017 .

the survey respondents anticipated that they would be able to cover about 70% to 75% of their estimated spending needs for infrastructure and equipment during that period , with most of the funding coming from their revenues ; they expected about a quarter of the funding to come from other sources , chiefly state ( 9% ) and federal ( 8% ) grants and loans .

the survey results suggested an estimated gap of around $265 million per year between the available funding and the amount short lines felt was needed .

rrif is only one of several federal and state programs available to reduce the cost of railroads' investment in infrastructure .

others include the following .

this tax credit , first enacted in 2004 , allows class ii and class iii railroads to reduce their taxes by 50% of the cost of track maintenance expenses incurred in a year , up to a limit established by multiplying the railroad's track mileage by $3,500 .

the cost to the federal government in forgone tax revenue is estimated at $165 million to $202 million per year , which represents investments of roughly $300-$400 million annually .

in contrast to the rrif program , this tax credit is targeted exclusively to short line railroads .

it does not require the recipient to undertake an uncertain loan application process , with its attendant costs , or to comply with requirements for rrif loans , such as the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) and the rrif program's buy america policy .

the tax credit expired on december 31 , 2016 .

legislation to extend the credit has been introduced in the 115 th congress ( h.r .

721 ; s. 407 ; s. 2256 ) .

congress created a national infrastructure investment discretionary grant program within the office of the secretary of transportation in 2009 .

this program , popularly known as the transportation investment generating economic recovery ( tiger ) grant program , made over $5 billion in grants through fy2017 .

grants require a 20% match in urbanized areas ; in rural areas , no local match is required .

although only governmental entities are eligible to receive grants , applications may represent public - private partnerships .

passenger and freight rail infrastructure projects are eligible uses of tiger funds .

freight rail projects ( including port improvement projects with a rail component ) have received nearly $810 million in grants ; short line railroad improvement projects have received more than $270 million .

the program is very competitive , with several times as much funding requested each year as the $500 million typically available for grants .

the tifia loan program , like the rrif program , was authorized by congress in 1998 .

as of the end of calendar year 2016 , the program had assisted 56 projects with a total value of over $82 billion ; the federal value of credit assistance provided was more than $20 billion , at a direct cost of more than $1 billion ( representing the cost of the credit risk premium and the administrative costs of processing applications ) .

eligible projects include "rail projects involving the design and construction of intercity passenger rail facilities or the procurement of intercity passenger rail vehicles" and "intermodal freight transfer facilities. .

although five intermodal projects involving rail freight have received assistance , no tifia loans have been approved for pure rail projects .

congress appropriates funding to cover the credit risk premium cost of tifia loans , reducing the cost of loans to recipients .

see table 2 for a summary of differences between the rrif and tifia programs .

in the fast act , the 2015 surface transportation authorization legislation , congress authorized $1.435 billion through fy2020 to administer the program and cover the credit risk premium .

since dot assumes a loss ratio of around 10% , the $1.435 billion available after administrative costs gave it the capacity to provide about $14 billion in tifia loans or loan guarantees from fy2016 through fy2020 .

a number of states have established grant , loan , and tax benefit programs to help short line railroads finance infrastructure or equipment purchases .

in its report on class ii and class iii railroad capital needs and funding sources , fra reported that , in a survey of how short line railroads expected to fund their needs in the near future , respondents expected to get a greater percentage of funding for infrastructure and equipment investments from state programs ( 9% ) than from federal programs ( 8% ) .

the primary competition for short line and regional railroads is the trucking industry .

the degree of competition is affected by the extent of regulation and taxation on the rail and truck sectors .

trucks operate over publicly provided infrastructure ( the highway network ) , whereas railroads are financially responsible for their own infrastructure .

although federal and state taxes on diesel fuel contribute to maintaining the highway infrastructure , studies indicate that heavy trucks cause much more damage to highways than they pay in fuel taxes .

this problem is exacerbated by exemptions congress has provided to limits on truck weights , which raise the productivity of trucking vis - à - vis railroads while increasing the amount of damage the trucks cause to the highway infrastructure .

congress could aid the short line and regional railroads by , for example , increasing the amount of fuel tax paid by heavy trucks to a level commensurate with the damage they cause to the highway infrastructure and limiting exemptions to truck weight restrictions .

such changes also would benefit the class i railroads .

however , these changes could increase the cost of shipping goods by truck , adversely affecting trucking industry employment .

in addition , higher truck rates could affect rail shippers by giving railroads room to raise their own rates .

there are many possible ways of evaluating the effectiveness of the rrif program .

by one measure on which congress has focused — the extent to which railroads have made use of rrif loans — the program has not been very effective , considering that less than $6 billion of the $35 billion in loan authority has been used .

however , the $35 billion limit appears to have been set somewhat arbitrarily , rather than reflecting an analysis of railroad investment needs that could not be met by other means .

the fact that the rrif program has lent far less than the amount congress authorized , particularly to private - sector borrowers , may indicate that freight railroads' ability to finance their investment needs without recourse to government support is greater than congress believed .

congress has expressed a desire that the program be used more heavily , especially by short line railroads , and has identified two aspects of the program that may be reducing its attractiveness: the uncertain length of the loan review process and the cost to the applicant of the loan .

a third aspect that may be reducing the program's attractiveness is the requirement that loan recipients comply with the requirements of the national environmental protection act , various "buy america" requirements , and federal prevailing wage and employee protection requirements .

by statute , a rrif loan application is supposed to be approved or disapproved within 90 days .

but that 90-day clock does not begin until a loan application is considered complete .

in a 2014 audit of the program , the dot office of inspector general found that unclear program information resulted in incomplete loan applications that required fra to work with applicants on completing the applications .

the inspector general determined that due to the extensive loan review process , which involved fra , outside reviewers , dot's office of credit oversight and risk management , and its credit council , the loan application process took a long time and had an uncertain outcome , discouraging potential applicants .

management of the program was subsequently transferred to the build america bureau .

the bureau published a guide to its credit programs ( covering both rrif and tifia ) in january 2017 .

the bureau had five loan applications under review as of january 1 , 2018 ; all were draft applications ( after review , an applicant may or may not be invited to submit a final application ) .

the length of time since the draft applications had been submitted was 19 months , 14 months , 10 months , 8 months , and 5 months , suggesting that in spite of the publication of the program guide and other changes made to shorten the review process , it may still be quite lengthy .

federal law requires that federal credit programs operate at no cost to the government .

the government faces two primary costs for loan assistance and guarantee programs: that of administering the program , including evaluating applicants , and that of a borrower failing to repay its loan .

to cover the cost of administering the program ( including evaluating loan applications ) , the rrif program charges loan applicants a nonrefundable fee of up to 0.5% of the loan amount .

to protect against the possibility of defaults , federal law requires that loan programs keep enough money in reserve to cover the estimated cost to the government of defaults on the loans made .

this reserve amount , which in the case of the rrif program is paid by the borrower , is referred to as a credit risk premium .

a credit risk premium is calculated for each loan , based primarily on the financial soundness of the borrower and the amount of collateral pledged by the borrower .

credit risk premiums for the rrif program generally have been between 0% and 5% of the loan amount .

for example , amtrak paid a 4.424% credit risk premium for its 2011 rrif loan and 5.8% for its 2016 rrif loan .

if collateral of sufficient value is pledged , no credit risk premium may be required .

the 2014 audit of the rrif program noted that some short line railroads had pointed to the credit risk premium as discouraging them from applying to the program .

in response , fra stated that it has no discretion to subsidize the credit risk premium for applicants .

such a step would require congressional action .

as noted above , for several years congress has included in dot appropriations bills a provision barring the use of federal funds to pay the credit risk premium .

prior to the fast act , dot was required to refund the credit risk premium to borrowers after all the loans in their cohort of loans had been repaid .

dot had originally been instructed to establish cohorts of loans for this purpose , with the intent of both maintaining "sufficient balances of credit risk premiums to adequately protect the federal government from risk of default , while minimizing the length of time the government retains possession of those balances. .

however , as of january 2018 , dot has not issued a formal definition of a "cohort of loans. .

as a result , while 21 rrif loans have been repaid , dot has not yet returned any credit risk premiums to their borrowers .

in section 11607 of the fast act ( p.l .

114-94 ) , congress repealed the language requiring dot to repay the credit risk premium for future loans , leaving the decision about repayment to the discretion of dot .

dot has reportedly decided that credit risk premiums paid for loans made after enactment of the fast act will not be repaid .

with respect to loans made prior to passage of the fast act , the conference committee report accompanying the fast act directed dot to refund credit risk premiums to borrowers that had repaid their rrif loans , "regardless of whether the loan is or was included in a cohort .

the intent of this provision is for the secretary to pay back such credit risk premium , with interest , as soon as feasible but not later than three months after the date of enactment. .

as noted , more than two years after adoption of this report dot has yet to repay any credit risk premiums to borrowers that have repaid their loans .

to qualify for a loan , an applicant must comply with a variety of federal laws , including nepa , various "buy america" requirements , and federal prevailing wage and employee protection requirements .

nepa requires that fra review a project's environmental impact .

the buy america act requires that a project receiving a government loan use steel , iron , and other manufactured goods produced in the united states , unless the project sponsor receives a waiver from fra .

the rrif program was created primarily to support freight rail service , particularly that of small ( "short line" ) railroads .

but a significant portion of rrif assistance has gone to passenger rail service , especially since 2008 .

the recipients of the greatest amount of assistance have been amtrak ( three loans totaling $3.1 billion ) and the new york city metropolitan transportation administration ( one loan for $967 million ) .

as of january 2018 , just over four - fifths of the total assistance provided by the program has gone to passenger rail projects ( see table 3 ) .

one cause of much larger loan amounts for passenger projects is that the short line railroads that borrow from rrif typically have small and thus relatively inexpensive projects ; the class i railroads that might be undertaking larger projects have not made use of rrif funding .

another cause may be the lack of alternative funding sources for intercity passenger rail projects .

in calendar year 2009 , congress appropriated $10.5 billion ( later reduced to $10.1 billion through a rescission of appropriated funding ) for grants for high - speed and intercity passenger rail projects .

the availability of that funding generated significant interest on the part of states to establish or expand passenger rail service ; fra reported receiving applications for a total of more than $75 billion .

congress provided virtually no funding for intercity passenger rail service expansion from 2010 until 2017 , so organizations interested in passenger rail services may have turned to rrif as an alternative or supplemental source of funding .

lending to intercity passenger rail projects creates some unique challenges for rrif .

passenger rail projects often fail to make an operating profit , and few of them anywhere in the world generate sufficient operating profit to cover their capital costs .

amtrak , the federally owned intercity passenger railroad operator , has received more than half of all funds loaned by the rrif program .

amtrak has repaid two of the loans ; it does not have to begin repaying the 2016 loan until 2022 .

amtrak states that it will service this loan with revenue from its northeast corridor operations .

however , while amtrak earns an operating profit on its northeast corridor operations , it loses money overall and relies on an annual appropriation of approximately $1.4 billion from congress to continue operating .

thus , the railroad's ability to repay its rrif loan depends on the receipt of other federal funds .

in 2010 , rrif extended a $155 million loan to the denver union station project authority for the reconstruction of denver union station as an intermodal passenger station .

the loan was serviced from the proceeds of tax - increment revenue from development around the station , with a backstop commitment from the city and county of denver .

the project repaid both its rrif and tifia loans in february 2017 .

several private entities seeking to build and operate passenger rail projects have expressed interest in rrif loans in recent years .

privately owned companies operate passenger rail services in many countries , but they typically pay only a portion of the cost of building and maintaining rail infrastructure , which usually receives some form of government support .

one entity that began operating passenger rail service in 2018 , all aboard florida ( which has branded its trains as brightline ) , reportedly applied for a $1.87 billion rrif loan to develop 110-mile per hour passenger service between miami and orlando .

the company later told the press it was seeking other financing instead of a rrif loan , and was issued $1.75 billion in private activity bonds by the florida development finance corporation .

the company is using $600 million to pay for upgrades to the line between miami and west palm beach ( phase i ) , and $1.15 billion to pay for the new high - speed line from its coastal line ( at west palm beach ) to orlando .

xpresswest , a proposed privately funded high - speed rail line between las vegas and southern california , reportedly applied for a $5.5 billion rrif loan in december 2010 .

the chairs of the house and senate budget committees sent a letter to the secretary of dot on march 6 , 2013 , opposing the loan as being too risky ; on june 28 , 2013 , dot issued a letter saying it had suspended review of the xpresswest loan application due to the applicant's difficulties in satisfying buy america requirements and providing documentation for the loan request .

a subsequent venture with a chinese rail company to build the line was terminated , reportedly also due to difficulties in satisfying the buy america requirements of the rrif program .

the texas central railway , a private group proposing to build a high - speed line between dallas and houston , has said that it is considering seeking a loan from the rrif or tifia programs but that it presently is not eligible to apply .

to date , fra has approved no rrif loans to private passenger rail operators .

if such loans are extended , they are likely to be quite large relative to the loans rrif has extended for freight projects and may pose different risks .

rrif loans for freight projects typically are for the purpose of improving an operating railroad that already generates revenue from customers .

those existing facilities may serve as collateral for the loans .

some of the private passenger rail projects now under development , by contrast , involve provision of new services on trackage that has yet to be built , potentially leaving the rrif program with a significant risk of loss if the project is not completed .

