a question of the privileges of the house is a formal declaration by a member of the house asserting that a situation has arisen that affects "the rights of the house collectively , its safety , dignity , and the integrity of its proceedings. .

when making the declaration , the member submits a resolution providing detail on the situation and typically urging action of some sort .

a question of privilege has been held to take precedence over all questions except a motion to adjourn .

in explaining this unique privilege , house speaker thomas reed said: the rights and privileges of all the members of the house , in the discharge of their functions , are sacred , and the house can undertake no higher duty than the conservation of all those rights and privileges intact .

and even if the case arises under dubious circumstances , it is proper for the house to pause and give suitable heed to any question which any member raises with regard to his rights and privileges as a member .

it is for the house alone to determine what they are .

once a question of the privileges of the house is raised , the speaker must , at some point , entertain the question and rule on its validity .

the speaker makes a ruling regarding whether a question constitutes a valid question of the privileges of the house with guidance from the house parliamentarian based on house rule ix and house precedent .

if valid , a question of the privileges of the house will be considered on the house floor .

the first section of this report provides information on raising and considering such questions to provide assistance in anticipating potential house action .

information is provided on restrictions governing when a question can be raised and when the speaker must rule on the question's validity .

further information is provided on actions the house may take after the speaker's ruling on the question's validity , including how the house may consider and dispose of a valid question .

appendix a provides scripts of parliamentary language used on the house floor when such a question is raised .

the second section of this report focuses on the content of questions in an effort to provide guidance as to what the speaker may determine constitutes a valid question .

it includes information on , and examples of , types of questions that have been ruled valid and not valid .

appendix b provides a list of all valid questions offered in the past two decades .

the final section of the report provides extensive data on questions raised in the past two decades , such as the number of valid questions raised per congress and the proportion of questions offered by the minority party .

in addition , this section provides data on how valid questions were disposed of , which varied significantly depending on whether the member offering the question belonged to the majority or the minority party .

this section also includes information on the categories of questions offered , as well as the categories of questions ultimately agreed to by the house .

an examination of questions of the privileges of the house illuminates several characteristics of their use , content , and consideration .

questions possess several distinctive features .

the notion of questions of privilege predates congress .

the house , however , demonstrated a historical reluctance to define such a question for over a century until the chamber found it necessary to create a definition as part of a rule that would "prevent the large consumption of time which resulted from members getting the floor for all kinds of speeches under the pretext of raising a question of the privileges of the house. .

despite the creation of the rule , raising a question of the privileges of the house allows any member to be recognized and to have a resolution read on the floor , even if the question is later ruled not to be valid .

this represents an uncommon opportunity , particularly for members of the minority party , to draw attention to a specific matter in a chamber where the majority party leadership characteristically sets the floor agenda .

also unique is that , by their nature , questions of the privileges of the house allow potentially controversial assertions to be read on the floor , such as criticisms of another member's conduct .

the combination of these characteristics ( the question's potential use by any member , its reading requirement , and the subject matter's potentially controversial nature ) make such resolutions exceptional in the house .

there is a contrast between the types of questions raised and the types of questions agreed to .

the ratios of the types of questions offered and the types of questions agreed to by the house varied .

as displayed in figure 4 , the greatest number of questions raised related to conduct ( 39% ) and to the house's constitutional prerogatives ( 23% ) .

of the resolutions agreed to , however , most ( 78% ) related to the house's constitutional prerogatives , while a relative few ( 9% ) related to conduct .

this might reflect a general disinclination to agree to conduct - related resolutions .

consideration of questions reflect the roles and relations of the majority and the minority .

an examination of questions of the privileges of the house might offer insights into the roles and relationship of the majority party and the minority party in the house .

first , recall that the minority party offered a majority ( 72% ) of the total number of valid questions , and the proportion of questions offered by the minority remained consistent during most of the period , as illustrated in figure 1 .

second , the manner in which questions were disposed of varied significantly depending on whether the member offering the question belonged to the majority or the minority party .

of the questions offered by majority members , a majority ( 69% ) were agreed to .

in fact , all questions offered by the majority party that were voted on were agreed to , perhaps suggesting that if a majority party resolution was not likely to receive an affirmative vote , it did not receive a vote but was disposed of alternatively ( eg , by referring the resolution to committee ) .

of the questions offered by the minority party , a large majority ( 82% ) were tabled , meaning that the house chose to dispose of the resolution adversely but without taking a vote on the resolution .

this may be done to avoid political and / or practical situations that are inopportune for the majority party .

for example , a motion to table prevents a vote that might be used by the minority as a messaging vote and , in addition , halts consideration of the resolution so that the house may engage in the business previously planned by the majority party .

appendix a .

scripts of parliamentary language used on the floor parliamentary language used when a member gives notice of a resolution in most cases , a member ( other than the majority leader of minority leader ) must first give notice of his or her intention to offer the resolution .

the parliamentary language used in such situations is generally some variation of the following: member: mr. speaker , pursuant to clause 2 ( a ) ( 1 ) of rule ix , i rise to give notice of my intent to raise a question of the privileges of the house .

the form of my resolution is as follows: ( at this point , the member reads the resolution in its entirety , although he or she may also ask unanimous consent to dispense with the reading . ) .

speaker: under rule ix , a resolution offered from the floor by a member other than the majority leader or the minority leader as a question of the privileges of the house has immediate precedence only at a time designated by the chair within two legislative days after the resolution is properly noticed .

pending that designation , the form of the resolution noticed by the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) will appear in the record at this point .

the chair will not at this point determine whether the resolution constitutes a question of privilege .

that determination will be made at the time designated for consideration of the resolution .

 ( w ithin two legislative days the member will be notified of the date and time when he or she should rise to offer the resolution. ) .

parliamentary language used when a member offers the resolution when the resolution is offered , the parliamentary language used in such situations is generally some variation of the following: member: mr. speaker , i rise to a question of the privileges of the house and offer the resolution previously noticed .

speaker: the clerk will report the resolution .

 ( the c lerk reads the resolution. ) .

does the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) wish to present argument on the parliamentary question whether the resolution presents a question of the privileges of the house ? .

member: yes .

speaker: the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) is recognized for that purpose .

member: i rise today to ... ( in the event that a member's remarks deviate from the subject of a question of the privileges of the house , the speaker pro tempore will remind the member to confine his or her remarks to the question . ) .

speaker: are there any other members that want to be heard on this point ? .

speaker: the resolution does not qualify ( with explanation ) .

 — or — speaker: the resolution qualifies .

the clerk will report the resolution .

 ( t he clerk reads the resolution . ) .

the resolution presents a question of the privileges of the house .

pursuant to clause 2 of rule ix , the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) and the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) each will control 30 minutes .

the chair recognizes the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) .

appendix b .

questions of the privileges of the house ( 105 th congress - 113 th congress [1995-2014] ) .

