much attention has been focused on the use of water to grow certain agricultural crops in california , given current drought conditions in the state and mandatory cutbacks for non - agricultural water users .

this attention has been twofold .

first , media reports have highlighted how much water is used overall by california's agricultural sectors .

second , media reports have highlighted how much water is used to grow certain types of crops .

most media attention has focused on certain orchard crops , such as tree nuts and vineyard crops , as well as some grain and pasture crops used to support california's meat and dairy industries .

these reports frequently conflict with primary data sources , resulting in confusion over the state of agricultural production and irrigated water use in the california .

regarding overall water use for california's agricultural production , media reports have widely cited estimates claiming that 80% of the state's available water supplies are used annually for agricultural use .

federal and state sources indicate that the state's agricultural sector uses less available water than many media reports claim .

the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) indicates that roughly 60% is used for the state's agricultural sectors ; the california department of water resources ( dwr ) indicates roughly 40% .

the difference between these two estimates is largely based on different survey methods and assumptions , including the baseline amount of water estimated for use , including what constitutes "available" supplies .

some reports , including information posted by the california department of food and agriculture ( cdfa ) , have tried to clarify and highlight differences between various water use estimates .

regarding water used to produce specific crops , news outlets across the country have , on numerous occasions , reported estimates of the amount of water california farmers use to produce a single serving of certain foods .

for example , according to these reports , it takes nearly one gallon of water to produce one almond and 450 gallons of water to produce a quarter - pound hamburger patty .

such statistics can be misleading and further raise questions about the usefulness of quantifying the inputs and resources required to produce a single serving of a specific crop or a single serving of meat or dairy products .

most fruit and nut trees require water year - round and often take several years before the plant reaches fruiting maturity .

at maturity , a fruit orchard can produce food capable of feeding many people .

other crops — such as feed grains and pasture crops — are grown , in some cases , mainly to feed livestock , poultry , and dairy cows .

the cumulative amount of resources and inputs needed to raise a single farm animal to maturity adds up quickly .

growing consumer and market demand for these food commodities is also a major factor in their production .

moreover , some agricultural products are grown in areas where water is more accessible .

also , not all of the water used by the agriculture sector is captured by the plant ; some is returned to the soil or atmosphere .

congressional interest in california agricultural water use centers largely on the operation of the bureau of reclamation's central valley project , which supplies water to numerous agricultural and municipal contractors , some or much of it at a low cost , as well as on u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) support for individual crops and farmers .

congress may also be interested in broader implications of decreased agricultural production and / or lack of water availability throughout the state under certain water supply scenarios .

 ( figure 1 provides a map of california's counties and agricultural districts. ) .

agriculture and related industries are important to california's economy .

the total value of the agricultural production and processing sector was estimated at more than $100 billion in 2012-2013 , including the farm , wholesale , and retail levels for agriculture and agriculture - related industries ( table 1 ) .

as a share of the total california economy , direct agricultural production and processing output ( sales ) accounted for nearly 3% of total state output .

considering the broader economic contribution of the state's food and beverage sectors , the industry's share of the california economy was estimated at nearly 5% ( table 1 ) .

several studies have been conducted by researchers at the university of california estimating the contribution of some of the state's major farming sectors to the overall state economy .

for example , california's dairy industry , including dairy farming and milk processing , contributed an estimated $20.8 billion in 2014 to the state in terms of economic value added ( direct plus so - called indirect and induced effects ) .

california's almond industry generated an estimated $21.5 billion in 2014 in total economic impacts for the state .

overall , these researchers estimate that a "$1 billion increase of the value added from agricultural production and processing results in a total of $2.63 billion of [gross state product] gsp," or the value added by all industries in the state .

other estimates are even greater .

employment within california's agricultural sector averaged more than 412,000 jobs during 2014 , accounting for more than 2% of overall employment .

including other closely related processing industries , researchers at the university of california estimate that the state's agricultural sectors accounts for as much as 6.7% of california's private sector labor force ( including part - time workers ) .

other estimates place this estimate even higher .

these researchers further estimate that "each job in agricultural production and processing accounts for 2.2 jobs in the california economy as a whole. .

agricultural production and processing employment in some parts of california , such as the central valley , are estimated to be greater in percentage terms .

in addition to growing market demand , the availability of irrigation water has been a factor in the development of california's agricultural production , particularly in areas where annual rainfall is inadequate to produce desired crop yields .

estimates of total water use in california and the amount and share of water used for irrigation agriculture vary depending on the data source and methodology used .

compared to the national average , california's relatively high per - acre irrigation water use may , in part , be explained by lower annual rainfall , few unused sources of freshwater , longer growing seasons , and generally drier conditions .

however , california's high per - acre use of water might also stem from irrigation inefficiencies , given current market signals ( namely , artificially low water costs given existing irrigation water policies ) that might not encourage farmers to conserve water or improve irrigation .

the arid climate in some producing regions might also contribute to overall irrigation water losses from evaporation .

despite ongoing investment in more efficient on - farm irrigation systems , flood and furrow irrigation still accounted for 43% of all irrigated acres in 2010 and continues to be the predominant irrigation method ( table 5 ) .

however , between 1991 and 2010 , adoption of drip and microsprinkler irrigation systems more than doubled and accounted for 39% of all irrigated acres in 2010 .

this shift to more efficient irrigation methods may in part be attributable to a reduction in irrigation water supplies in response to periodic drought conditions and other water supply constraints , as well as reduced costs and available federal assistance for adopting improved technologies .

the text box below describes the different types of irrigation systems in use .

drip and microsprinkler irrigation systems are reported to have the highest irrigation efficiency rating of 87.5% - 90.0% , compared to traditional sprinkler systems of 70.0% - 82.5% , depending on the type of system .

irrigation efficiency for most surface irrigation systems can range widely , with furrow and gravity systems having a reported 67.5% - 75.0% efficiency rating .

the type of irrigation system adopted can depend on financing available to update a farm's irrigation system but may also depend on site - specific conditions at the farm , including soil type and topography , as well as the type of crop grown .

sprinkler systems may be suitable for sandy light soils where there is rapid percolation ; some systems are not suitable if the slope of the land exceeds 5% - 10% or in areas with high saline soils , such as in some areas on the westside of the san joaquin valley .

economic factors such as market demand for high - value crops or the ability to sell or lease surplus water may also influence investment in more efficient irrigation technology .

figure 12 shows differences among hydrologic regions in terms of irrigation methods used and trends in methods used from 1991 to 2011 .

cost is often the main limiting factor for more widespread adoption of drip irrigation systems .

media reports cite estimates that a permanent drip irrigation system can cost $1,000 to $3,000 per acre , not including installation ; maintenance and / or repair costs can add another $100 to $300 an acre per year .

actual costs will depend on the type of crop grown .

in 2013 , usda reported that california farmers with irrigated land invested an estimated $600 million in irrigation equipment , covering investments in facilities , land improvement , and computer technology .

the california farm water coalition reports that between 2003 and 2008 , california farmers invested more than $1.5 billion on drip and microsprinkler irrigation technology , with about 1.3 million acres installed with high - technology irrigation systems .

some have suggested that , because of steady advances in technology and efficiency gains made in response to previous water shortages and drought conditions , additional gains in irrigation efficiency will be difficult to obtain .

however , others have noted that , in response to the current and ongoing situation , there continues to be ongoing efforts and increasing investment in irrigation technology .

the california farm bureau federation ( cfbf ) claims , "experts suggest california farmers and ranchers have invested hundreds of millions of dollars in irrigation technology in recent years , and there's general agreement that the pace of investment and technological advancement is increasing. .

cfbf notes that farmers are continuing to invest in new and also improved technologies , including subsurface drip irrigation , as well as better emitters , valves , gauges , and management .

many farmers also engage in certain water and resource conservation practices , such as use of cover crops , minimum tillage , water recycling , and mulching .

cfbf claims this investment and management has allowed california producers to grow more on increasing acreage using roughly the same amount of water .

studies claim there is the potential to reduce agricultural water use from improved technology and water management , and changes in cropping patterns .

a 2009 study by the pacific institute reported potential water savings of 4.5 million acre - feet in a wet year and 6.0 million acre - feet in a dry year , or reductions of 17% from improved technology and water management .

a 2014 follow - up analysis by the natural resources defense council ( nrdc ) reported potential savings of between 5.6 million and 6.6 million acre - feet per year , or about 17% to 22% water savings from current levels "while maintaining productivity and total irrigated acreage. .

many groups have criticized the findings of these studies .

some point out that previous studies conducted by university researchers indicate that on - farm changes by california farmers would result in water savings that are significantly lower than those reported by the pacific institute and nrdc .

some claim these estimated water savings far exceed recent water delivery reductions .

others object to the study's assumptions that producers will shift away from growing certain crops , claiming they ignores market demand , which influences what farmers grow , among other types of methodological concerns .

others also object to claims that agricultural productivity will not be affected by irrigation reductions , pointing out numerous studies over the years estimating significant economic losses to the state's agricultural sectors as a result of ongoing drought conditions .

the most recent estimates by researchers at uc - davis project the total direct economic costs of the drought to the agricultural sectors will total $1.8 billion in 2015 , or about 4% of the state's 2012 agricultural gross cash receipts , covering estimated revenue losses to crop , dairy , and livestock producers , as well as additional water pumping costs .

the debate about water savings from improved irrigation efficiency further raises the question about what is the net outcome of such efficiency gains in the farming sectors: namely , will water use reductions through the adoption of more efficient irrigation systems result in overall water savings , or will these reductions be used to support additional expansion in agricultural production ? .

california's agricultural industry is an important part of the state's economy and a significant contributor to the nation's food supply for certain crops such as fruits , vegetables and tree nuts .

agricultural production has shifted from traditional field crops in recent decades to higher value fruit , vegetable , tree nuts and other specialty crops .

this shift appears to be largely market driven .

confusion over how much water is used to grow crops in california stems largely from baseline differences in water use and supply definitions used by different agencies reporting such data .

