a firm's financial statements provide investors and creditors with essential financial information to evaluate the firm's performance .

financial statements are also a primary means by which firms communicate with capital markets' stakeholders , including investors , creditors , regulators , and the public .

congress created the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) in 1934 to protect investors ; maintain fair , orderly , and efficient markets ; and facilitate capital formation .

however , congress retains its oversight responsibilities over the sec .

one aspect of the powers congress gave the sec is the statutory authority to establish accounting standards for the private sector in the united states .

since the creation of the sec , domestic companies in the united states have used u.s. generally accepted accounting principles ( u.s. gaap ) to issue financial statements .

throughout its history , the sec has relied on the private sector to establish and evolve u.s. gaap .

currently , the sec recognizes the financial accounting standards board ( fasb ) as the designated organization for establishing u.s. gaap in the united states for the private sector .

many foreign countries , including the european union ( eu ) , either require or allow international financial reporting standards ( ifrs ) for firms in their jurisdiction .

the eu also accepts u.s. gaap as equivalent to ifrs .

the sec and fasb have been considering incorporating ifrs where compatible with u.s. gaap since the signing of a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) with the international accounting standards board ( iasb ) in 2002 , known as the norwalk agreement .

the fasb and iasb committed in the mou to developing a "high - quality compatible accounting standards for both domestic and cross - border financial reporting. .

they also agreed to make existing financial reporting standards fully compatible and to maintain the compatibility between both standards .

since 2002 , the sec has delayed the date of convergence and has changed direction on whether the united states will ultimately adopt or converge with ifrs or maintain and evolve u.s. gaap independent of iasb .

this report first provides a brief explanation of the different accounting standards and u.s. capital markets .

u.s. capital markets are discussed in the context of how converging or remaining on u.s. gaap may affect investors and firms .

it then examines congressional interest in convergence issues , including recent statements by sec's senior leadership on this issue .

in conclusion , the report discusses a number of policy options facing congress in the u.s. gaap versus ifrs debate .

appendixes of key definitions for certain concepts and terminology and acronyms used in this report are provided .

in simple terms , accounting standards are agreements among practitioners ( i.e. , accountants , auditors , and regulators ) on how each line item on the financial statement should be valued and reported .

the rules and guidelines in aggregate comprise u.s. gaap or ifrs .

u.s. gaap is widely considered to be rules - based accounting that relies on specific guidance and a list of detailed rules on how accounting principles should be applied to economic events .

as the name indicates , accounting standards in the united states are described as u.s. generally accepted accounting principles ; arguably , it can be asserted the rules - based accounting framework in the united states is guided by a set of accounting principles .

over the decades , however , u.s. gaap has become more rules based as practitioners have sought clarity from regulators on how best to implement the accounting standards as prescribed by u.s. gaap and through the judicial process .

in contrast to u.s. gaap , ifrs is considered principles based .

rules - based standards with their specificity may not address all unforeseen situations , whereas principles - based standards provide a framework for decisionmaking ( the spirit of how rules should be interpreted and followed ) but do not provide specific guidance or a list of detailed rules as with u.s. gaap .

if a practitioner is in doubt about how to apply the principles , ifrs directs the practitioner back to the principles .

whether ifrs will evolve into a rules - based standard , similar to u.s. gaap , may not be known until it has weathered significant scrutiny from practitioners and the judicial system .

financial statements provide economy - wide benefits to firms and investors through the dissemination of accurate information .

one way these benefits are realized is through the efficient allocation of capital between investors and firms .

investors rely on financial statements to make informed decisions on how best to invest their savings .

this section of the report first discusses congressional interest in sec actions on the issue of which standard , u.s. gaap or ifrs , best serves the interest of the u.s. capital markets .

next , it discusses the implications of remaining on u.s. gaap or adopting ifrs from investor and firm perspectives .

perspectives on a unified global accounting standard have evolved in the united states since the signing of the norwalk agreement in 2002 .

many in the global community prefer that the united states adopt or closely converge with ifrs , but perspectives vary among domestic stakeholders on what best serves the interest of u.s. capital markets .

congress , in its oversight capacity of the sec and fasb , has several policy options .

in choosing between u.s. gaap and ifrs accounting standards , arguably , the policy goals of protecting investors and facilitating capital formation would need to be weighed .

this section of the report examines the benefits and challenges of three of those policy options: 1 .

maintain u.s. gaap , while continuing to work with iasb on convergence ( issuing joint standards ) when it serves in the best interest of u.s. capital markets .

another aspect to consider within the scope of maintaining u.s. gaap is to create and promote international u.s. gaap ( i - gaap ) .

the new i - gaap would incorporate the best aspects of u.s. gaap , yet it could be responsive to the needs of the world's capital markets that are similar to the united states .

2 .

adopt ifrs as the u.s. accounting standard , which would require some timeline for implementation that considers the interests of various stakeholders .

3 .

a hybrid policy option would give u.s. firms the choice of issuing financial statements under either u.s. gaap or ifrs , or include ifrs financial statements as supplemental information to u.s. gaap .

one policy option is to maintain u.s. gaap .

because accounting standards are continuously evolving , maintaining the status quo raises the question of whether fasb and iasb should coordinate when responding to emerging issues .

fasb , in its capacity as the accounting standard setter in the united states for private firms , has jointly worked with iasb to develop certain accounting standards , but coordination has fallen short of working toward convergence .

the rest of this section of the report discusses various aspects of why maintaining u.s. gaap might be in the best interest of the u.s. capital markets .

the discussion begins by providing two different examples of how u.s. gaap financial statements are integrated into the institutional infrastructure of the united states and why changing to a different accounting standard would need careful consideration .

it then discusses , based on current events , reasons why maintaining a responsive and independent u.s. accounting standards setter is important to u.s. investors and firms .

the next section discusses why the sec might want to change a 2007 ruling that allowed foreign firms listed in the united states to file under ifrs .

in 2007 , the sec changed its ruling that required foreign - listed firms to reconcile their financial statements to u.s. gaap and allowed them to file under ifrs .

lastly , it presents a discussion on creating a new alternative international accounting standard based on u.s. gaap .

switching to ifrs would have consequences beyond financial reporting .

two different examples of how u.s. gaap is closely linked with other aspects of the u.s. institutional infrastructure — tax laws and statutory reporting — might illustrate this interplay .

tax laws require that taxable income be computed under the method of accounting that a taxpayer maintains for computing their income ( i.e. , normal business income ) .

the change from u.s. gaap to ifrs might not only affect financial reporting but how the tax liability is determined for u.s firms that carry inventory .

the u.s. tax code allows last in first out ( lifo ) valuation of inventory as a consequence of gaap accounting when determining tax liability , whereas ifrs does not allow lifo ( see text box ) .

the issue surrounding lifo has been one of the most frequently discussed issues over ifrs adoption .

the issue was discussed at a march 24 sec budget hearing held by the house financial services committee .

similar to how financial reporting is closely linked with requirements in tax laws , statutory reporting ( i.e. , regulatory filings ) is closely linked to financial reporting .

although statutory reports often leverage some of the gaap financial information , they communicate a different set of information that is not readily communicated by gaap financial statements .

for example , in the insurance industry , statutory reports focus on the insurance firm's ability to pay the claims of the insured , whereas gaap statements focus on the revenue and profit generated by the insurance firm .

likewise , the banking industry requires banks to file call reports with the bank regulators .

call reports communicate additional information about the bank's capital and liquidity among other information about the health of the bank .

both gaap and statutory filings are useful for investors and regulators .

regulators frequently use statutory reports to gather information about the health of a specific industry , which is often useful for policymakers .

an example of fasb's ability to maintain its independence and be responsive to the needs of u.s. capital markets is how it has addressed the concerns of u.s. firms over the implementation of the new revenue recognition standard .

on may 28 , 2014 , the fasb and iasb issued a joint revenue recognition standard for revenue from contracts with customers .

the new standard was to go into effect for reporting periods beginning after december 15 , 2016 .

however , in response to firms' concerns , on april 1 , 2015 , fasb sought comments on delaying the implementation of the new revenue recognition standard by one year to december 15 , 2017 , without iasb consent .

reportedly , when fasb was initially considering postponing the implementation date , iasb was not .

nearly a month later , when fasb voted to delay implementation , iasb voted to publish an exposure draft proposing a one - year delay in implementation "to keep the effective date of the iasb's and the fasb's revenue standards aligned. .

fasb's ability to respond to the concerns of u.s. capital market participants at a faster rate than iasb might provide policymakers with a significant reason to maintain the institutional structure of u.s. accounting regulators and u.s. gaap .

as fasb and iasb try to create converged standards , some of the underlying differences in accounting standards are becoming more apparent , leading to divergence between u.s. gaap and ifrs .

the degree of convergence or divergence might become more evident as the accounting standards are updated over time .

for example , fasb and iasb have had differing approaches in response to constituents' concerns about accounting for "financial instruments" that began as a joint project in 2005 .

in 2014 , based on the feedback it received on the exposure draft , "accounting for financial instruments and revisions to the accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities," fasb revised its original proposal and chose a deliberative approach in three phases , while ifrs issued the new standard , ifrs 9 , to be effective january 1 , 2015 .

much of the recent u.s. debate among stakeholders and congress has focused on how much convergence is desirable .

the differences in accounting standards could benefit capital markets if the competition and evolution of different approaches between accounting standards lead to better standards over time .

differing approaches could lead to fasb and iasb learning best practices from each other , which could result in improved financial reporting and disclosures , but it could also lead to continued divergence from creating one common global accounting standard .

in 2007 , the sec changed the requirement for foreign private issuers to file form 20-f and allowed fpis to file under ifrs .

congress and the sec may want to consider requiring all listed firms in the united states , including foreign private issuers , to report under u.s. gaap or reconcile ifrs financial statements with u.s. gaap standards .

the sec could change its 2007 ruling that allowed fpis to file under ifrs and require them to reconcile ( form 20-f ) to u.s. gaap or file under u.s. gaap .

as previously discussed , requiring all u.s. - listed companies to file under one accounting standard might eliminate any investor confusion , but foreign firms might respond to this change by delisting .

if the united states continues to maintain u.s. gaap , an option to consider is to create and promote an international version of u.s. gaap ( i - gaap ) , as proposed in a fasb - commissioned report in 2009 .

for countries that have similar characteristics to the u.s. economy and institutional infrastructure , adoption of i - gaap might promote greater confidence in their capital markets .

continued divergence between gaap and ifrs might provide more of a reason to create i - gaap , which would adhere to the fundamentals of the rules - based approach of u.s. gaap but would have greater input from other jurisdictions .

as previously discussed , competing standards ( i - gaap and ifrs ) might lead to better standards that benefit capital markets .

an ongoing criticism of ifrs is the ability of each jurisdiction to effectively implement and enforce the newly adopted ifrs standards within its jurisdiction .

to counter some of the criticisms faced by ifrs adoptees and maintain i - gaap's credibility , i - gaap adoptees could be required to adhere to specific expectations on implementation , enforcement , and auditing requirements .

each jurisdiction must initially qualify to adopt and implement i - gaap .

an international fasb ( i - fasb ) could be established as the governing body to develop i - gaap and to determine which countries qualify to adopt i - gaap .

acceptance into i - gaap after meeting certain standards might function in a similar fashion to how member countries are admitted to the eu .

thereafter , each jurisdiction could be periodically certified by i - fasb on their compliance with i - gaap .

certifying only select countries to implement i - gaap and monitoring their ongoing adherence could help maintain the credibility of i - gaap .

although there might be many benefits to dual international accounting standards , dual standards may prevent eventual global convergence to a single set of standards .

a second policy option for congress and the sec to consider is the complete adoption of ifrs as the u.s. accounting standard .

this section of the report discusses different ways ( options ) of adopting ifrs and specific issues related to those options ; transitional issues common to the ways of adopting ifrs ; and the role of u.s. institutions .

the first way is for the sec to choose a specific date that all public companies must begin reporting under ifrs .

this approach might be the least confusing and most straightforward for firms and investors , but it presents a particular set of challenges .

not all firms may be able to adhere to a specific date , because a significant amount of basic resources ( eg , human , technology , and financial ) necessary for ifrs implementation might not be available at the same time .

if the conversion date was set far into the future with sufficient planning , then the resource constraint might not be as significant .

the second way to implement ifrs is in multiple phases .

in the united states , the last significant changes to accounting standards as required by the sarbanes - oxley act were phased in over a number of years .

implementing ifrs over several years based on firm - revenue size or by industrial segment might allow stakeholders sufficient time to adapt to the new standards without significant disruption to individual firms or the economy .

phasing in ifrs based on firm - revenue size with larger firms adopting first could be justified on the grounds that firms with higher revenues are able to absorb the costs more readily than smaller firms .

further , because there are significantly more smaller firms than larger firms , it will allow more time for the supporting companies to scale up their resources to support the transition .

this approach might enable smaller firms to learn from the successes and failures of larger firms and identify ways to reduce costs of conversion .

the potential for investor confusion exists , however , during the period of transition as firms within the same industry could be reporting under two different standards .

another option would be to implement ifrs by specific industries over time .

industry - specific implementation would be easier for investors and other stakeholders trying to evaluate the performance of a company among its peers .

however , specialization that auditors , financial analysts , and consultants develop in one industry might not readily translate to another specific industry .

for example , consider an individual who is specialized in auditing banks .

arguably , the knowledge of the banking industry is not so readily transferable to the natural resources industry .

this approach might present challenges to smaller firms , because they may not have the knowhow or financial resources to convert simultaneously with their peers that have higher revenues within the same industry .

compared with the normal business operating cycle for individual firms and the economy , converting to a new standard arguably will require greater resources .

u.s. gaap and ifrs differ on what should be included on financial statements and how the information is presented .

to accommodate the transition to a new accounting standard , existing computer systems that maintain the accounting records must be upgraded or new systems purchased .

companies would likely need to maintain the new systems and legacy systems until the usefulness of the information from legacy systems expires .

in addition to the one - time cost of converting to ifrs , there would be ongoing costs similar to remaining on u.s. gaap .

if firms choose to issue financial statements under both standards during the period of transition , there would be costs to reconcile both sets of financial statements and provide sufficient disclosures for investors to understand the potential differences in net income ( loss ) and asset valuation under each standard .

firms must also decide if the benefits outweigh the costs of having both sets of financial statements audited or just having one set of financial statements audited .

another transitional issue of adopting ifrs is that the financial statements at first might be misrepresented either intentionally or unintentionally .

for example , a firm's management might have incentives ( eg , stock options or stock grants ) to take advantage of the principle - based approach to engage in earnings management .

in addition , the learning curve for the firm's staff and auditors could lead to unintentional mistakes .

if the financial statements' errors are significant , then the business must reissue the financial statements .

a significant financial misstatement could lead to a decline in a firm's stock price and make it difficult to raise capital .

if several companies have to restate their financial statements , investors may lose confidence in the overall u.s. capital markets , at least temporarily .

in turn , loss of confidence by the investment community could increase the cost of capital or limit the availability of credit for u.s. firms .

the investment community might discount the value of firms' equity or demand higher premiums for the debt issued by firms .

to mitigate some of the transitional challenges , u.s. firms might be able to leverage the knowledge gained from overseas firms that have adopted ifrs .

leveraging the knowledge from overseas firms could potentially result in lower costs of conversion for u.s. firms than the costs incurred by overseas firms .

similarly , u.s. regulators may also be able to learn best practices from their overseas counterparts and help implement a smoother transition .

the role of the sec and fasb as accounting standard setters must be reconsidered if ifrs is adopted in the united states .

fasb's role is limited to setting standards , whereas the sec has a broad regulatory role in the capital markets , therefore the sec's role in u.s. capital markets might not be significantly diminished .

if the united states chooses to adopt ifrs without customization , then fasb's role could be diminished or possibly redefined .

fasb could evolve to become an advisory body to the sec .

another issue to consider is that ifrs has not weathered the u.s. judicial process and remains a principles - based standard .

if ifrs is adopted in the united states , over the ensuing years firms may interpret and apply standards differently .

similar to fasb's current role , a national standard setter could mitigate differences and issue uniform guidance .

further , without a standards body to provide guidance in the context of the u.s. institutional infrastructure , multinational firms may be influenced by how standards are interpreted in other jurisdictions .

there are a few ways to incorporate ifrs into the u.s. financial reporting requirements .

one option is to allow a choice between ifrs and u.s. gaap or require firms to file under both standards .

a second option , proposed by sec's chief accountant , is to allow supplemental ifrs reporting .

these different options are discussed in detail below .

congress and the sec could allow firms to choose either u.s. gaap or ifrs .

allowing firms the choice of accounting standards would give firms the flexibility to be more responsive to the desires of the investing community ; in other words , let market demand determine which standard becomes pervasive in the united states .

however , this option would make it challenging for investors to compare firms within the same industry , and there are other possible implications .

the choice of standards might become segmented by industry .

given their relative importance to investors , larger firms might have disproportionate influence over which standard their specific industry follows .

if a specific standard becomes firmly entrenched by a specific industry , it would be easier for investors to compare firms within the same industry , but it would be more difficult to compare firms across industries .

further , firms might periodically "venue shop" between both standards for best results .

similar to provisions in tax laws , congress and the regulators could consider limiting how often firms change accounting standards .

tax law allows a business to change the method of accounting it uses for determining taxable income only with the consent of the secretary of the treasury .

similar provisions could be made for switching financial reporting by firms with the consent of the sec or fasb .

another approach is to require all u.s. firms to file under both standards , which could be more expensive for firms but might help ease the transition to ifrs for investors .

policymakers could choose to require firms to report under both standards indefinitely or for a specific period of time .

for example , policymakers could choose a five - year transition period in which firms are required to file under both standards and then require firms to report only under ifrs .

the choice of different accounting standards or requiring both accounting standards would make it more difficult for accountants , auditors , and regulators , because they must understand the nuances of each accounting and auditing standard .

in the united states , private - firm auditors follow generally accepted auditing standards ( gaas ) in conjunction with u.s. gaap .

jurisdictions that have adopted ifrs generally use the international standards in auditing developed by international auditing and assurance standards board ( iaasb ) .

the adoption of ifrs does not necessarily mean the iaasb standard would be the default standard .

the sec and public company accounting oversight board could determine which auditing standards would be used in the united states .

similar to accounting standards , auditing standards have also evolved with the institutional infrastructure of the united states .

implementation of iaasb must be considered in the context of specific legislation passed by congress to protect investors ( i.e. , sox ) .

this hybrid option would require a decision to be made about which of these auditing standards firms would be required to follow .

similar to gaas , a u.s. version of international gaas ( i - gaas ) could be created if ifrs were adopted in the united states .

another option to consider , as proposed by the sec's chief accountant , james schnurr , in december 2014 , would allow voluntary disclosure of ifrs financial information as a supplement to u.s. gaap financial statements .

schnurr's proposal did not specify if full ifrs financial statements or selected financial data would be reported as supplemental information under ifrs .

further , schnurr's proposal did not specify if the supplemental ifrs information should be audited or unaudited .

currently , investors expect financial statements filed with the sec to have been audited .

inclusion of ifrs financial statements with sec filings has the potential to attract additional overseas investors , but unaudited statements might mislead investors , as they may assume that ifrs financial statements are audited in similar fashion to u.s. gaap statements .

alternatively , the sec and pcaob could consider requiring filers to disclose in their financial statements which statements are audited and unaudited .

to alleviate investors' concerns , the sec and pcaob could mandate that all financial information filed with the sec must be audited .

it would increase costs for companies to have both sets of financial statements audited , but inclusion of ifrs statements under this option would be voluntary , and not a requirement .

alternatively , as currently permitted , the sec could allow only u.s. gaap financial statements to be filed with the sec .

any firms desiring to attract additional investors could issue audited ifrs financial statements independent of sec filings .

for example , the advantage of this proposal is that firms would only undergo the additional expense of supplemental filing if it were beneficial to them .

the introduction of ifrs financial information could benefit u.s. firms interested in attracting more overseas investors .

however , inclusion of two sets of financial statements might also confuse both domestic and international investors , especially if revenue , expense , net profit , asset , and liability values differ in each set of financial statements .

appendix a .

key definitions the following definitions are described in the context of how they are discussed in this report ; they are not meant to be precise legal or finance definitions .

adoption — the acceptance of ifrs as the accounting standard for publicly listed firms .

arm ' s length — parties to a transaction that are independent and on equal footing without any special relationship or having another agreement on the side .

capital allocation — the process of allocating investments across borders , business units , or departments to maximize returns on the investments .

convergence — convergence might be described as a process by which a jurisdiction incorporates specific standards from international financial reporting standard ( ifrs ) or modifies some or all of its generally accepted accounting principles ( gaap ) to more closely resemble ifrs .

conservatism p rinciple — in accounting , under the conservatism principle , if the probability of loss in value of an asset is high , then the loss should be recognized .

conversely , if the likelihood of a gain is low , then the gain should not be recognized .

similar application is required for recognizing estimates and profit ( loss ) .

due process — due process could be described as a principle of fairness in all legal matters that aspires to safeguard both private and public rights against unfairness .

from this basic principle of fairness , many decisions including procedural and substantive rights and process are determined .

cost of capital — one of many possibilities is that increased interest from investors can lower a firm's cost of raising capital either in debt or equity .

in simple terms , a firm could pay a lower interest rate when issuing debt or issue fewer shares of stock at a higher price due to increased demand .

listed firms — firms that are listed on a stock exchange ( eg , new york stock exchange [nyse] , national association of securities dealers automated quotations [nasdaq] ) .

market liquidity — market liquidity is defined as assets that can be easily purchased or sold without significant change in the assets' price .

principles - based accounting standards — they provide a framework for decisionmaking but do not provide specific guidance or a list of detailed rules to follow , and they are widely used to describe ifrs .

rules - based accounting standards — they rely on specific guidance and a list of detailed rules on how accounting principles should be applied to economic events .

they are widely used to describe u.s. gaap .

venue shopping — choosing an accounting standard that reflects the firm's performance in the best light possible to investors and regulators .

appendix b .

acronym .

