u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , an agency within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , performs multiple functions including the adjudication of immigration and naturalization petitions and refugee and asylum claims , as well as other immigration - related services .

uscis currently funds over 95% of its budget by charging user fees to petitioners for its services .

the agency and its predecessor , the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , have had the legal authority to do so since at least the passage of the immigration and nationality act of 1952 ( ina ) .

in 1988 , congress created the immigration examinations fee account , which made the portion of uscis's budget collected from user fees no longer subject to annual congressional approval .

this budgetary structure has attracted congressional attention as the result of president obama's recent executive action on immigration .

among its other provisions , the action would expand the current use of deferred action that some estimate could affect up to 5 million unauthorized aliens living in the united states .

uscis would process all new deferred action petitions , the cost of which would be paid for through user fees .

some members of congress oppose the executive action , particularly its expansion of existing deferred action provisions .

however , because uscis's funding is largely independent of the annual appropriations process , congress cannot use that process to halt the deferred action programs contained in the president's executive action .

if congress wanted to alter existing statutory provisions governing the collection of user fees in the immigration examinations fee account , the availability of user fees for expenditure , or the prohibition of user fees for certain purposes , it would need to enact legislation .

apart from the agency's accountability to congress , other issues may merit congressional attention .

these include the agency's capacity to handle surges in application volume while maintaining stable service levels for the rest of its caseload ; whether the underlying reasoning used to establish petition fees continues to be appropriate ; whether current fees are at a level where they may be affecting or altering both the pool of applicants who apply for benefits and the pool of lawful permanent residents who decide to naturalize ; and the pace and progress of information technology modernization within an agency that remains reliant upon paper copies of petitions and documents .

this report begins with a brief overview of uscis functions .

it then describes the agency's budgetary structure , including its three primary fee accounts for processing user fees .

it discusses how the agency calculates user fees for particular immigration services and benefits .

the report closes with a discussion of issues for congress .

uscis was established with the homeland security act of 2002 and assumed responsibility for the immigration service functions of the federal government on march 1 , 2003 .

uscis has over 200 offices around the world and employs roughly 19,000 employees and contractors within four directorates and nine program offices .

processing petitions and applications , which is most of the agency's workload , occurs in four major uscis service centers and 83 field offices in the united states , puerto rico , and guam .

over two decades ago , the budgetary structure of uscis's predecessor agency , the former ins , was transformed when the immigration examinations fee account ( iefa ) was created to fund the agency's activities and operations .

since the creation of uscis in 2003 , the agency has been largely dependent upon fees to fund its operations .

the agency has two other smaller accounts described below that were created to receive monies to support specific purposes both within and outside uscis: the h - 1b non - immigrant petitioner fee account and the h - 1b and l fraud prevention and detection fee account .

uscis also receives a small portion of its budget through appropriations .

as noted above , the ina permits uscis to collect fees at a level that ensures recovery of the full costs of providing adjudication and naturalization services , including services provided without charge to asylum applicants and certain other immigrant applicants , as well as administrative costs .

 ( see appendix b for a list of selected uscis petition fees as well as actual ( fy2014 ) and projected ( fy2015 ) petition processing volumes. ) .

as such , uscis can ( with exceptions ) adjust fees according to its budgetary needs .

setting fee levels , however , can be politically contentious ( see " fee levels and public policy " below ) .

to do so , uscis must regularly assess the cost of providing its services and apply cost accounting analyses to appropriately and accurately assess fees to each petition type .

such analyses are particularly important for an agency that derives most of its operating budget from user fees .

since its formation , uscis has come under scrutiny for weak cost assessments and occasional long processing waiting periods .

 ( for a brief history of uscis fees , see appendix a . ) .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has investigated the degree to which the uscis fee schedule corresponds to its processing costs .

substantial revisions to uscis fees in fy2004 , fy2007 , and fy2010 have resulted in part from such gao reviews .

for instance , the fy2004 fee adjustments stemmed from a cost review and fee assessment in fy1998 .

the fy2007 fee adjustment was based on a cost review in fy2006 , the first in eight years .

in contrast , the fy2010 fee adjustments emerged following a cost review completed in fy2009 , just three years after the previous one .

the timing of gao and internal assessments can significantly affect both the average level of fee increases as well as uscis workloads .

in its 2009 report gao recommended more frequent fee reviews to reduce the need for disproportionately large increases .

for instance , the fy2010 fee review resulted in an average fee increase of about 10% , compared with an 88% fee increase in fy2007 .

in the month prior to when uscis enacted the fy2007 fee increase , application volume soared , outpacing the agency's processing capacity .

this contributed to a processing backlog of roughly 1.5 million petitions and created unplanned costs for the agency to store its paper - based applications .

as of april 2015 , uscis was working on a fee review for the fy2016-fy2017 biennial period .

based on the results of the fee review , uscis will determine whether to adjust its fee structure .

over two decades ago , the budget structure of uscis's predecessor agency , the former ins , was transformed by the law that created the immigration examinations fee account to fund the agency's activities and operations .

since that time , and particularly since uscis was created in 2002 , the agency has relied almost entirely on user fees to fund its operations .

appropriations have been granted for special projects and currently fund the e - verify program .

having a government agency funded by user fees reduces the fiscal burden on u.s. taxpayers .

however , it also might reduce the influence and oversight that congress can exert over how the agency spends its user fees .

such limitations became more apparent following the passage of the president's executive action of november 20 , 2014 , which included a new deferred action program that some members of congress oppose .

some have expressed concerns about the impact that a relatively sudden and large demand for uscis adjudication services might have on the rest of the agency's workload .

uscis has experience in handling surges in petition volume .

it also has , with the existing daca program initiated in 2012 , an active model for confronting potential challenges posed by similar programs initiated within the recent executive action .

however , past experience also suggests that processing backlogs could occur , as well as increases in processing times for other types of petitions .

such delays underscore both the agency's limited personnel resources and its continued reliance on a largely paper - based system .

in addition to these issues , immigration observers continue to express concerns over several perennial issues related to uscis .

the most frequently cited concern involves fee levels .

some evidence suggests that the current naturalization petition fee , in particular , poses a barrier to individuals wishing to become u.s. citizens , a critical step toward political and civic incorporation .

while immigrant advocacy groups argue that lower fees would increase the numbers of lprs who naturalize , uscis has not signaled any plans to adjust its fee structure to address this concern beyond maintaining the naturalization petition fee at its current level .

appendix a .

history of uscis fee funding in its original version , the immigration and nationality act of 1952 ( ina ) prescribed fees for certain immigration services .

furthermore , a general "user" statute in title v of the independent offices appropriations act of 1952 granted government agencies the authorization to charge fees for services performed .

legislation in 1968 removed the enumeration of statutory fees under the ina , and subsequently immigration fees were prescribed in regulations under the authorization of the latter "user" statute .

following the 1968 legislation , the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) continued to periodically adjust fees as it deemed necessary .

however , the second term of the reagan administration saw more concerted efforts to make ins adjudication functions fee - reliant .

at the same time that congress passed the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ( irca ) , which included a legalization program for certain unlawfully present aliens , the ins decreased fees for stays of deportation but increased them for certain other deportation - related motions .

in the publication of the final fee schedule after passage of irca , the agency stated that it believed it was legally required to recover all of its costs for services it provided .

the 1987 amendment to the fee schedule added fees for the legalization program under irca , and despite opposition to the $185 filing fee , the ins maintained the charge was needed to ensure the program was self - funding .

in 1988 , congress mandated the creation of the immigration exam fee account ( iefa ) in the departments of commerce , justice , and state , the judiciary , and related agencies appropriations act of 1989 , such that the funding for the legalization fees could be isolated and a portion of those fees retained by the agency .

these fees would then be available to the ins to recover some of the costs associated with providing immigration services .

the following fiscal year , the iefa was amended in the departments of commerce , justice , and state , the judiciary , and related agencies appropriations act of 1990 , giving ins the authority to retain and expend all of the adjudication fees collected .

the purpose of this change was that funding for the adjudications and naturalization program of the ins would be financed solely through this mechanism .

following the passage of the immigration act of 1990 , the ins experienced a period of unprecedented growth in applications and petitions for immigration services .

this growth was further compounded in 1995 when approximately 3 million individuals who had legalized under irca became eligible to naturalize .

at roughly the same time , gao released a report on the financial practices of the ins that found inadequate controls over fee funding and vulnerability to fraud and other abuses .

gao also found that despite a large increase in fee funding , the agency suffered from inadequate service processing times and weak leadership and management .

the ins responded to this report through centralization initiatives and by stating that its new fee schedule of 1991 would reduce the growing applications backlog .

yet , by 1993 observers expressed growing concerns that increased fees had not yielded the promised performance improvements .

some asserted that the ins was using a portion of funds from the iefa for enforcement activities rather than adjudication services .

between 1993 and 2001 , the ins continued to receive criticism for not meeting its service objectives , despite increases in funding from fees and appropriations .

many observers continued to assert that ins was using a portion of its immigration services collections to fund non - service activities such as border security and interior enforcement .

this suspected interweaving of service and non - service funding prompted a push to separate the service and enforcement functions of the ins .

in 1997 , the u.s. commission on immigration reform recommended that the ins be dismantled and the adjudication and enforcement functions be divided up between the department of state and the department of justice ( doj ) , respectively .

the clinton and bush administrations , however , categorically rejected the proposed dismantling of ins and instead encouraged internal reforms .

following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congress decided to formally separate ins's enforcement and adjudication functions .

with the passage of the homeland security act of 2002 ( hsa ) , congress dissolved the ins and established uscis , a new immigration adjudication agency , within the newly formed department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

the ins did attempt to increase its fees in fy2003 to cover anticipated additional costs related to security checks , but doj did not act upon the request due to the upcoming transition of immigration functions from doj to dhs .

since its creation , uscis has been largely dependent upon fees to fund its services , with direct appropriations provided primarily for temporary projects .

appendix b .

fee and processing volume statistic .

