this report provides background information and analysis on the following topics: various aspects of u.s. - turkey relations , including ( 1 ) turkey's strategic orientation ; ( 2 ) u.s. / nato cooperation and how a turkish purchase of an s - 400 air defense system from russia could endanger its acquisition of u.s. - origin f - 35 aircraft ; ( 3 ) the situation in northern syria , including with kurdish - led militias ; ( 4 ) criminal cases of note since the failed 2016 coup attempt in turkey ; and ( 5 ) congressional proposals .

domestic turkish developments , including politics under president recep tayyip erdogan's largely authoritarian and polarizing rule ( with local elections scheduled for march 2019 ) , and significant economic concerns .

for additional information , see crs report r41368 , turkey: background and u.s. relations , by jim zanotti and clayton thomas .

president erdogan has ruled turkey since becoming prime minister in 2003 .

after erdogan became president in august 2014 via turkey's first - ever popular presidential election , he claimed a mandate for increasing his power and pursuing a "presidential system" of governance .

analyses of erdogan sometimes characterize him as one or more of the following: a pragmatic populist , a protector of the vulnerable , a budding authoritarian , an indispensable figure , and an islamic ideologue .

erdogan's consolidation of power has continued amid domestic and international concerns about growing authoritarianism in turkey .

he outlasted the july 2016 coup attempt , and then scored victories in the april 2017 constitutional referendum and the june 2018 presidential and parliamentary elections — emerging with the expanded powers he had sought .

some allegations of voter fraud and manipulation surfaced in both elections .

u.s. and european union officials have expressed a number of concerns about rule of law and civil liberties in turkey , including the government's influence on media and turkey's reported status as the country with the most journalists in prison .

while there may be some similarities between turkey under erdogan and countries like russia , iran , or china , some factors distinguish turkey from them .

for example , unlike russia or iran , turkey's economy cannot rely on significant rents from natural resources if foreign sources of revenue or investment dry up .

unlike russia and china , turkey does not have nuclear weapons under its command and control .

additionally , unlike all three others , turkey's economic , political , and national security institutions and traditions have been closely connected with those of the west for decades .

erdogan is a polarizing figure , with about half the country supporting his rule , and half the country against it .

to obtain a parliamentary majority in the june 2018 elections , erdogan's islamist - leaning justice and development party ( adalet ve kalkinma partisi , or akp ) relied on a coalition with the nationalist action party ( milliyet halk partisi , or mhp ) .

the mhp is the country's traditional turkish nationalist party , and is known for opposing political accommodation with the kurds .

local elections scheduled for march 2019 could be a significant barometer of domestic support for erdogan under the difficult economic circumstances described below .

the turkish economy appears to be slowing down , with negative consequences both for consumer demand and for companies seeking or repaying loans in global markets .

economic growth was down from over 7% in 2017 to around 3% in 2018 , with forecasts for 2019 at or below 1% .

by the end of 2018 , inflation had essentially doubled year - on - year to more than 20% .

during 2018 , the turkish lira depreciated close to 30% against the dollar in an environment featuring a globally stronger dollar , rule of law concerns and political uncertainty , and significant corporate debt .

in august 2018 , amid u.s. - turkey tensions on the pastor brunson matter , president trump announced a doubling of tariffs on turkish steel and aluminum imports .

this prompted retaliatory action from turkey .

the lira plunged in value , but recovered somewhat in the final months of 2018 after turkey's central bank raised its key interest rate by 6.25% in september .

in november 2018 , the united states granted turkey ( along with seven other countries ) a six - month exception from u.s. sanctions on iranian oil .

some observers speculate that turkey may need to turn to the international monetary fund ( imf ) for a financial assistance package .

this would be a sensitive challenge for president erdogan because his political success story is closely connected with helping turkey become independent from its most recent imf intervention in the early 2000s .

before the central bank's rate hike in september 2018 , some commentators voiced concerns about the bank's independence as erdogan publicly opposed increasing rates .

in january 2019 , turkey's parliament voted to grant erdogan broader emergency powers in case of a financial crisis .

the government appears to be trying to stimulate growth via familiar measures to boost consumer demand .

a former turkish economic official has claimed that by offloading the "debt crisis of the real sector" onto the banking sector , the government has exacerbated the crisis .

in his opinion , a "harsh belt - tightening policy" with or without the imf is thus inevitable after the march 2018 local elections .

