the manner by which hong kong selects its next chief executive ( ce ) in 2017 may be a bellwether for the prospects for the democratization of the city's governance system .

although china's leaders have agreed in principle that the chief executive for the hong kong special administrative region of the people's republic of china ( hksar ) may be chosen by universal suffrage in 2017 , the conditions placed on the method of nominating candidates may prove to be unacceptable to the people of hong kong and the city's legislature , the legislative council ( legco ) .

hong kong's current chief executive , leung chun - ying ( c.y .

leung ) , submitted his proposed resolution to change the ce selection process to legco on june 17 , 2015 .

controversies over restrictions on the ce's proposal to legco imposed by an august 2014 decision of china's national people's congress standing committee ( npcsc ) have led to ongoing protests across hong kong and serious opposition from some legco members .

on june 18 , 2015 , legco voted 28 against and 8 in favor , thereby defeating the resolution .

it remains to be seen if this effectively ends prospects for reforming the ce selection method before the 2017 election , or if the npcsc , ce leung , or legco will identify a new path toward the ce's election by universal suffrage .

since hong kong's reversion from british to chinese sovereignty in 1997 , many of the people of hong kong have looked forward to and campaigned for the fulfilment of the promise contained in the city's basic law — the election of the chief executive and legco by universal suffrage .

past attempts to reform hong kong's election process have had mixed results .

in december 2005 , legco voted down proposed ce election reforms after up to 250,000 people rallied against the proposed reforms .

on december 29 , 2007 , in response to a request from then ce donald tsang yam - kuen , the npcsc issued "decision on issues relating to the methods of selecting the chief executive of the hong kong special administrative region and for forming the legislative council of the hong kong special administrative region in the year 2012 and on issues relating to universal suffrage," which stated that the chief executive may be elected by universal suffrage in 2017 .

despite the apparent promise in the npcsc's december 2007 decision , legislation in 2010 to make modest changes in the ce selection process were approved by legco only after the prc government and hong kong's democratic party struck a last - minute agreement .

the prospects for democratic election reforms in hong kong are of potential interest to congress for several reasons .

first , the u.s. - hong kong policy act of 1992 ( 22 u.s.c .

5731 ; p.l .

102-383 ) states , "support for democratization is a fundamental principle of u.s. foreign policy .

as such , it naturally applies to united states policy toward hong kong. .

second , how china handles the possible democratic election reforms in hong kong is one indicator of its commitment to its "one country , two systems" policy as it applies to hong kong , as well as its tolerance of political reform in general .

third , hong kong plays an important role for u.s. economic interests in asia .

if the chinese and hong kong governments are unable to formulate ce election reforms acceptable to legco and the people of hong kong , possibly continued and intensified political unrest could harm hong kong's ability to function as an economic hub for u.s. interests in asia .

fourth , the resolution of hong kong's political reforms may have an impact on relations between china and taiwan .

the crux of the political controversy around the possible ce election reforms is the process of nominating the official candidates .

article 45 of the basic law of the hong kong special administrative region of the people's republic of china ( generally referred to as the "basic law" ) states the method for selecting the chief executive shall be specified in the light of the actual situation in the hong kong special administrative region and in accordance with the principle of gradual and orderly progress .

the ultimate aim is the selection of the chief executive by universal suffrage upon nomination by a broadly representative nominating committee in accordance with democratic procedures .

[emphasis added. .

in its august 2014 decision , the npcsc approved the selection of the chief executive in 2017 by universal suffrage , but restricted the number of nominees to either two or three candidates , and also stipulated that the nominating committee ( nc ) be "made in accordance with the number of members , composition and formation method of the election committee for the fourth chief executive [c.y .

leung]. .

in addition , the npcsc decision stipulated that to be officially nominated , a candidate "must have the endorsement of more than half of all the members of the nominating committee. .

in the eyes of the pro - democracy legco members ( see text box , "pan - democrats and pro - establishment: political labels in hong kong" ) , many hong kong political analysts , and the participants in the ongoing protests in hong kong , the constraints contained in the august 2014 npcsc decision effectively preclude the nomination of a pro - democracy candidate for chief executive , and give the chinese government indirect control over the official nomination process .

all of the pro - democracy legco members , commonly referred to as the "pan - democrats," have stated they will vote against any proposal that complies with the august 2014 npcsc decision .

the various pro - democracy voices in hong kong have called upon the npcsc to revise or amend its august 2014 decision to provide for more flexibility in the nomination process , and have pressed ce leung to urge npcsc to reconsider the constraints imposed by its decision .

neither the chinese government nor the hong kong government has demonstrated a willingness to reconsider their decisions regarding the 2017 ce election reforms .

underlying the objections to the npcsc august 2014 decision is the perception that the constraints violate the spirit and the intent of past commitments by the chinese government to allow hong kong a high degree of autonomy over its governance and a promise to allow the people of hong kong to elect their chief executive through a free and fair democratic process .

these perceived promises and commitments can be traced back at least 25 years to the 1990 passage of the basic law , and contribute to the sense of frustration among many hong kong residents with the latest npcsc decision .

however , chinese and hong kong officials assert that the npcsc august 2014 decision complies with china's international commitments and the laws governing the hksar , and is consistent with past statements regarding the adoption of universal suffrage in hong kong elections .

annex i of the basic law , as amended , stipulates that "the chief executive shall be elected by a broadly representative election committee in accordance with this law and appointed by the central people's government. .

annex i requires that the election committee be composed of 1,200 members , with 300 members from each of the following four sectors: ( 1 ) industrial , commercial and financial sectors ; ( 2 ) the professions ; ( 3 ) labor , social services , religious , and other sectors ; and ( 4 ) members of the legislative council , representatives of district - based organizations , hong kong deputies to the national people's congress , and hong kong members of the national committee of the chinese people's political consultative conference .

election committee members serve for five years .

annex i also stipulates that the delimitation of the various sectors , the organization in each sector eligible to return election committee members and the number of such members returned by each of these organizations shall be prescribed by an electoral law enacted by the hong kong special administration region in accordance with the principles of democracy and openness .

in addition , annex i states that candidates for ce are to be nominated by receiving the support of no fewer than 150 election committee members and that each member can nominate only one candidate .

to elect the ce , election committee members "shall vote in their individual capacities" by secret ballot on a "one - person - one - vote basis," with the specific election method stipulated in the hksar electoral law .

the chief executive election ordinance ( ceeo ) is the main hksar law governing the chief executive selection process .

the ceeo establishes the specific procedures and rules by which candidates are nominated and the future chief executive is selected by the election committee .

the ceeo also determines the specific number of seats granted to the designated subsectors of the four sectors enumerated in annex i of the basic law ( see appendix a ) , and stipulates who is eligible to vote for election committee members for each of the subsectors .

in some cases , the voters are individuals , and in some cases companies or organizations are entitled to vote .

according to the hksar government , there were just under 250,000 registered voters for the last election committee subsector elections held in december 2011 .

nearly a quarter of the 1,200 election committee members were chosen in uncontested subsector elections .

for the contested seats , 27.6% of the eligible voters participated in the election .

 ( see appendix a for details. ) .

for the last chief executive election held in 2012 , the election committee nominated three candidates — albert ho chun - yan , at the time , chair of the pan - democratic democratic party ; leung chun - ying , a pro - establishment ex - legco and executive council member ; and henry tang ying - yen , a pro - establishment ex - chief secretary of hong kong .

on march 25 , 2012 , the election committee chose leung chun - ying with 689 votes .

henry tang finished second with 285 votes , and albert ho received 76 votes .

annex i of the basic law also establishes the procedures to amend the selection process for the chief executive .

article 7 states if there is a need to amend the method for selecting the chief executives for the terms subsequent to the year 2007 , such amendments must be made with the endorsement of a two - thirds majority of all the members of the legislative council and the consent of the chief executive , and they shall be reported to the standing committee of the national people's congress for approval .

on april 6 , 2004 , the npcsc issued an interpretation of article 7 of annex i ( as well as article iii of annex ii ) stipulating a six - step procedure to amend the selection process for the chief executive ( see text box , "six - step procedure for amending the selection process for the chief executive" ) .

that six - step process has been followed in every subsequent attempt to amend hong kong's election process for either chief executive or legco .

in addition , the hksar government has usually conducted extensive rounds of public consultation to both ascertain if conditions in hong kong were appropriate for election reforms ( step 1 ) , as well as to solicit opinions on what reforms to propose to legco ( step 3 ) .

the hksar government has repeatedly stated it intends to follow the provisions in the basic law and the various npcsc decisions — including the six - step process — to propose possible changes in the ce selection process in 2017 .

in addition , as it did during past considerations of electoral reform , the hksar government has conducted public consultations to ascertain the necessity for and the nature of the electoral reforms it will propose to legco .

under the terms of the npcsc's august 2014 decision , the current ce selection system will be used in 2017 , given the resolution failed to pass legco .

legco's defeat of the hong kong government's proposal does not necessarily end the possibility of ce election reforms by 2017 , but prospects appear dimmed .

legco could reconsider the motion , but it is unlikely that a sufficient number of pan - democrats would change their vote to alter the outcome .

the hong kong government could submit a new resolution designed to gain some support among the pan - democrats , but ce leung has indicated he has no plans to consider that option .

on june 30 , ce leung dismissed a call by anson chan to reopen the election reform discussion .

another alternative would be for the npcsc to revise or amend its august 2014 decision .

the day after the legco vote , china's official news agency , xinhua , published a story in china daily stating that the npcsc's august 2014 decision "would remain in force despite being vetoed by city lawmakers. .

according to the article , an npcsc statement released after the legco vote declared , "the [august 2014] decision will continue to serve as the constitutional ground for hong kong in the future , as it enforces universal suffrage in the chief executive election , and its legal force is unquestionable. .

finally , cy leung could resubmit a report to the npcsc on the conditions in hong kong , indicating that circumstances have changed since he submitted the previous report in july 2014 .

however , it seems unlikely that the npcsc will significantly alter the conditions stated in its august 2014 decision if ce leung submits such a report .

following the defeat of the election reforms , focus in hong kong has shifted to the district council elections to be held in november , as well as the 2016 legco elections .

elections for hong kong's 18 district councils are scheduled for november 22 , 2015 , with all 431 members to be elected by a popular vote .

this will be the first district council election in which all the seats will be filled by a popular vote .

during the umbrella movement , the organizers encouraged people to register to vote .

some of the newly emerged groups involved in the protests are reportedly forming new political parties and may field candidates for the district council elections .

also , the pan - democratic parties reportedly are trying to coordinate candidates in the district council elections to increase their candidates' chances of being elected .

the 2015 district council elections are important for two major reasons .

first , the results will widely be construed as an indicator of public support or opposition to the pan - democrats' defeat of the ce election reforms .

second , as indicated in appendix a , 117 of the district council members will sit on the 2017 ce selection committee , and 5 of them will be elected as legco members in 2016 .

the 2016 legco elections also are important for the prospects for democracy in hong kong .

their outcome likely will be interpreted as an expression of popular support for either the pan - democrats or pro - establishment parties , and their stances on the proposed ce election reforms .

in addition , the 2016 legco may have an opportunity to consider ce election reforms during their term in office , if the ce selected in 2017 chooses to restart the reform process , and the npcsc amends or supersedes its august 2014 decision on ce election reforms .

for 155 years , the city of hong kong was a british crown colony , governed by an appointed governor and british civil servants .

on december 19 , 1984 , the united kingdom's then - prime minister margaret thatcher and china's then - premier zhao ziyang signed the "joint declaration of the government of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland and the government of the people's republic of china on the question of hong kong," commonly referred to as the "joint declaration," agreeing to transfer sovereignty of hong kong to china on july 1 , 1997 .

both nations also agreed to register the joint declaration with the united nations as a binding international treaty .

the joint declaration contains no direct reference to democracy or universal suffrage .

it does , however , state that the chief executive will be selected either by local elections or consultations .

in addition , the joint declaration states that the "international covenant on civil and political rights ( iccpr ) as applied to hong kong shall remain in force. .

under the terms of the joint declaration , china promised that hong kong would "enjoy a high degree of autonomy," and "the current social and economic systems in hong kong will remain unchanged" for 50 years .

the joint declaration also required china's national people's congress ( npc ) to pass "a basic law of the hong kong special administrative region" stipulating china's policies on hong kong that were to be consistent with the terms of the joint declaration .

the national people's congress passed the required basic law on april 4 , 1990 .

on the selection of hong kong's chief executive , paragraph 3 of the joint declaration states , "the chief executive will be appointed by the central people's government on the basis of the results of elections or consultations to be held locally. .

annex i of the joint declaration , entitled , "elaboration by the government of the people's republic of china of its basic policies regarding hong kong," states , "the chief executive of the hong kong special administrative region shall be selected by election or through consultations held locally and be appointed by the central people's government. .

the united states - hong kong policy act of 1992 effectively continues u.s. relations with hong kong after china's resumption of authority over the city as it did during the time the city was a british colony , so long as china abides by its international obligations with respect to hong kong , including the joint declaration .

among those international obligations are china's pledge that it would allow the hong kong special administrative region ( hksar ) "a high degree of autonomy on all matters other than defense and foreign affairs," and the provisions of the international covenant on civil and political rights shall remain in force .

in addition , the act states u.s. support for the democratization of hong kong "will remain equally true after june 30 , 1997," the day before china resumed sovereignty over the city .

section 202 of the act grants the president the authority to suspend treating hong kong differently from china with respect to a particular law if the president determines that hong kong "is not sufficiently autonomous to justify" such treatment .

in making the determination , the president "should consider the terms , obligations , and expectations expressed in the joint declaration with respect to hong kong. .

section 301 of the act originally mandated that the state department produce an annual report on "conditions in hong kong of interest to the united states," through 2001 .

that mandate was extended by subsequent legislation until 2006 , but was not been extended beyond that date until congress passed the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) in december 2014 .

that law required the state department provide congress with a one - time report on the status of hong kong .

the report , released on april 10 , 2015 , contained a section on "electoral reforms," including the following statement: the united states has called for the conduct of a multi - candidate competitive election for chief executive in 2017 , which would enhance the legitimacy of hong kong's chief executive , would be a major step forward in hong kong's political development and would bolster hong kong's stability and prosperit .

ever since the joint declaration confirmed hong kong's reversion to chinese sovereignty , some observers have speculated that aspects of hong kong's political system and traditions could influence prospects for political reform in mainland china .

according to some analysts , democratic reforms in hong kong would engender social pressure for similar political changes in mainland china's political system .

other analysts suggested that the chinese government may use hong kong as a testing ground for political reforms that might be adapted and adopted for implementation in mainland china .

the notion was that the "one country , two systems" policy would provide china's leaders with the leeway to permit democratic reforms in hong kong without what they perceived to be a risk of creating "political instability" on the mainland .

the npcsc august decision and the chinese government's response to the umbrella movement , however , have fostered a growing concern among some hong kong residents about the "mainlandization" of hong kong .

some observers of hong kong / mainland relations perceive a gradual drift in hong kong towards its taking on characteristics associated with mainland china .

such observers argue that this drift has in part been caused by greater interaction between hong kong and mainland china , and has in part been the result of chinese government policies toward hong kong .

according to this analysis , rather than mainland china taking on characteristics of hong kong , hong kong is slowly becoming more and more like mainland china .

the npcsc august decision fits with the notion that some observers have described as the "mainlandization" of hong kong .

the decision established a nomination process that can be controlled by the chinese government while giving the appearance of implementing democratic reforms .

in addition , the chinese government's criticism of the umbrella movement — which it refers to as the "occupy movement" or "occupy central" — is seen by some as more evidence that the chinese government intends to transform hong kong into a society that follows mainland culture and norms .

other signs that some observers suggest are indicators of the chinese government's efforts to make hong kong more like mainland china are the past attempt to pressure the hksar government to introduce a "moral and national education" curriculum in hong kong schools that critics saw as pro - beijing propaganda , and recent suggestions that the hksar government introduce mainland sedition laws for adoption by legco .

critics also note that the liaison office of the central people's government in the hong kong special administrative region ( liaison office ) has commented publicly about local political issues in hong kong with greater frequency .

the possible "mainlandization" of hong kong may be attributable not only to the direct or indirect actions of the chinese and hksar government , according to some observers .

hong kong's economy has become increasingly reliant on the mainland economy , and a growing number of businesses in hong kong are owned by or are subsidiaries of mainland companies .

in addition , hong kong's retail sector is increasingly geared to serving the demand of the over 50 million mainland visitors , and the thousands of new mainland immigrants to hong kong each year .

the hong kong press routinely contains accounts of conflict between mainland tourists and immigrants and local hong kong residents over cultural and behavioral differences .

some hong kong residents have expressed fear that their city is being taken over by mainland companies and immigrants .

it is too early to determine in which direction the impact of political interaction will be greater in the long run .

at present , observers appear to be more concerned about the "mainlandization" of hong kong than optimistic about hong kong's traditions of respect for human rights , the rule of law , and the aspirations for democracy spreading into mainland china .

the outcome of the current debate over ce election reforms is likely to be a significant factor in future assessments of the flow of political influence across the hong kong / mainland border .

the "one country , two systems" model was originally intended to apply to the possible reunification of mainland china and taiwan — not hong kong .

when china and the united kingdom began negotiating the joint declaration in 1984 , the chinese government applied the concept for use in hong kong .

at the time , chinese officials apparently hoped that if they could successfully demonstrate that "one country , two systems" worked in hong kong , they could persuade the taiwanese government and people that it was a viable model for mainland - taiwan unification .

according to some observers , the events of 2014 in hong kong have undermined support in taiwan for closer relations between mainland china and taiwan .

some analysts maintain that disenchantment with china's handling of events in hong kong may have contributed to the poor showing of taiwan's kuomintang ( kmt ) party in local elections held in november 2014 , but others point to local economic problems as the main cause of the kmt's election losses .

in addition , hong kong's umbrella movement has established ties with taiwan's sunflower movement , during which young activists occupied taiwan's parliament building to protest the kmt's allegedly rushed review of a trade deal with mainland china .

the political situation in hong kong has allegedly contributed to a recent increase in hong kong residents emigrating to taiwan .

the success or failure of hong kong to adopt ce election reforms may resonate in taiwan .

hong kong's movement to a system whereby the election of its chief executive by universal suffrage allows hong kong residents to choose between candidates of differing political views would likely be well - received in taiwan .

however , failure to adopt universal suffrage in hong kong may swing more taiwanese voters towards opposition to closer ties with mainland china , and possible greater support for taiwan's democratic progressive party ( dpp ) .

the level of congressional interest in hong kong's possible ce election reforms may depend on what transpires as the reform process moves through the third and fourth step of the proscribed six - step procedure .

in addition , the hksar government's treatment of alleged protest organizers may also influence congressional interest in hong kong , and the 114 th congress's potential to take action .

legislation has been introduced to amend or alter current u.s. policy toward hong kong .

congress may also examine u.s. support for democratization in hong kong .

during the 113 th congress , both chambers of congress introduced legislation that would have amended the u.s. - hong kong policy act of 1992 , as well as made it possible for hong kong to qualify for the u.s. visa waiver program .

subcommittees of the house committee on foreign affairs and the senate committee on foreign relations held hearings about hong kong's possible election reforms and the ongoing pro - democracy protests .

although none of the proposed legislation became law , some members and committees of the 113 th congress closely monitored the events in hong kong and some members of congress were critical of what they saw as an inadequate response from the obama administration and the department of state .

the hong kong human rights and democracy act ( hkhrda ; h.r .

5696 and s. 2922 ) was introduced in both the house of representatives and the senate on november 13 , 2014 .

the legislation reaffirmed "the principles and objectives set forth in the united states - hong kong policy act of 1992," including "support for democratization" as a "fundamental principle of united states foreign policy. .

the bill also supported "the democratic aspirations of the people of hong kong , as guaranteed to them by the joint declaration , the basic law , the international covenant on civil and human rights , and the universal declaration of human rights. .

hkhrda supported , as well , "the establishment by 2017 of a genuine democratic option to freely and fairly nominate and elect the chief executive of hong kong.…" section 4 of the hkhrda would have reinstated the state department's annual report on the status of hong kong as provided by section 301 of the united states - hong kong policy act of 1992 for 10 years .

the reinstated report was to also include an accounting of "matters in which hong kong is given separate treatment under the laws of the united states from that accorded to the people's republic of china and in accordance with this act. .

section 5 of the hkhrda was the source of some controversy as the obama administration , the hksar government and some supporters of the hong kong pro - democracy demonstrations expressed opposition to its provisions .

the original version of h.r .

5696 and s. 2922 rendered hong kong ineligible for treatment different from that afforded the people's republic of china under united states laws , agreements , or arrangements enacted or entered into after the date of the enactment of this act unless the president certifies to congress that hong kong is sufficiently autonomous to justify such different treatment .

the section did provide for a presidential waiver if the president determined that such a waiver is "in the national security interests of the united states. .

the obama administration indicated that it would prefer the certification be done by the secretary of state .

the hong kong government and some pro - democracy advocates from hong kong objected to the presumption that hong kong was no longer sufficiently autonomous to justify separate treatment from china .

the senate committee on foreign relations amended and approved s. 2922 on december 12 , 2014 , changing the provisions of section 5 .

the amended version of s. 2922 would have required the secretary of state ( not the president ) to certify to congress "[n]ot later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of the hong kong human rights and democracy act , and annually thereafter" that "hong kong is sufficiently autonomous to justify separate treatment different from that accorded to the people's republic of china in any new laws , agreements , treaties , or arrangements.…" neither h.r .

5696 nor s. 2922 was voted on by either the house of representatives or the senate .

besides the hong kong human rights and democracy act , the 113 th congress considered other legislation explicitly dealing with hong kong .

as noted previously , congress passed the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) in december 2014 , requiring the state department submit to a report on the status of hong kong to designated congressional committees ( see " implications for u.s. policy toward hong kong " ) .

s. 703 would have amended the immigration and nationalization act to make the hong kong special administrative region eligible for designation as a visa waiver program country .

in addition , h.r .

1923 , s. 266 , and s. 744 contained provisions that would have made hong kong eligible for the visa waiver program .

none of these bills was enacted into law .

the political situation in hong kong was the subject of hearings during the 113 th congress .

the house committee on foreign affairs subcommittee on asia and the pacific held a hearing entitled , "hong kong: a broken promise ? .

on december 2 , 2014 .

the senate committee on foreign relations subcommittee on east asian and pacific affairs held a hearing entitled , "evaluating the impact of the 'umbrella movement,'" on december 3 , 2014 .

in addition , the congressional - executive commission on china ( cecc ) held a hearing entitled , "the future of democracy in hong kong," on november 20 , 2014 .

on february 27 , 2015 , representative christopher smith introduced the hong kong human rights and democracy act ( h.r .

1159 ) .

the act reaffirms u.s. interest in "the continued vitality , prosperity , and stability of hong kong," and "support for democratization" as "a fundamental principle of united states foreign policy. .

it also states that it is u.s. policy "to support the establishment by 2017 of a genuine democratic option to freely and fairly nominate and elect the chief executive of hong kong.…" the provisions of h.r .

1159 are very similar to the amended version of s. 2922 approved by the senate foreign relations committee during the 113 th congress .

section 4 of the act would reinstate the state department's annual report to congress as provided for in section 301 of the united states - hong kong policy act of 1992 ( 22 u.s.c .

5731 ) for 10 years or "until such earlier date that the secretary of state certifies that hong kong has held free and fair elections for two consecutive chief executive and two consecutive legislative council periods. .

section 5 of the act would amend the united states - hong kong policy act of 1992 by adding section 202a , which would require the secretary of state to certify to congress not later than 90 after enactment and annually thereafter "whether hong kong is sufficiently autonomous to justify separate treatment different from that accorded the people's republic of china in any new laws , agreements , treaties , or arrangements entered into between the united states and hong kong after the date of the enactment of such act. .

the section also provides for the secretary of state to waive the certification requirement if the secretary determines that such a waiver is in the national interest of the united states .

on june 18 , 2015 , senator bob corker submitted the department of state operations authorization and embassy security act , fiscal year 2016 ( s. 1635 ) , which would reinstate and extend the annual state department report required by section 301 of the united states - hong kong policy act of 1992 through 2020 , and would require the secretary of state to certify to congress within 90 days of enactment and annually thereafter whether hong kong special administrative region is sufficiently autonomous to justify different treatment for its citizens from the treatment accorded to other citizens of the people's republic of china in any new laws , agreements , treaties , or arrangements entered into between the united states and hong kong after the date of the enactment of this act .

the bill does provide waiver authority if the secretary determines that such a waiver is in the national interests of the united states , and provides prior notice and justification to the senate committee on foreign relations and the house committee on foreign affairs .

the house committee on foreign affairs subcommittee on asia and the pacific held a june 11 , 2015 , entitled , "retreat or revival — a status report on democracy in asia. .

among the locales under examination in the hearing was hong kong ( along with burma and thailand ) .

the senate has not held a hearing on democracy and / or electoral reforms in hong kong during the 114 th congress .

for many years , congress has appropriated funds through various programs to promote democracy around the world , including china and hong kong .

these programs are administered by the state department's bureau of democracy , human rights , and labor ( drl ) , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the national endowment for democracy ( ned ) .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) provided for the continuation of funding for these programs .

in the congressional budget justification for fiscal year 2015 , ned stated , "the endowment will maintain its focus on the four priority countries in asia — pakistan , burma , north korea , and china ( including tibet , xinjiang , and hong kong ) . .

past u.s. programs in hong kong have focused on providing technical assistance on membership recruitment , voter and media communications , and fundraising to hong kong's political parties and political groups .

ned and the national democratic institute ( ndi ) are currently providing assistance to the design democracy hong kong project , a web - based forum ( http: / / designdemocracy.hk / ) where hong kong residents can create different models for the selection of the chief executive and legco by universal suffrage .

as of january 27 , 2015 , 716 ce election models have been created and 15 legco models .

in april 2014 , ned hosted ex - cs anson chan and martin lee , who gave a talk in washington , dc , on democracy in hong kong .

some mainland and hong kong publications have published allegations that the united states and other foreign sources were funding and advising the pro - democracy protesters in hong kong .

ce leung has on several occasions claimed that he has evidence to prove foreign support of the umbrella movement , but to date he has not publicly released the alleged evidence .

as a result , some pro - democracy organizations and individuals in hong kong are apprehensive about contact and / or association with congress , the u.s. government , and other foreign governments and diplomats .

since the beginning of the pro - democracy protests in hong kong , the chinese and hksar governments have periodically restricted the movement of hong kong residents and people from other countries allegedly associated with the protest movement .

several legco members and students involved in hkfs or scholarism have been denied entry into mainland china even though they possessed the necessary official documents .

at least one hong kong resident was not allowed to board his original return flight to hong kong from taiwan reportedly because of his alleged involvement in the umbrella movement .

on december 2 , 2014 , members of the british parliament's foreign affairs select committee were informed by chinese government officials that they could not travel to hong kong to investigate the political situation in hong kong .

the committee's chairman , richard ottaway , was reportedly told by china's deputy ambassador to britain ni jian that the refusal of entry was related to the occupy movement .

the denial was unusual as the decision was made by the chinese government and not the hksar government , which under the basic law has autonomy with respect to immigration policy and procedures .

appendix a .

composition of election committee hong kong's chief executive election ordinance ( ceeo ) allocates the 300 seats in each of the four sectors stipulated in annex i of the basic law into 35 subsectors as indicated in the tables below .

also listed is the number of registered voters — with corporate and individual voters in separate columns — for each subsector in the 2011 election committee elections , according to the hong kong's electoral affairs commission .

appendix b .

legislative council members: pro - establishment and pan - democrat factions the 70 members of hong kong's legislative council are frequently divided into two factions — the pro - establishment members and the pan - democrats .

the table below provides a list of the current legco members and their party affiliation , divided into pro - establishment and pan - democrat members .

appendix c. functional constituency members by constituency and electorate the table below lists the 35 functional constituency members of hong kong legislative council by the official name of the functional constituency they represent .

in addition , it lists the number of registered voter eligible to vote in each functional constituency .

appendix d. full text of resolution to amend annex i of the basic law iii .

motion motion concerning the amendment to the method for the selection of the chief executive of the hong kong special administrative region secretary for constitutional and mainland affairs to move the following motion: pursuant to article 7 of annex i to the basic law of the hong kong special administrative region of the people's republic of china , the interpretation by the standing committee of the national people's congress of article 7 of annex i and article iii of annex ii to the basic law of the hong kong special administrative region of the people's republic of china of 6 april 2004 , and the decision of the standing committee of the national people's congress on issues relating to the selection of the chief executive of the hong kong special administrative region by universal suffrage and on the method for forming the legislative council of the hong kong special administrative region in the year 2016 of 31 august 2014 , the " ( draft ) amendment to annex i to the basic law of the hong kong special administrative region of the people's republic of china concerning the method for the selection of the chief executive of the hong kong special administrative region" appended to this motion is hereby endorsed by this council by a two - thirds majority of all members .

annex ( draft ) amendment to annex i to the basic law of the hong kong special administrative region of the people's republic of china concerning the method for the selection of the chief executive of the hong kong special administrative region 1 .

starting from 2017 , the chief executive shall be selected by universal suffrage upon nomination by a broadly representative nominating committee in accordance with democratic procedures and appointed by the central people's government .

2 .

the nominating committee shall be composed of 1200 members from the following sectors: industrial , commercial and financial sectors - 300 the professions - 300 labour , social services , religious and other sectors - 300 members of the legislative council , representatives of members of the district councils , representatives of the heung yee kuk , hong kong deputies to the national people's congress , and representatives of hong kong members of the national committee of the chinese people's political consultative conference - 300 the term of office of the nominating committee shall be five years .

in the event that the office of chief executive becomes vacant within the five - year term of office of the nominating committee and a by - election is held , the term of office of the new chief executive shall be the remainder of the previous chief executive .

3 .

the delimitation of the various sectors of the nominating committee , the organizations in each sector eligible to return nominating committee members and the number of such members returned by each of these organizations and how to return them shall be prescribed by an electoral law enacted by the hong kong special administrative region in accordance with the principles of democracy and openness .

corporate bodies in various sectors shall , on their own , elect members to the nominating committee , in accordance with the number of seats allocated and the election method as prescribed by the electoral law .

members of the nominating committee shall discharge their duties in their individual capacities .

4 .

a person seeking nomination by the nominating committee may be recommended jointly by not less than 120 members and not more than 240 members of the nominating committee .

each member may recommend only one person .

the nominating committee shall , from the persons recommended as aforesaid , nominate two to three persons seeking nomination to become chief executive candidates by secret ballot .

each nominating committee member shall vote for at least two persons , and may at most vote for all persons seeking nomination by the nominating committee .

each candidate must have the endorsement of more than half of all the members of the nominating committee .

the specific nominating method shall be prescribed by the electoral law .

5 .

all eligible electors of the hong kong special administrative region who have registered in accordance with the law shall , from the list of candidates nominated by the nominating committee , elect one chief executive designate by secret ballot .

the specific election method shall be prescribed by the electoral law .

 ( as reported at http: / / www.legco.gov.hk / yr14-15 / english / counmtg / agenda / cm20150617.htm . ) .

