the government of puerto rico currently faces a serious fiscal emergency that is the culmination of long - standing budgetary , economic , and financial challenges .

while puerto rico has made a number of structural reforms and has increased tax rates in the past few years , it had been unable to head off increasingly urgent fiscal challenges .

recent projections estimate the island's economy will shrink by about 1.2% in fy2016 ( which ends june 30 , 2016 ) and by about 2% in fy2017 .

defaults on bonds issued by some components of the puerto rican government have already occurred , and credit rating agencies expect others to follow .

in august 2015 , debt service on bonds issued by the public finance corporation , an arm of the government development bank ( gdb ) , was not paid in full .

the puerto rico infrastructure financing authority ( prifa ) did pay interest in full on certain bonds due on january 1 , 2016 .

the gdb itself did not pay principal due on may 1 , 2016 , as described in the next section .

the puerto rican government's fiscal situation , according to emergency legislation ( act 21 of 2016 ) enacted on april 6 , 2016 , "is more dire than at any other point in its history" and "depleted resources and strained liquidity threaten to bind the commonwealth to a choice between honoring its commitments to bondholders or continuing to provide the residents of puerto rico with essential services. .

a federal district judge in late march 2016 held in a case involving the tax treatment of walmart that the government of puerto rico "is insolvent and no longer able to pay its debts as they become due. .

the governor of puerto rico , alejandro garcía padilla , while signing the emergency act , was quoted as stating that "puerto rico is insolvent. .

the puerto rican government has slowed some tax refunds and supplier payments to bolster its liquidity .

the puerto rican government has taken several measures over the past three years to address its deteriorating fiscal situation .

those measures , however , appear to have delayed the current fiscal emergency , but have been insufficient to put public finances on a sustainable path .

the puerto rican government , in formulating its fiscal strategy , has employed several high - profile restructuring experts .

puerto rico has faced fiscal challenges ever since the mid - 1970s .

the economic effects of the 1973-1974 energy crisis , which caused serious dislocation to the mainland economy , had even more severe consequences for puerto rico .

the precarious state of puerto rico's public finances stems in part from prolonged economic weakness .

economic growth was sluggish even before the 2007-2009 recession , and official forecasts project continued slow growth .

previous economic analyses of puerto rico's economy have pointed to low employment and labor participation rates , an economic structure shaped more by tax advantages than comparative advantages , and intensified global competition .

those trends and associated economic challenges have prompted many puerto ricans to move to the u.s. mainland , leading to population decline of about 1% per year over the past decade .

figure 5 shows estimated trends for puerto rico's resident population since 1950 .

one study estimated that a third of those born on puerto rico now reside on the mainland and found that migrants tended to be younger and less well educated compared to island population averages .

economic growth depends on productivity and the availability of resources such as capital and labor .

by reducing the amount of labor available to the island economy , outmigration poses risks to future economic growth .

moreover , outmigration serves as a signal that some island residents perceive that the mainland presents more attractive economic opportunities .

some puerto ricans who migrate to the mainland later return to the island .

since the mid - 1990s , the number of those moving to the mainland has trended upwards , whereas the number of those returning to puerto rico has not shown a distinct trend .

possible options for congress to address the fiscal distress faced by the government of puerto rico and its constituent public corporations are framed by the island's status as a territory — something different than a state and different from an independent sovereign country .

the federal government has generally been reluctant to offer direct financial assistance to individual states in fiscal distress , although congress at times has adjusted technical parameters of federal programs to provide direct or indirect support for states .

the independence of state governments to set their own fiscal paths has been linked to an expectation that those governments take responsibility for the consequences of their fiscal decisions .

in some other fiscal systems , a central government's willingness to cover shortfalls by state governments has been seen as having led to less prudent fiscal behavior .

central governments in some federal systems provide subnational governments with more support , but impose more intrusive fiscal controls .

the report of the former imf economists was framed in terms familiar to typical imf interventions , in which short - term bridge financing is provided conditional on agreements with governments to address structural economic issues over a longer term .

congressional options might thus be divided between strategies to address imminent liquidity challenges , such as providing credit support or altering bankruptcy laws , and strategies intended to promote economic growth over the longer term .

the u.s. department of the treasury proposed a framework in october 2015 that called on congress to pass legislation to "provide the critical tools puerto rico needs to restructure its debt , enhance its fiscal governance , fix its healthcare system , and help jumpstart its economy. .

the obama administration had earlier indicated that it is not contemplating a federal bailout of puerto rico , but provided technical support and has sought to make existing federal resources available .

president obama's fy2017 budget plan called for a "broad legal framework" that would allow puerto rico's public debt to be restructured and would provide for fiscal oversight for the island .

central governments and international organizations have at times stepped in to backstop debts of other governments to lower those governments' borrowing costs .

such support typically has been linked to budgetary or structural reform requirements .

for example , the european central bank in 2011 acted to support debt offered by eurozone countries , which dramatically lowered borrowing costs of countries that could have faced severe liquidity challenges .

the u.s. government provided credit guarantees for the mexican government in 1994-1995 .

the u.s. government also provided indirect credit support for many state government agencies through the depression - era reconstruction finance corporation ( rfc ) .

for instance , in 1941 the rfc acted as an intermediary to roll over $136 million in debt for the state of arkansas .

in the early decades of the 20 th century , the u.s. government took an expansive role in addressing debts of caribbean and central american countries .

reimbursement and eligibility rules for federal entitlement programs in puerto rico often differ from those in effect on the mainland .

for example , funding for the federal portion of medicaid is capped for u.s. territories , but is open - ended for states .

the federal matching rate for medicaid ranges from 50% for states with the highest per capita income to 74% for the state with the lowest per capita income , while the matching rate for puerto rico is set at 55% .

congress could revise medicaid matching fund formulas or eligibility standards .

it could also modify reimbursement rules or enrollment standards under medicare , or adjust rules governing other federal programs , such as the income support programs .

resident commissioner pierluisi introduced several bills ( h.r .

1225 , h.r .

1417 , h.r .

1418 , h.r .

1822 , h.r .

2635 ) in the 114 th congress to modify federal health and income support programs to provide additional resources to puerto rico .

under current law , puerto rico is generally considered a state for most provisions of the bankruptcy code ; but it is explicitly excluded from that definition for purposes of determining those eligible to file under chapter 9 , which sets out a process for consideration of debt relief requests of instrumentalities of state governments .

thus , subunits of puerto rico , such as public corporations , are barred from filing under chapter 9 .

the restructuring law that puerto rico enacted in june 2014 , which was in part motivated by the financial situation of prepa and other public corporations , was established with the aim of providing an alternative to processes provided by the bankruptcy code .

that law , however , was struck down by a u.s. district court .

on july 6 , 2015 , the u.s. court of appeals for the first circuit affirmed the lower court's ruling that federal bankruptcy provisions preempted puerto rico's ability to employ its own restructuring law .

congress could amend the bankruptcy code to permit puerto rico to allow its municipalities ( which include instrumentalities and subdivisions of the territory ) to enter into chapter 9 and proceed with a well - established process for restructuring public debts .

to that end , resident commissioner pierluisi introduced h.r .

870 on march 16 , 2015 .

senator blumenthal introduced a similar measure ( s. 1774 ) on july 15 , 2015 .

representative pelosi introduced the puerto rico emergency financial stability act of 2015 ( h.r .

4290 ) on december 18 , 2015 , a measure to stay litigation related to the island's public debts , which could provide further time for negotiations between puerto rico and its creditors .

senator warren introduced a companion measure , the puerto rico emergency financial stability act of 2015 ( s. 2436 ) , in the senate on the same day .

on march 14 , 2016 , senator menendez introduced two bills ( s. 2675 , s. 2676 ) that would allow adjustments of puerto rico's debt .

governor garcía padilla has also called for giving puerto rico access to chapter 9 .

treasury secretary lew has also expressed support for allowing puerto rico to access chapter 9 .

some hedge funds and other holders of puerto rican bonds , however , have opposed including the island in chapter 9 .

interests of hedge funds with major holdings of general obligation ( go ) bonds , however , may differ from those of funds holding bonds of the island's public corporations that are not secured by a general obligation of the puerto rican government .

access to chapter 9 might provide limited relief from debt burdens , as the central government of puerto rico — like state governments — would presumably be unable to file for bankruptcy relief itself .

as figure 4 indicates , a substantial portion of the island's debt was issued by the central government .

public corporations issued the bulk of their debt as special revenue bonds , which have been generally considered as protected from adjustment .

federal systems allow lower level governments to adapt policies to reflect local preferences , while letting the central government focus on programs of national interest and concern .

a federal system of government also provides a degree of fiscal insurance to lower - level governments .

for example , a central government can respond to mitigate the consequences of disasters or localized economic downturns affecting specific states or regions .

the level of support for lower - level governments provided by a central government is typically linked to the stringency of fiscal controls .

federal systems , by and large , can be divided into two types .

some federal governments — such as the united states — allow local governments more autonomy , but maintain an expectation that those governments will manage any budgetary shortfalls largely on their own .

other federal systems provide more extensive support for lower - level governments , but impose more restrictive central control on local decisions .

the independence of u.s. state governments to set their own fiscal paths has thus been linked to an expectation that those governments take responsibility for their finances .

in some other fiscal systems , the willingness of a central federal government to cover shortfalls by lower - level governments has been seen as having led to fiscal behavior that was less prudent .

the u.s. federal system provides substantial implicit fiscal insurance to state and local governments through the automatic stabilization characteristics of income support programs , federal disaster assistance , and by a progressive federal individual income tax .

the federal government , however , has been generally reluctant to offer direct financial assistance to states in difficult fiscal situations .

some members have called for some form of control board to oversee puerto rico's finances and other aspects of public administration .

as noted above , governor garcía padilla has called for establishment of a local control board to oversee fiscal recovery .

representative jeff duncan , chairman of the subcommittee on the western hemisphere of the house foreign affairs committee , called for a control board to oversee puerto rico's finances along the lines of the financial control board that congress set up in 1995 to oversee the district of columbia's government .

one federal appeals court judge , however , contended that "instituting direct congressional control of puerto rico's finances through a financial control board would require fundamentally redefining puerto rico's relationship to the united states. .

congress established the district of columbia financial responsibility and management assistance authority , commonly known as the control board , by passing the district of columbia financial responsibility and management assistance act of 1995 ( p.l .

104-8 ) .

that act also created a chief financial officer ( cfo ) position with authority to administer the district's financial operations .

the federal government also assumed certain pension and judicial obligations of the district and reduced the district's share of medicaid costs .

after the district government was able to balance its budget for four years , the control board became dormant after september 2001 .

state governments have also established financial control boards for other municipal governments , such as the cities of philadelphia , cleveland , and detroit .

the federal government also extended fiscal assistance directly and indirectly to new york city in 1975 .

in october 2015 , the u.s. department of the treasury set out a reform framework that included a call for fiscal oversight as well as a broad debt restructuring of puerto rico's debts .

several congressional proposals have put forth that include some form of control or oversight board .

representative sean duffy introduced h.r .

4199 , the puerto rico financial stability and debt restructuring choice act on december 9 , 2015 .

senator hatch introduced s. 2381 , the puerto rico assistance act of 2015 , on the same day .

the house natural resources committee issued a discussion draft on march 29 , 2016 , of the puerto rico oversight , management , and economic stability act .

on april 12 , 2016 , representative duffy introduced the puerto rico oversight , management , and economic stability act ( promesa ; h.r .

4900 ) , which would set up an oversight board for puerto rico and create a process to restructure the island's debts , among other provisions .

the house natural resources committee held hearings on h.r .

4900 on april 13 , 2016 .

a markup session was started on the same day to hear opening statements , but a continuation of the markup for the next day was postponed .

representative duffy introduced h.r .

5278 , a revised version of h.r .

4900 , on may 18 , 2016 .

the house committee on natural resources marked up h.r .

5278 on may 25 , 2016 .

amendments agreed to include technical corrections , extensions of certain studies on the puerto rico government and economy , among others .

the major provisions of the bill , however , were unaffected .

the committee approved the measure on a 29-10 vote .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) judged that the oversight board that h.r .

5278 would establish should be considered part of the federal budget according to the "unified budget concept" set forth in the 1967 president's commission on budget concepts .

cbo estimated that operating the oversight board for puerto rico would cost $370 million over the period fy2017-fy2022 .

section 107 of h.r .

5278 mandates that the territory's government designate a dedicated funding source for the board , which ( under the unified budget concept ) would increase federal revenues by an estimated $370 million .

the net effect on the federal budget , therefore , is estimated to be zero .

congress could also encourage the puerto rican government to pursue economic development strategies more in line with the island's economic comparative advantages rather than its tax advantages .

puerto rico has long relied on special provisions in the u.s. tax code and in its own tax laws to stimulate investment .

many of the tax advantages available to corporations or subsidiaries located in puerto rico , such as internal revenue code section 936 , which until it was phased out between 1996 and 2005 , essentially exempted income of u.s. firms operating in u.s. possessions , have reduced the u.s. treasury's receipts .

the irs's unwillingness to challenge the creditability of puerto rico's act 154 taxes against u.s. tax liability provides indirect support for the island's public finances that is nearly offset by the loss of revenues foregone by the u.s. treasury .

puerto rico's act 22 , which provides certain tax exemptions to wealthy persons who establish residency in puerto rico , may also affect u.s. treasury receipts .

congress could also consider options that might address structural issues that may have hindered puerto rico's economic growth .

congress could consider several regulatory policies , such as jones act restrictions on shipping between puerto rico and the mainland .

congress has already waived jones act requirements for the u.s. virgin islands and could extend that waiver to puerto rico .

several past studies have noted that labor participation rates for puerto rico are well below those on the mainland .

some have suggested that social insurance may play a role in discouraging employment outside the underground economy .

the economic and fiscal recovery working group plan of september 2015 proposes establishment of an earned income tax credit , a restructuring of the nutritional assistance program ( nap ; the island analogue to the food stamps / supplemental nutrition assistance program ) , and changes to public housing policies — all designed to bolster incentives to work .

some economists have also pointed to the federal minimum wage as a hindrance to labor demand .

the economic and fiscal recovery working group plan calls for several labor reforms , including limits on severance pay , weakened dismissal protections , and changes in overtime regulations .

the plan also calls on congress to grant a 10-year waiver of minimum wage increases for workers under the age of 25 .

