congress uses an annual appropriations process to provide discretionary spending for federal government agencies .

the responsibility for drafting legislation to provide for such spending is currently divided among 12 appropriations subcommittees in each chamber , each of which is tasked with reporting a regular appropriations bill to cover all programs under its jurisdiction .

 ( the titles of these 12 bills , which correspond to their respective subcommittees , are listed in table 1 at the end of this section. ) .

the timetable associated with the annual appropriations process requires the enactment of all regular appropriations bills prior to the beginning of the fiscal year ( october 1 ) .

if regular appropriations are not enacted by that deadline , one or more continuing resolutions ( crs ) may be enacted to provide interim funding authority until all regular appropriations bills are completed or the fiscal year ends .

during the fiscal year , supplemental appropriations may also be enacted to provide funds in addition to those in regular appropriations acts or crs .

amounts provided in appropriations acts are subject to limits , both procedural and statutory , which are enforced through mechanisms such as points of order and sequestration .

disagreement over the appropriate level of discretionary spending — as well as its distribution between defense and nondefense activities — significantly affected the focus of the fy2016 appropriations process .

while the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-67 ) revised the statutory discretionary spending limits to allow higher spending in fy2014 and fy2015 , that agreement did not alter the calculation for the fy2016 limits .

as a consequence , the fy2016 limits were generally less than 1% higher than both the fy2014 and fy2015 limits .

in the fy2016 budget submission , the president proposed raising both the defense and nondefense limits .

the congressional budget resolution ( s.con.res .

11 ) took a different approach in that it assumed fy2016 discretionary spending at the level allowed by the limits at that time but also allowed additional spending ( largely in the defense category ) that was effectively not subject to the statutory spending limits .

this additional spending was proposed at a higher level than the amount requested by the president .

this disagreement as to the level of discretionary spending was ultimately resolved through the enactment of the bipartisan budget act of 2015 on november 2 , 2015 ( bba 2015 ; h.r .

1314 ; p.l .

114-74 ) .

the bba 2015 raised both the defense and nondefense statutory discretionary spending limits for fy2016 and fy2017 and specified an expected level for the "overseas contingency operations / global war on terrorism" ( oco / gwot ) spending adjustment for each of those fiscal years .

the enactment of annual appropriations subject to those limits has yet to occur .

consideration of fy2016 regular appropriations bills in the house began on april 15 , 2015 , with subcommittee approval of the energy - water ( h.r .

2028 ) and military construction - va ( h.r .

2029 ) appropriations bills .

since that time , all 12 regular appropriations bills have been reported from committee , and six of those have passed the house .

about a month after committee action began in the house , the senate began its consideration of fy2016 appropriations measures with the subcommittee approval of the energy - water and military construction - va appropriations bills , on may 19 .

the senate appropriations committee subsequently reported all 12 regular appropriations bills .

on june 18 , the senate rejected a motion to invoke cloture on the motion to proceed to the department of defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

2685 ) .

since that time , the senate voted not to invoke cloture on motions to proceed to the defense , military construction - va , and energy - water appropriations bills .

however , on november 5 , the senate agreed to proceed to consider the military construction - va appropriations bill and passed that bill on november 10 .

the senate proceeded to consider the transportation - hud appropriations bill ( h.r .

2577 ) on november 18 but has not completed that consideration as of the date of this report .

because none of the fy2016 regular appropriations bills became law by the start of the fiscal year , a cr was enacted to provide continuing appropriations until december 11 ( h.r .

719 ; p.l .

114-53 ) .

 ( prior to the final consideration and enactment of h.r .

719 , senate legislative action related to fy2016 continuing appropriations occurred on a different legislative vehicle , h.j.res .

61 . ) .

this report provides background and analysis of congressional action related to the fy2016 appropriations process .

the first section discusses the status of discretionary budget enforcement for fy2016 , including the statutory spending limits and allocations associated with the congressional budget resolution .

the second section provides information on the consideration of regular appropriations bills .

further information with regard to the fy2016 regular appropriations bills is provided in the various crs reports that analyze and compare the components of the president's budget submission and the relevant congressional appropriations proposals .

this report will be updated periodically during the fy2016 appropriations process .

for information on the current status of fy2016 appropriations measures , see the crs appropriations status table: fy2016 , at http: / / www.crs.gov / pages / appropriationsstatustable.aspx .

the framework for budget enforcement of discretionary spending under the congressional budget process has both statutory and procedural elements .

the statutory elements are the discretionary spending limits derived from the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) .

the procedural elements are primarily associated with the budget resolution .

it limits both the total spending under the jurisdiction of the appropriations committee , as well as spending under the jurisdiction of each appropriations subcommittee .

in addition , pursuant to section 251 ( b ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca ) , certain spending is effectively exempt from these statutory and procedural spending limits because the limits are adjusted upward to accommodate that spending .

such spending includes budget authority specifically designated as emergency requirements , oco / gwot , disaster relief , and particular amounts of budget authority for certain program integrity initiatives .

since the enactment of the bca in 2011 , the vast majority of adjustments pursuant to section 251 ( b ) have been for budget authority designated as oco / gwot .

such adjustments have allowed for additional budget authority ( largely in the defense category ) for expenses associated with overseas operations , such as those in iraq and afghanistan , as well as other related purposes .

the house and senate provide annual appropriations in 12 regular appropriations bills .

each of these bills may be considered and enacted separately , but it is also possible for two or more of them to be combined into an omnibus vehicle for consideration and enactment .

alternatively , if some of these bills are not enacted , annual funding for the projects and activities therein may be provided through a full - year cr .

as of the date of this report , the house appropriations committee has reported all 12 regular appropriations bills for fy2016 ( see table 4 ) .

six of these bills have been passed by the house ( see table 5 ) .

the senate appropriations committee has also reported all 12 of the fy2016 regular appropriations bills ( see table 6 ) .

the senate passed one of these — military construction - va ( see table 7 ) — and also proceeded to consider the transportation - hud appropriations bill ( h.r .

2577 ) .

it has not completed that consideration as of the date of this report .

 ( in addition , the senate has voted not to invoke cloture on motions to proceed to consider two other regular bills — defense and energy - water. ) .

because none of the fy2016 regular appropriations bills was expected to be enacted by the beginning of the fiscal year , a cr ( h.r .

719 ; p.l .

114-53 ) was enacted on september 30 , 2015 .

this cr generally extended funding at last year's levels , with a small across - the - board reduction and certain enumerated exceptions , through december 11 , 2015 .

for further information with regard to the funding and other authorities provided by the continuing appropriations in h.r .

719 , see crs report r44214 , overview of the fy2016 continuing resolution ( h.r .

719 ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

prior to the consideration and enactment of h.r .

719 , senate legislative action related to fy2016 continuing appropriations occurred on a different legislative vehicle , h.j.res .

61 .

congressional action on both of these vehicles is summarized chronologically in this section of the report .

on september 22 , senate majority leader mitch mcconnell offered an amendment in the nature of a substitute ( s.amdt .

2669 ) to h.j.res .

61 that would provide temporary fy2016 continuing appropriations through december 11 , 2015 , and also contained provisions that would limit the ability of planned parenthood to receive federal funds unless certain conditions were met .

this amendment was offered to an unrelated measure that was pending before the senate ( hire more heroes act of 2015 ; h.j.res .

61 ) .

on september 24 , the senate failed to invoke cloture on that amendment to h.j.res .

61 by a vote of 47-52 .

no further senate action occurred with regard to that amendment .

after the senate rejected cloture on the senate amendment to h.j.res .

61 on september 24 , majority leader mcconnell made a motion that proposed a senate amendment ( s.amdt .

2689 ) to a different , unrelated measure pending before the senate ( tsa office of inspection accountability act of 2015 , h.r .

719 ) and filed cloture on that motion .

more formally , the majority leader offered a motion to concur with an amendment ( s.amdt .

2689 ) to a house amendment to a senate amendment to h.r .

719 .

as was the case for the initial cr amendment he offered to h.j.res .

61 , this new senate amendment contained temporary fy2016 continuing appropriations through december 11 .

however , this amendment did not include the planned parenthood – related provisions that were carried in the initial cr amendment offered to h.j.res .

61 .

on september 28 , the senate invoked cloture on a motion to concur with s.amdt .

2689 by a vote of 77-19 .

on september 30 , the senate adopted that motion to concur by a vote of 78-20 .

by a vote of 277-151 , the house concurred in that senate action later in the day , and h.r .

719 was signed into law that evening ( p.l .

114-53 ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates the budgetary effects of interim crs on an "annualized" basis , meaning that those effects are measured as if the cr were providing budget authority for an entire fiscal year .

according to cbo , the total amount of annualized budget authority for regular appropriations in the cr that is subject to the bca limits ( including projects and activities funded at the rate for operations and anomalies ) is $1,016.582 billion .

although the total spending in the cr that is subject to the fy2016 statutory limits is equal to the total of those limits , the cr is estimated to comply with the defense limit , but it exceeds the nondefense limit .

cbo estimates defense spending in the cr to total $520.385 billion , which is about $2.7 billion below the defense limit .

nondefense spending , however , is estimated to total $496.197 billion , which is about $2.7 billion above the nondefense limit .

as was previously mentioned , however , the earliest that the statutory discretionary spending limits could be enforced is 15 days after the end of the congressional session .

this date is likely to occur after the expiration of the cr on december 11 , 2015 .

when cbo estimated the budgetary effects of the cr and included spending that is effectively not subject to the statutory discretionary spending limits — because it was designated or otherwise provided as oco / gwot , continuing disability reviews and redeterminations , health care fraud and abuse control , disaster relief , and emergency requirements — the total amount of annualized budget authority in the cr is $1,099.962 billion .

