the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) requires that the nation's transportation fuel supply contains renewable fuels .

this mandate — established in the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ; p.l .

109-58 ) and expanded in the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ; p.l .

110-140 ) — requires the use of renewable fuel , although it does not explicitly require the production of that fuel .

obligated parties , such as refiners or importers of gasoline or diesel fuel , are responsible for complying with the rfs requirements .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) administers the mandate , which is an amendment to clean air act ( caa ) provisions governing the regulation of fuels .

the statutory renewable fuel volume increases annually until 2022 , with epa determining the volume after 2022 within certain limitations .

in general , epa has the authority to waive the rfs requirements , in whole or in part , if certain conditions outlined in statute prevail .

the rfs is a complex and highly technical policy initiative .

it deals with multiple sectors of the economy and requires the use of some advanced renewable fuel production technologies that have yet to reach maturity .

the rfs also incorporates thresholds for greenhouse gas emission reduction .

this complexity is exacerbated by multiple stakeholders with differing perspectives on what the rfs should accomplish , how it should be implemented , and whether it should exist , which leads to debate about the rfs and its future .

congressional debate about the rfs is expected to continue with special attention to how epa administers the program .

as congress continues its oversight of the rfs , it may be useful to understand the rfs waiver authority granted to epa .

this report discusses the waiver provisions of the rfs , including the modification - of - applicable - volumes ( "reset" ) section .

epact05 established a renewable fuel program requiring that transportation fuel sold or introduced into commerce in the united states , on an annual average basis , contain a specified amount of renewable fuel .

the rfs mandate , as amended by eisa , calls for the consumption of 9 billion gallons of total renewable fuel in 2008 , ascending to 36 billion gallons in 2022 , with epa determining the annual volume after 2022 .

the statute identifies four categories of renewable fuels that must be used to meet the mandate .

however , these four categories can be aggregated into two major categories: unspecified biofuel ( mainly cornstarch ethanol ) and advanced biofuel ( eg , cellulosic biofuel , biomass - based diesel , and other advanced biofuels ) , shown in figure 1 .

over time , the growth in the rfs transitions from biofuels that , in practice , are made mostly from food and feed crops to biofuels made from nonfood and nonfeed crops .

for instance , in 2022 , the statute requires that advanced biofuels constitute close to 60% of the 36 billion gallon mandate and unspecified biofuels constitute about 40% .

congress gave the epa administrator waiver authority to adjust the renewable fuel volumes specified in statute given certain conditions ( eg , inadequate domestic renewable fuel supply ) .

the epa administrator is required to set the standards by november 30 of the preceding year ( eg , under statute the 2020 standard is required to be finalized by november 30 , 2019 ) .

further , when the epa administrator reduces the cellulosic biofuel volume , the administrator also may reduce the total renewable fuel and total advanced biofuel volumes by the same or a lesser volume .

for biomass - based diesel , the statute specifies volumes for four years ( 2009-2012 ) and requires epa to announce the remaining annual biomass - based diesel volume "14 months before the first year for which such applicable volume will apply" ( eg , the 2021 biomass - based diesel standard is required to be finalized by november 2019 ) .

epa issued the final 2019 standards ( and the 2020 standard for biomass - based diesel ) in november 2018 .

the rfs statutory requirements and the epa requirements for 2014 through 2019 are provided in table 1 .

the rfs provisions of the caa contains a set of waiver provisions .

the provisions contain three separate waivers — a general waiver , a cellulosic biofuel waiver , and a biomass - based diesel waiver — that the epa administrator may use to waive , in whole or in part , the volume of renewable fuel mandated by statute .

the waivers referred to in this report should not be confused with small refinery exemptions .

if a waiver is issued , it expires after one year ( 60 days for the biomass - based diesel waiver ) , unless the administrator renews the waiver .

additionally , starting in 2016 , the waiver provision allows for a modification of applicable volumes .

the waivers and the modification of applicable volumes are described in further detail in the following sections of this report .

epa has repeatedly used its cellulosic biofuel waiver authority to reduce the cellulosic biofuel volume required , and , since 2014 , to also reduce both the advanced biofuel and total renewable fuel volume required .

in november 2018 , epa announced that it used the cellulosic biofuel waiver to reduce the applicable total renewable fuel , advanced biofuel , and cellulosic biofuel volume requirements for 2019 .

according to the agency , the "13.0 billion gallons specified in the statute for advanced biofuel cannot be reached in 2019 … primarily due to the expected continued shortfall in cellulosic biofuel. .

the epa administrator issued a general waiver for prior final rules ( which covered 2014 through 2016 ) and repeatedly issued cellulosic biofuel waivers for 2010 through 2018 .

the administrator used the waivers for 2014 , 2015 , and 2016 to reduce the total renewable fuel ( including a lowering of the unspecified biofuel mandate ) , advanced biofuel , and cellulosic biofuel volume requirements .

the administrator has not granted a biomass - based diesel waiver .

waiver authority is intended , in part , to assist epa with implementation of the rfs .

one of epa's program tasks is to use the waiver authority , when required , to determine the annual final standard , and to announce that final standard by the statutory deadline .

the challenge of projecting advanced biofuel production , political pressure from some stakeholders , and other factors may have contributed to past delays in issuing final standards under the waiver authority .

such delays could lead to difficulty for obligated parties who have to demonstrate program compliance and for renewable fuel producers who are interested in producing the required fuel .

for 2016 through 2019 , epa has issued the final rule according to the statutory schedule .

there are three stakeholders that generally have had distinct views about the impacts of the waiver authority: the advanced biofuel industry , the conventional biofuel industry , and the petroleum industry .

some advanced biofuel advocates assert that granting of waivers , in conjunction with other factors , could weaken confidence in renewable fuel markets and the chosen technologies , specifically cellulosic biofuel .

advanced biofuel production , particularly cellulosic biofuel production , has not been produced at the levels called for in the statutory provisions by relatively large margins .

some conventional biofuel advocates have not always been content with epa's proposals to use the waiver authority to reduce conventional biofuel volumes .

conventional biofuel production has remained in line with what the statutory provisions require .

some in the petroleum industry assert that the waiver authority is an option that addresses the use of more ethanol than can be used by certain vehicles ( i.e. , the blend wall ) or supported by existing infrastructure .

while perspectives about epa's use of the waiver authority vary among stakeholders , the waivers have provided epa with the flexibility to establish volume requirements that have been attained .

the 2019 final rule has triggered the reset section of the waiver provision for total renewable fuel .

previous final rules had already triggered a reset for both advanced biofuels and cellulosic biofuels .

epa reports that in early 2019 it will issue a rulemaking that proposes to "reset" the cellulosic biofuel , advanced biofuel , and total renewable fuel volume targets for the years 2020-2022 .

many have questions and concerns about how epa may implement the reset section ( the modification - of - applicable - volumes section of the rfs ) .

this section requires the epa administrator to modify the applicable volumes of the rfs in its entirety starting in 2016 if certain conditions are met .

it is not clear how epa may carry out this action .

the administrator has the discretion to set the modified amounts .

depending on how the reset is applied , there could be interest in its impact on public and private investment for biofuels .

there might also be interest in the reset's potential impact on the transition of the program from mostly conventional biofuel to mostly advanced biofuel by 2022 .

additionally , there may be interest about whether a reset could address the concerns expressed by some obligated parties ( i.e. , refiners ) about high compliance costs .

going forward , reset implementation could have implications for the entire fuel industry , given the potential for epa to reduce the applicable volumes or maintain ambitious targets .

