the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) conducts scientific research in areas such as ecosystems , climate , global climate change , weather , and oceans ; supplies information on the oceans and atmosphere ; and manages coastal and marine organisms and environments .

in 1970 , reorganization plan no .

4 created noaa in the department of commerce .

reorganization plan no .

4 brought together environmental agencies from within the department of commerce , such as the national weather service , and from other departments and agencies , such as the department of the interior's bureau of commercial fisheries and the national science foundation's national sea grant program .

the reorganization was intended to unify the nation's environmental activities related to oceanic and atmospheric research and to provide a systematic approach for monitoring , analyzing , and protecting the environment .

one of noaa's main challenges is related to this diverse mission of science , service , and stewardship .

a review of research undertaken by the agency found that "the major challenge for noaa is connecting the pieces of its research program and ensuring research is linked to the broader science needs of the agency. .

noaa's administrative structure has evolved into five line offices: the national ocean service ( nos ) ; national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) ; office of oceanic and atmospheric research ( oar ) ; national weather service ( nws ) ; and national environmental satellite , data , and information service ( nesdis ) .

in addition to noaa's five line offices , program support ( ps ) provides cross - cutting services for the agency and includes the office of marine and aviation operations ( omao ) , corporate services , the office of education , and facilities .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) provided $5.441 billion for noaa .

president obama has requested $5.975 billion for noaa's fy2016 budget .

this amount is $533.7 million ( 9.8% ) more than the fy2015 enacted appropriation level .

on june 3 , 2015 , the house passed the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 ( h.r .

2578 , h.rept .

114-130 ) .

the house - passed bill would provide a total of $5.169 billion for noaa in fy2016 .

this amount is $271.7 million ( 5.0% ) less than the fy2015-enacted appropriation level and $805.4 million ( 13.5% ) less than the administration's fy2016 request .

on june 16 , 2015 , the senate committee on appropriations reported the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 .

the senate committee - reported bill ( s.rept .

114-66 ) would provide a total of $5.382 billion for noaa in fy2016 .

this amount is $59.4 million ( 1.1% ) less than the fy2015-enacted appropriation , $593.1 million ( 9.9% ) less than the administration's fy2016 request , and $212.3 million ( 4.1% ) more than the level recommended by house - passed bill .

in most years , more than 98% of noaa's discretionary budget is appropriated to the operations , research , and facilities ( orf ) and the procurement , acquisition , and construction ( pac ) accounts .

over the last decade , pac funding has grown because of funding increases for satellite acquisition and orf funding has remained relatively constant ( see figure 1 ) .

funding from orf and pac is provided across most of noaa's line offices and program support .

there also are several smaller specific appropriations accounts .

these are listed below and included in table 1 .

all of the five line offices and program support are funded by the orf account , and most of the offices also receive funding from the pac account .

in contrast to funding at the account level , most funding for noaa's line offices is allocated among programs and activities according to agency authorities and priorities .

nos and nmfs authorities are related to coastal and ocean resource management , whereas nws and nesdis generally are related to weather and climate .

oceanic and atmospheric research ( oar ) is the primary center for research within noaa .

in fy2015 , more than 92% of oar's budget is dedicated to research and development .

program support provides support to activities across noaa's line offices .

funding for each line office is provided in table 2 .

the following summaries also include selected appropriations highlights for each line office .

three amendments were included in the house - passed bill to restrict funding for specific noaa activities .

h.amdt .

339 would restrict funding to enforce amendment 40 of the gulf of mexico red snapper fishery management plan .

red snapper are highly valued by recreational and commercial fishermen .

allocation generally involves the distribution of red snapper among fishing sectors ( commercial and recreational ) and among groups within a given sector ( private and charter recreational fishermen ) .

historically , the recreational sector including charter and private fishermen landed fish under the same quota .

amendment 40 divides the recreational quota between the federal for - hire component ( charter ) ( 42.3% ) and the private angling component ( 57.7% ) .

some private recreational fishermen claim that the charter component will gain a disproportionate share of the recreational quota under this arrangement .

h.amdt .

346 would restrict funding to further implement coastal and marine spatial planning and ecosystem - based management components of the national ocean policy developed under executive order 13547 .

on july 19 , 2010 , president obama signed executive order 13547 , which established a national policy for stewardship of the ocean , coasts , and great lakes .

the president established the national ocean council ( noc ) to coordinate and implement the national ocean policy .

on april 16 , 2013 , the noc released the national ocean policy implementation plan , which describes specific federal actions needed for enacting the policy .

the administration has presented the national ocean policy as a planning framework that operates within existing authorities .

some have questioned whether the administration's proposal to implement such a policy is a new regulatory program and whether the administration has the statutory authority to take these actions .

some also have asserted that marine spatial planning and ecosystem - based management may exclude some activities from ocean areas , such as recreational fishing and oil and gas development .

h.amdt .

354 would prohibit the use of funds for noaa to implement recovery plans for salmon and steelhead populations listed under the esa if the recovery plans do not address predation by non - native species .

some introduced fish species , such as striped bass and largemouth bass prey on native species such as juvenile salmon .

this amendment attempts to encourage managers to address the management of introduced species and their predation on salmon as a factor related to salmon recovery .

in his fy2016 budget request , president obama has asked congress to provide him with the authority to submit fast - track proposals to reorganize or consolidate federal programs and agencies .

one such reorganization proposes to consolidate federal business and trade programs into one department .

the administration asserts that reorganization would create a more efficient and effective department that would promote u.s. competitiveness , exports , business , and jobs .

most department of commerce agencies would become part of the new department .

noaa would be incorporated into the department of the interior ( doi ) to strengthen stewardship and conservation efforts and to enhance scientific resources .

no additional information regarding how noaa and doi programs might be integrated has been given .

a similar proposal for presidential authority and reorganization of federal business and trade programs was made in 2012 , but there appeared to be little congressional support for the proposal .

there has been a general trend to consolidate budget line items in noaa's budget .

in fy2016 , noaa is proposing to further restructure budget line items by combining program , project , and activity ( ppa ) lines .

the largest changes would be to the nmfs budget .

according to noaa , restructuring would better align the nmfs budget to its programmatic and organizational needs and provide increased transparency and accountability .

for example , seven ppas under the protected species research and management program areas would be combined into two ppas – marine mammals , sea turtles , and other species ; and esa salmon .

also in nmfs , the fisheries research and management subprogram , which currently has 15 ppas , would be changed to fisheries science and management , which would have 6 ppas .

consolidating ppas could make the reprograming of funds among related programs easier for the agency .

however , the level of detail and allocation of funds among different activities that currently have distinct ppas might become more difficult to discern in the noaa budget justification .

for example , pacific and atlantic salmon would be combined in one ppa ; currently they have separate budget lines .

the senate committee on appropriations report to accompany h.r .

2578 ( s.rept .

114-66 ) would adopt all of the budget structure revisions proposed in the noaa budget request except for the proposal to consolidate atlantic and pacific salmon into a single ppa .

