committees have existed within the house and senate since the first congress .

initially , committees were ad - hoc — temporarily convened to address specific pieces of legislation and disbanded after reporting to the house or senate .

by the early 1800s , both the house and senate "developed a system of permanent , or standing , committees" that were organized around topics instead of an individual piece of legislation .

the system of permanent , standing committees was reinforced through changes made in the 1946 and 1970 legislative reorganization acts that further defined and refined committee jurisdiction .

communications to and within congress have evolved over the years .

technology available today was unheard of 20 years ago .

the idea that representatives , senators , and committees could communicate in real time with constituents was unfathomable .

political scientist stephen frantzich once described congress as "the vortex of three discrete communications flows: it is the target , sender , and subject matter of communication. .

further , when representatives and senators wanted to solicit constituent opinions , those opinions "arrived only sporadically , and members had to augment fragmented information with creative intuition to assess constituent desires and possible reactions. .

many committees now use email , official websites , blogs , youtube channels , twitter , and facebook pages to communicate — technologies that were either nonexistent or not widely available until recently .

the communication strategies of congressional committees have changed with the development of these online social networking services .

these technologies have arguably served to enhance the ability of committees to share information directly with stakeholder groups , including other members , federal agencies , and individual private citizens .

despite the advantage of having a direct avenue of communication open between the committee and these groups , electronic communications have raised some concerns .

for example , existing law and chamber regulations on the use of communication media such as the franking privilege have proven difficult to adapt to the new electronic technologies .

this report examines how congressional committees are using social media .

this includes how social media is altering how members organize and manage their personal and committee offices and impacting the ability of members to gather support for political and policy goals .

perhaps most importantly , social media may transform the very nature of representation in the united states .

after providing an overview and background of social media platforms , the report analyzes patterns of committee use of twitter and facebook during a 4½ - month period in 2013 and discusses three potential implications of social media for committees in congress: increased direct interaction with the public , real - time interaction with advocacy groups , and outreach of public constituencies .

the rise of social media , and electronic communications more generally , has potentially wide - ranging implications for the practice of legislative politics .

unlike postal letters , technology has reduced the marginal cost of communications .

members can now reach large numbers of citizens for a fixed cost , and individuals and groups can reach congress at virtually zero cost .

likewise , the speed of information exchange between capitol hill and the rest of the country has decreased and has become almost instantaneous .

as soon as something happens in congress , it is known everywhere in real time .

these advances are altering how members organize and manage their personal and committee offices and impacting the ability of members to gather support for political and policy goals .

perhaps most importantly , they may transform the very nature of representation in the united states .

what follows is a brief discussion of three potential implications of social media for committees in congress: increased direct interaction with the public , real - time interaction with advocacy groups , and outreach of public constituencies .

as with any new technology , the number of committees using twitter and facebook and the patterns of use may change rapidly .

thus , the conclusions drawn from these data cannot be easily generalized nor can these results be used to predict future committee behavior .

social media has the potential to change the nature of how committees receive and process information from the public .

for the first time , a committee's public environment , which includes "the general public and representatives of organized interests," has tools available to directly contact the committee , tasks left to lobbyists , professional association managers , and individual members of congress in the past .

processing this stream of information is increasingly difficult , especially in light of the expectation for interactivity that comes from social media platforms like twitter and facebook .

historically , for policy matters under their jurisdictions , most congressional committees have primarily interacted with members of congress , the executive branch , and stakeholder groups .

lacking a direct electoral constituency , the committee system has not generally sought to engage directly with the public .

consequently , committee communications often took place through press releases and committee websites .

the recent adoption of social media has the potential to change how committees communicate , providing public access to the committee for the first time .

the historic position of committee communication with individual constituents stands in contrast with the communications strategies for representatives and senators , who regularly want to hear from and speak directly to their constituents .

for individual members , twitter and facebook are unique tools that can allow them to hear from and speak directly to constituents ( and non - constituents ) in real time .

using social media to interact with constituents could provide representatives and senators with information that was previously unavailable .

instead of relying on phone , mail , and email tallies on an issue , constituents can be engaged in real time through twitter and facebook .

whereas the interactivity of twitter and facebook might be beneficial to member offices , its benefit is less obvious to a committee .

as the data herein show , committees do not generally utilize the interactive features available through social media , with only 5.5% of all tweets responding to other users .

instead , committees use the system to supplement more traditional communication and outreach strategies by announcing hearings , meetings , the passage of legislation , and the position of the committee vis - a - vis a particular policy area .

when interactivity does occur , it tends to be retweets of journalists and individual members of congress , especially those who serve on the committee .

it is not clear from this research whether committees seek to engage directly with individual constituents and if they do , what they would do with the information they receive .

since committees are set up to evaluate policy options within a specified jurisdiction , receiving and processing public opinion could change the focus of a committee's work and draw it away from the oversight of the executive branch , the needs of individual members of congress , and the regulation of stakeholder groups and industries .

committees could utilize the interactivity of social media to further engage the public in the committee's activities , including oversight and legislative hearings .

twitter and facebook have the potential to allow the committee to field ideas or hearing questions in real time from interested parties .

engaging the public in this manner would be outside of past committee practices .

such interaction could allow members to see public reaction in real time , and adjust their questions as they see fit .

using real - time feedback during a hearing or meeting , however , could influence the committee's activity in unpredictable ways and introduce uncertainty in the legislative and oversight process .

whether desired or not , communication between committees and individual citizens may simply become reality .

the representational communication activities of both members and citizens are constrained by cost .

prior to the rise of electronic communications , these costs were a significant impediment ; postal mail and long - distance phone calls have a stable marginal cost .

likewise , citizens were constrained by their own personal financial budget ; the marginal value of a phone call or letter to congress had to be weighed against the marginal value of any other use of the same money .

in effect , both members and citizens were constrained to communicate with each other only when the cost of communication was outweighed by the importance of the communication .

electronic communications have virtually no direct marginal cost .

once a member or a citizen pays the startup and recurring costs of owning a computer , and paying for internet access , there is no further financial cost for each individual communication between them .

almost all electronic communication media ( eg , email , social media , tele - townhalls , or web advertisements ) tend to have fixed capital or startup costs , but are then largely free on the margin .

the result is that , for both member and citizen , the only marginal cost to sending an additional communication is time .

the result has been an explosion of citizen communications with congress .

the amount of constituent mail ( postal and email ) reaching members has increased almost tenfold in the past 20 years , to almost half a billion messages per year .

social media contacts by citizens to members are not aggregated , but presumably now comprise a non - trivial number of communications .

with the marginal cost reduced to near zero , citizens have little incentive not to contact committees , even if previously such contact was unwelcomed or ignored .

in effect , technological change may be opening the committee system up to greater public interaction .

electronic communications are faster than traditional forms of member - citizen communications .

this is obvious , but it has several important implications for how committees choose to use new platforms , including social media , and how those choices might shape their communications strategy .

in the past , if committees wanted to send out time - sensitive communications on congressional action , the best outlet was probably a faxed press release to the media , perhaps to the local newspapers serving a committee member's district or state .

there was no point in trying to send postal mail directly to citizens at that speed .

now , however , members can update constituents on floor activity or other business instantly , using subscribed email lists or social media .

likewise , constituents can use email and social media to contact members in real time .

this advantage changes not only how quickly information can be shared but also the types of information members and citizens might provide each other .

in the past , real - time information about an upcoming amendment in a committee markup might not have been possible to communicate ; the vote might have taken place before the member could alert the constituents about it , or before constituents could communicate preferences to the member .

with the rise of electronic communications , constituents and members can easily share information about such an amendment in real time .

some members have used social media to conduct "virtual town halls. .

these forums , similar to a regular town hall meeting or a tele - town hall , where constituents could call in to ask questions , allow participants to ask questions through a designated social media platform ( eg , twitter or facebook ) .

virtual town halls leverage the interactivity of social media platforms and allow for instantaneous questions and answers on twitter , and longer conversations on facebook .

while there was no evidence in the data set that committees are engaging in virtual town halls , it is possible that future field hearings could utilize a social media platform to allow for public comment or testimony .

virtual town halls could also pose unique challenges for committees .

unlike members who could utilize real - time constituent communication in their decision making , committees generally observe policy and executive branch operations over a longer time horizon .

as political scientist douglas arnold described , the committee system is the principle vehicle for gathering and analyzing information .

committees specialize not only in policies but in the politics of those policies .

.. .

committees encourage interest groups and other interested parties to testify and submit statements , and they commission bureaucrats and congressional staff agencies to produce even more studies .

if a committee were to hold a virtual town hall meeting and it received more questions or feedback than it could answer , a risk exists that participants could perceive that the committee was purposefully avoiding their questions .

additionally , answering questions in a virtual environment ensures that answers are preserved in perpetuity .

to interact in a real - time environment , committee members or staff would likely need to coordinate responses to ensure that the committee's message is consistent .

advocacy groups have long used all available methods to promote grassroots support for their positions .

for example , the public health community has long used the media to promote issues like "alcohol and tobacco control , lead poisoning , nutrition , and the prevention and treatment of hiv , and violence prevention. .

social media expands the potential reach for advocacy efforts .

groups use social media , especially twitter , to engage followers and encourage them to use the advocacy message in their social media posts and to contact governmental decision - makers .

spurring followers to contact the government to advocate for a policy change is an effective strategy for advocacy groups and can be enhanced through the use of social media .

house and senate rules , however , require that official resources be used only for the purpose for which they were appropriated .

further , the house social media policy prohibits the inclusion of "grassroots lobbying or solicit[ation] support for a member's position" from being placed on the committee website , and the senate internet policy prohibits the use of the official webpages for promotional matter .

additionally , for governmental entities , including congressional committees , federal law prohibits the use of appropriated money to directly or indirectly encourage the public to contact the government in an effort to influence public policy .

there is the possibility that committee engagement in social media to encourage others to contact the government could violate the spirit , if not the letter , of the anti - lobbying law and house and senate social media and internet policies .

research on the content of tweets and facebook posts , however , suggests that less than 2% of all tweets and facebook posts contain outreach messages .

further , those that do fit into this category generally encourage retweets or the sharing of posts , not the contact of other governmental officials .

the use of social media — a strong advocacy tool — is not without potential peril .

committees that use twitter , facebook , and other platforms will likely need to be cognizant of the types of messages shared and what , if anything , those messages might be asking of the follower .

