this is the third in a series of crs reports on pit manufacturing .

a "pit" is the core of the primary stage of a thermonuclear weapon .

its key ingredient is weapons - grade plutonium ( wgpu ) , which is composed mainly of the fissile isotope plutonium - 239 ( pu - 239 ) along with small quantities of other plutonium isotopes .

detonating the pit provides the energy to detonate a weapon's secondary stage .

during the cold war , the rocky flats plant ( co ) made up to 2,000 "war reserve" pits per year ( ppy ) .

 ( a war reserve pit is one that has been accepted for use in the nuclear stockpile , as distinct from developmental or production prove - in pits. ) .

production at rocky flats halted in 1989 .

since then , the united states has made 29 war reserve pits total for replacement in w88 submarine - launched ballistic missile warheads between 2007 and 2011 .

yet as discussed in " install equipment with a single - shift capacity of 50 ppy ," the department of defense ( dod ) stated it needed the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa , the separately organized agency within the department of energy ( doe ) in charge of maintaining the u.s. nuclear stockpile ) to have the capacity to produce 50 to 80 ppy .

this capacity , it is argued , would support nuclear weapon life extension programs , permit replacement of pits found to be defective , and address geopolitical developments .

pits are to be made at los alamos national laboratory ( lanl , nm ) in the pf - 4 ( plutonium facility 4 ) building , potentially in proposed smaller structures called modules that would be connected to pf - 4 by tunnels , or in both .

in an effort to increase pit production capacity , congress focused on inputs , such as requiring a plutonium processing building to be constructed by a certain date at a certain cost .

however , in section 3112 of p.l .

113-291 , the carl levin and howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 , congress changed tack and focused on output .

it directed nnsa to ramp up pit production and demonstrate the capacity to produce at a rate of 80 ppy for at least a 90-day period in 2027 .

 ( the legislation permits extending this deadline by two years under certain conditions. ) .

accordingly , while some argue that the capacity should be larger and others hold that it should be smaller , this report takes as its focus how to move toward 80 ppy , not whether it is the right number .

production at that rate requires enough "material at risk" ( mar ) and space .

doe defines mar as "the amount of radioactive materials … available to be acted on by a given physical stress. .

it is material that could be released by a disaster , such as an earthquake that collapses a building followed by a fire .

it is measured in units of plutonium - 239 equivalent to convert all types of radioactive material to a common unit .

space is laboratory floor space , in square feet , available for plutonium operations .

to measure "enough," this report uses the concept of margin , which is space available for pit production and supporting tasks minus space required for them to be able to produce at a specified rate , and mar available for pit production and supporting tasks minus mar required for them to do so .

space margin and mar margin are separate ; both must be greater than zero to accommodate pit production at the specified rate .

pf - 4 has 60,000 square feet ( sf ) of laboratory space on its main floor .

it supports many plutonium missions .

some involve pit production , such as pit fabrication ( casting pits from molten plutonium ) and purifying plutonium for use in pits ; others include preparing plutonium - 238 ( pu - 238 ) for use as a power source for space probes , disassembly of pits and conversion of their plutonium to plutonium oxide , and surveillance of pits to check their condition .

pf - 4 has a ceiling on permitted mar ; as of february 2013 , that ceiling was 1,800 kilograms pu - 239 equivalent .

to provide perspective , in 2012 pit fabrication and plutonium purification accounted for 12,000 sf and 10,400 sf of pf - 4's laboratory space , respectively ; as of february 2013 , they accounted for 295 kg and 143 kg pu - 239 equivalent of pf - 4's mar ceiling , respectively .

a crs report provides a detailed breakout of pf - 4's space and mar usage .

mar and space also figure in a function that supports pit production , analytical chemistry ( ac ) .

ac analyzes very small samples of plutonium to determine the content of impurities , alloying material , and different isotopes of plutonium .

ac techniques include mass spectrometry , x - ray fluorescence , radiochemistry , and material assay .

the radiological laboratory - utility - office building ( rluob ) , which was completed in 2010 and is near pf - 4 , is to house most ac ; pf - 4 is to perform some higher - mar ac and ac support work involving larger samples , such as material preparation .

rluob's mar ceiling is 38.6 g pu - 239 equivalent , though nnsa is evaluating a proposal to increase that to 400 g. ac equipment requires substantial laboratory floor space , and rluob has 19,500 square feet of space ideally configured for ac .

this report presents options that may increase margin , many of which nnsa and its laboratories are considering .

however , while figures for space and mar available for pit production exist , though they may need updating , figures for space and mar required to produce 80 ppy do not exist because they have never been calculated rigorously .

accordingly , this report cannot find that one or more options would provide enough margin for producing 80 ppy or supporting ac .

instead , it presents a progression of options to move toward that goal: options not involving modifications to pit production processes ; options involving modification to those processes but not structural modifications to pf - 4 ; and options involving structural modifications to pf - 4 .

while the options seek to increase the feasibility of producing 80 ppy by 2027 , the report cannot address whether they could meet that date because time to implement them cannot be determined .

potential hurdles render schedules unpredictable .

construction may encounter delays .

moving equipment in pf - 4 , making structural changes , or changing plutonium processes must follow detailed procedures supported by extensive analysis .

organizations within doe , oversight agencies , communities , nongovernmental organizations , and others may contest proposed changes to regulations or to assumptions used in calculations .

implementing such changes may be time - consuming ; lawsuits may add delay .

efforts to develop new technologies may fail .

this report considers 16 options .

a combination of these and other options may be needed to meet the congressional requirement .

while any combination can only be selected if it provides enough mar margin and enough space margin , other factors will also enter into a choice among options by congress and nnsa .

these include: reducing cost ; accelerating schedule ( i.e. , making capacity available sooner ) ; increasing throughput , the rate at which pits are made or processes completed ; improving worker safety , which includes reducing the risk of injury from building collapse , fire , industrial accidents , and radiation exposure ; reducing the risk to the public from radiation exposure if pf - 4 were to release a large quantity of plutonium as a result of an earthquake or major accident ; and reducing radioactive waste .

each option contributes to increasing the feasibility of producing at a rate of 80 ppy by 2027 .

table 1 summarizes the contributions of each option to that requirement ; each section of the report begins with a few words highlighting the most important contributions of that option .

this report shows options , many of which nnsa and its labs are pursuing , that can help move toward enough capacity to manufacture pits at a rate of 80 per year .

one option by itself will not provide the capacity to manufacture pits at that rate .

as a result , nnsa faces the prospect of assembling a package of options , whether from the ones presented here or others , and congress faces the prospect of evaluating , perhaps amending , and approving it .

any package chosen would need to optimize among such goals as margin , cost , worker safety , and throughput .

questions and tradeoffs to consider in formulating a package include the following: mar reduction techniques include seismic strengthening of pf - 4 , using special containers to hold plutonium not in use , and removing contaminated gloveboxes .

would all such techniques need to be implemented , or would some , by themselves , provide enough mar margin ? .

relocating the royal crest trailer park could also reduce the need for these techniques .

conversely , some of these techniques might provide more mar margin than relocating royal crest , though perhaps at higher cost .

using a different wind model and more realistic assumptions could result in a calculated dose reduction by more than half in the event of a major accident at pf - 4 , permitting more than doubling the mar allowance for pf - 4 quickly and at essentially no cost , producing more mar allowance than relocating royal crest .

but would a doubling of the mar allowance suffice ? .

if not , what combination of measures that increased mar allowance would do so ? .

techniques to increase space margin include removing contaminated gloveboxes , setting up a production line able to make 50 ppy with one shift per day and operating it with two shifts per day , and building a module for pu - 238 work .

which combination of techniques would be most cost - effective ? .

building a module , whether at los alamos or elsewhere , for pu - 238 work would move a substantial amount of mar out of pf - 4 and would free up some space there as well .

would that module be cost - effective , or would other alternatives provide enough space and mar margin so as to render the module unnecessary ? .

or would other advantages argue for building a pu - 238 module even if sufficient margin could be obtained by other means ? .

using calcium chloride instead of sodium chloride and potassium chloride in electrorefining would reduce the amount of plutonium to be recovered through aqueous processes ; near net shape casting would do so as well .

both together may permit a reduction in the space needed for aqueous processes , and a reduction in mar as well , since aqueous processes are high in mar .

alternatively , would it be cost - effective to recover the plutonium remaining in the salt and in the ingot of impure plutonium after electrorefining runs ? .

if not , these materials could be packaged and shipped to wipp .

some techniques offer increases in both space margin and mar margin , such as removing contaminated gloveboxes .

some techniques may increase margin at little or no cost , and may provide savings .

using conservative rather than very conservative assumptions in calculating dose could reduce the need for costly physical changes , such as construction or procurement .

the cost to remove contaminated gloveboxes is essentially zero , as the boxes would need to be removed at the end of pf - 4's life , and removing them would avoid the risk of contamination accidents that are costly and time - consuming to clean up .

in sum , while arriving at a satisfactory package will require complex analyses , many options offer the potential to boost u.s. pit production capacity toward , if not to , the congressionally mandated capacity of 80 pits per year .

terms are listed in the order in which they appear in table 2 .

material at risk ( mar ) : the amount of material , in this case plutonium , acted upon by an event .

it is measured in units of grams of pu - 239 equivalent , a standard used to compare the radioactivity of diverse materials .

airborne release fraction ( arf ) : the fraction of material at risk released into the air as a result of the event .

arf is specific to the type of material ( eg , plutonium oxide , plutonium metal , plutonium in solution ) .

respirable fraction ( rf ) : the fraction of the material released into the air that is of a particle size ( 3 microns in diameter or less for plutonium oxide ) that , when inhaled , remains in the lungs .

an rf of 1 represents the worst case .

damage ratio ( dr ) : the amount of damage to a structure or container , with 0 being no damage and 1 being complete collapse .

a dr of 1 represents the worst case , complete collapse of pf - 4 or full destruction of a container .

leak path factor ( lpf ) : the fraction of material that escapes the building ; even if a building or container was fully destroyed , not all material would necessarily be released into the air .

while arf is related to material type , lpf is related to engineered containment mechanisms , such as robust containers .

an lpf of 1 represents the worst case ( i.e. , no containment is assumed ) .

chi / q: the rate at which plutonium particles are deposited ( fall to the ground ) .

it includes such factors as wind speed , wind direction , and distance from the facility to the individual receiving the dose .

breathing rate ( br ) : the volume of air , in cubic meters per second , that an individual breathes in .

this is important in calculating dose because the more air an individual breathes in , other things being constant , the higher the dose .

specific activity ( sa ) : a measure of the radioactivity of a material , expressed in curies ( a measure of the number of radioactive disintegrations per second ) per gram of material .

table 2 shows sa for pu - 239 .

dose conversion factor ( dcf ) : multiplying sa by this factor converts sa to dose .

dose is expressed in rem , a measure of ionizing radiation absorbed by human tissue .

