legislative efforts to revise tsca's chemical regulatory framework date back at least to 2005 .

the legislative proposals that have been discussed over this time generally would preserve the basic organization of tsca title i ; for example , provisions related to testing would remain in section 4 , new chemicals and new uses in section 5 , regulation of existing chemicals in section 6 , and preemption in section 18 .

they would also generally continue tsca's exclusion of specified categories of substances regulated under other laws .

yet the proposals would make significant changes to the operation of tsca .

the proposals differ in various respects from one another , however , including with respect to preemption .

in the 114 th congress , s. 697 , the frank r. lautenberg chemical safety for the 21 st century act , was introduced on march 10 , 2015 .

a hearing on the bill was held before the senate environment and public works committee on march 18 , 2015 .

following a markup , an amended version of s. 697 was ordered to be reported out of the committee on april 28 , 2015 , on a 15-5 vote with bipartisan support .

s. 697 was reported with an amendment in the nature of a substitute on june 17 , 2015 , and placed on the senate legislative calendar .

an alternate proposal , s. 725 , the alan reinstein and trevor schaefer toxic chemical protection act , has not been ordered to be reported out of committee .

s. 725 would eliminate express preemption from tsca entirely , and is not included in this report's comparison .

in the house of representatives , a discussion draft entitled the tsca modernization act of 2015 was released in early april , and a hearing was held in the subcommittee on environment and the economy of the committee on energy and commerce on april 14 , 2015 .

after some revisions , the house discussion draft was approved by the subcommittee on may 14 , 2015 , on a 21-0 voice vote , also on a bipartisan basis .

the tsca modernization act of 2015 was formally introduced , with some amendments , on may 26 , 2015 , as h.r .

2576 and referred to the full committee on energy and commerce .

the committee ordered the bill to be reported on june 3 , 2015 , on a 47-0 vote , with one abstaining , and the bill was reported on june 23 , 2015 .

the bill , as amended , was debated on the house floor and passed the house on june 23 , 2015 , on a 398-1 vote .

s. 697 and h.r .

2576 address many of the same topics and provisions of tsca , with important similarities and differences in their approaches .

for additional discussion of select issues addressed by the bills , see crs report r44434 , proposed amendments to the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) in the 114th congress: h.r .

2576 compared with the senate substitute amendment , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

s. 697 generally takes a more comprehensive and detailed approach to amending tsca .

it would add , among other new definitions , a definition of the term "safety standard" to mean a standard that ensures , without taking into consideration cost or other nonrisk factors , that no unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment , including to any relevant "potentially exposed or susceptible population," will result from exposure to a chemical substance under the conditions of use .

epa would be required to establish a risk - based screening process to identify chemicals as high or low priorities for assessment , and then to conduct assessments on the high priority chemicals , with at least 25 assessments initiated by five years after enactment ( along with other deadlines ) .

chemicals found not to meet the safety standard would have to be regulated ; epa would not be limited to the "least burdensome requirements" as under current tsca , although it would have to take into account costs , benefits , and alternatives .

s. 697 would make changes to the new chemical provisions , including imposing new duties on epa to review such chemicals against the safety standard .

new provisions on policies and guidance , including pertaining to use of science , would also impose duties on epa .

based on amended reporting requirements , epa would be required to identify chemicals that have not recently been in u.s. commerce as "inactive. .

h.r .

2576 would make fewer changes to tsca .

unlike s. 697 , it would not change tsca's new chemical provisions .

nor would it add a detailed new prioritization scheme for evaluating chemicals ( although epa could likely continue its existing prioritization efforts , the tsca work plan for chemical assessments ) .

similar to s. 697 , h.r .

2576 would prohibit epa from taking into account information on cost and other factors not directly related to health or the environment in conducting risk evaluations , give epa a mandate and framework to conduct such risk evaluations , and remove the "least burdensome requirements" language from tsca's risk management provisions for chemicals found to present an unreasonable risk .

h.r .

2576 would instead require that chemical rules be cost - effective , unless epa determines that additional or different requirements are necessary to protect against the identified risk .

epa would have to initiate at least 10 risk evaluations per year , subject to the availability of appropriations .

while doing so in different ways , both bills would also generally expand epa's testing authority ; impose certain requirements pertaining to scientific standards ; modify tsca's confidentiality provisions ; expand tsca's fee provisions ; and make certain other changes and additions to other sections of the law — although as noted above , s. 697 would make substantially more changes and additions .

table 1 below provides a side - by - side comparison of the preemption provisions and other provisions related to the state - federal relationship in these two bills .

table 1 first describes limits on the universe of state or local rules that would potentially be subject to preemption by epa actions by comparing the bills' overall preemption scope , exceptions , and savings clauses .

these are broadly similar , with some differences at the margins ; most notably , both would retain tsca's chemical - by - chemical preemption approach .

table 1 then compares the scope and timing of preemption ( subject to the exceptions ) based on various epa actions under each proposal .

here , there are somewhat larger structural differences between the bills: for example , s. 697 preempts new state restrictions while a chemical is undergoing assessment by epa , while h.r .

2576 has somewhat broader preemption on the basis of epa actions on new chemicals and significant new uses of chemicals .

both bills would preempt state requirements after epa either imposed requirements on a chemical found to present an unreasonable risk , or after epa determined that a chemical did not present an unreasonable risk .

table 1 then compares s. 697 's new waiver provisions with those of h.r .

2576 , which are retained from current tsca .

finally , table 1 notes several other provisions not pertaining to preemption that nonetheless relate to the federal - state relationship under tsca .

