the 114 th congress is considering legislation to provide "regulatory relief" for banks .

the need for such relief , some argue , results from the increased regulation that was applied in response to vulnerabilities that became evident during the financial crisis that began in 2007 .

in the aftermath of the crisis , the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) , a wide - ranging package of regulatory reform legislation , was enacted .

bank failures spiked during the crisis , and changes to banking regulation were a key part of financial reform .

as financial regulators have implemented the dodd - frank act and other reforms , some in congress claim that the pendulum has swung too far toward excessive regulation .

they argue that the additional regulation has resulted in significant costs that have stymied economic growth and restricted consumers' access to credit .

others , however , contend the current regulatory structure has strengthened financial stability and increased protections for consumers .

they are concerned that regulatory relief for banks could negatively affect consumers and market stability .

this report assesses banking regulatory relief proposals contained in bills that have been marked up by committee or have seen floor action in the 114 th congress .

in the house , proposals had generally been considered individually in separate bills until september 2016 , when many of these bills were combined with new provisions in the financial choice act ( h.r .

5983 , fca ) .

in the senate , proposals have been combined into one legislative package , the financial regulatory improvement act ( s. 1484 / s. 1910 ) .

for more information on these two comprehensive regulatory relief packages , see the text box below .

several proposals were also included in the version of h.r .

22 , the fixing america's surface transportation act , which was signed into law as p.l .

114-94 on december 4 , 2015 .

because banks are involved in many different activities , this report does not address all regulatory relief proposals that would affect each aspect of a bank's business ( eg , it does not cover proposals affecting banks' involvement in areas such as derivatives ) but focuses on those proposals that address the traditional areas of banking , such as taking deposits and offering loans .

although many of the proposals would modify regulations issued after the crisis , some would adjust policies that predated the financial crisis and some proposals are characterized as technical fixes .

further , the report covers only the regulatory relief banking legislation that has seen legislative action .

the proposals discussed in this report vary with regard to the type of relief , including to whom relief would be provided and the manner in which it would be provided .

for organizational purposes , this report classifies regulatory relief proposals into the categories of safety and soundness , mortgage and consumer protection , supervision and enforcement , or capital issuance .

for each proposal , the report explains what the bill would do and the main arguments offered by its supporters and opponents .

the goal of safety and soundness ( or prudential ) regulation is to ensure that a bank maintains profitability and avoids failure .

the rationale for safety and soundness regulation is to protect taxpayers ( who backstop federal deposit insurance ) and to maintain financial stability .

regulators monitor the bank's risk profile and set various metrics that banks must maintain in areas such as capital and liquidity .

after the spike in bank failures surrounding the crisis , many of the reforms implemented in the wake of the financial crisis were intended to make banks less likely to fail .

whereas some view these efforts as essential to ensuring the banking system is safe , others view the reforms as having gone too far and imposing excessive costs on banks .

banks are also regulated for consumer protection .

these regulations are intended to ensure the safety of the products , such as loans , that banks offer to consumers .

several bills would modify regulations issued by the consumer financial protection bureau , a regulator created by the dodd - frank act to provide an increased regulatory emphasis on consumer protection .

prior to the dodd - frank act , bank regulators were responsible for consumer protection .

the dodd - frank act gave the cfpb new authority and transferred existing authorities to it from the banking regulators .

the dodd - frank act also directed the cfpb to implement several new mortgage - related policy changes through rulemakings .

the bills included in this section could be viewed in light of a broader policy debate about whether the cfpb has struck the appropriate balance between consumer protection and regulatory burden , and whether congressional action is needed to achieve a more desirable balance .

supervision refers to the power to examine banks , instruct banks to modify their behavior , and to impose reporting requirements on banks to ensure compliance with rules .

in some cases , examiners confirm whether banks meet quantitative targets and thresholds set by regulation ; in others , they have discretion to interpret whether a bank's actions satisfy the goals of a regulation .

enforcement is the authority to take certain legal actions , such as imposing fines , against an institution that fails to comply with rules and laws .

while regulators generally view their supervisory and enforcement actions as striking the appropriate balance between ensuring that institutions are well managed and minimizing the burden facing banks , others believe the regulators are overreaching and preventing banks from serving their customers .

banks face regulations surrounding how they can raise capital from investors , and what rights are conferred to investors .

capital can take various forms depending on the ownership structure of the institution .

for example , publicly held banks issue stock that can be traded on exchanges .

disclosure requirements and investor protections may better inform investors about the risks that they are assuming , but can make it more costly for institutions to raise capital , and those costs might be passed on to customers in the form of higher fees or interest rates charged .

while some view these existing regulatory requirements as important safeguards that ensure that investors are protected from fraud , others see them as unnecessary red tape that makes it too difficult for banks to raise the capital needed to expand or remain healthy .

five bills that have seen congressional action would raise the exemption threshold on the securities and exchange commission's ( sec's ) registration for thrift holding companies to match the current exemptions for bank holding companies ( bhcs ) .

the proposal is found in the holding company registration threshold equalization act ( h.r .

1334 ) , which passed the house on july 15 , 2015 ; title iii of the promoting job creation and reducing small business burdens act ( h.r .

37 ) , which passed the house on january 14 , 2015 ; and section 601 of s. 1484 ( which is also section 971 of s. 1910 ) .

it was enacted in title lxxxv of the fixing america's surface transportation act ( h.r .

22 / p.l .

114-94 ) .

background .

historically , under the securities act of 1933 , banks and bhcs , similar to nonfinancial firms , generally were required to register securities with the sec if they had total assets exceeding $10 million and the shares were held ( as per shareholders of record ) by 500 shareholders or more .

banks and bhcs also were allowed to stop registering securities with the sec , a process known as deregistration , if the number of their shareholders of record fell to 300 shareholders or fewer .

title vi of the jumpstart our business startups act ( jobs act ) raised the sec shareholder registration threshold from 500 shareholders to 2,000 shareholders and increased the upper limit for deregistration from 300 shareholders to 1,200 shareholders for those banks and nonfinancial firms .

in other words , the jobs act made it easier for banks and bhcs to increase the number of their shareholders while remaining unregistered private banks and , if already registered , to voluntarily deregister while also adding more shareholders .

the provision went into effect immediately upon the enactment of the jobs act on april 5 , 2012 .

these changes made by the jobs act did not apply to savings and loan holding companies ( slhcs ) .

the holding company registration threshold equalization provisions amended the securities exchange act of 1934 by extending the higher registration and deregistration shareholder thresholds in the jobs act for banks and bhcs to slhcs .

savings and loans ( also known as thrifts and savings banks ) are similar to banks in that they take deposits and make loans , but their regulation is somewhat different .

over time , the differences between banks and savings and loans have narrowed .

under the provision , an slhc would be required to register with the sec if its assets exceed $10 million and it has 2,000 shareholders of record , up from the current requirement of 500 shareholders of record .

slhcs that want to deregister from the sec would have to have no more than 1,200 shareholders of record , an increase over the current 300 or fewer shareholders .

policy discussion .

generally speaking , the central perceived benefit of sec registration is to enhance investor protection by ensuring that investors have access to significant financial and nonfinancial data about firms and the securities they issue .

the cost of sec registration is the regulatory burden on the firm issuing securities associated with complying with sec requirements , which potentially raises the cost of capital and reduces how much capital a firm can raise .

for small firms , the regulatory burden of registration is thought to be greater than for larger firms .

policymakers attempt to reach the optimal trade - off between costs and benefits of sec registration by exempting firms below a certain size from registration requirements .

the jobs act raised this threshold for banks , modifying the balance between costs and benefits .

reports indicate that after passage of the jobs act , a number of privately held banks and bhcs took advantage of title vi's reduction in shareholder ownership registration triggers by raising capital from additional shareholders without having to register with the sec .

some banks also have taken the opportunity to deregister from the sec .

one of the few studies on changes to the financial health of banks that took advantage of the jobs act threshold changes to deregister found that the act was generally , but not entirely , financially beneficial to banks .

for example , it found that , on average , the legislation resulted in $1.31 in higher net bank income and $3.28 lower pretax expenses for every $1.00 of bank assets and was responsible for $1.54 million in increased assets per bank employee .

the study did not attempt to estimate the costs to investors of reduced disclosure under the changes made by the jobs act .

in potentially expanding the exemption threshold on sec registration for thrift holding companies , there are two main points to consider .

first , should exemption levels from sec registration requirements be different for thrifts and savings and loans than for banks ? .

current law makes it more difficult for small thrifts to raise capital than for small banks .

second , are the costs and benefits of registration requirements for small banks better balanced at the higher thresholds enacted for banks in the jobs act or the lower thresholds in current law for thrifts ? .

section 113 of s. 1484 ( section 914 of s. 1910 ) addresses the issue of how dividends are allocated among the shareholders of mutual holding companies or their subsidiaries .

it would authorize all mhcs to waive the "receipt of dividends declared on the common stock of their bank or mid - size holding company" without having to comply the federal reserve's regulation regarding "mutual holding company dividend waivers. .

mutual holding companies ( mhcs ) .

section 107 of the competitive equality banking act of 1987 provided for the formation of mutual holding companies ( mhcs ) .

mhcs are savings and loan holding companies in mutual form , some of which own mutually held federally insured savings and loan associations , and state - chartered mutual savings banks .

most banks in the united states are held either publicly or privately by shareholders .

in contrast , a mutual company or mutual savings bank ( association ) is one that is owned by its members .

in the instance of a mutual savings bank , the members are the financial institution's depositors .

a mutual savings bank can reorganize itself into an mhc by transferring all of the assets and liabilities to a newly formed stock institution , the majority shares of which are owned by the mhc .

the remaining minority shares are sold to equity investors , with depositors afforded the right to buy minority equity interest before it is made available to the public .

the dodd - frank act transferred authority over savings and loan holding companies regulated by the office of thrift supervision ( ots ) to the federal reserve and included a specific provision which requires a mhc to follow certain procedures in order to waive receipt of any dividend declared by a subsidiary .

dividends are distribution of earnings ( profits ) to shareholders , which are usually declared and paid quarterly .

the board of directors determines the amount of dividends .

if the mhc waives the right to receive dividends , depending upon the specifics of an institution's dividend arrangements , dividends may be distributed among the other equity holders or retained by the bank subsidiary .

the federal reserve issued regulation mm , implementing its authority over mhcs and included in it a subsection , 12 c.f.r .

239.8 ( d ) , implementing the statutory requirements permitting mhcs to waive the right to receive dividends declared by a subsidiary of the mhc .

under the federal reserve regulations , an mhc may waive the right to receive any dividend declared by a subsidiary ... if ( i ) no insider of the mhc , associate of an insider , or tax - qualified or non - tax - qualified employee stock benefit plan of the mhc holds any share of the stock in the class of stock to which the waiver would apply , or ( ii ) the mhc gives written notice to the ... [federal reserve] of the intent of the mhc to waive the right to receive dividends ... and the [federal reserve] board does not object .

the regulation specifies what must be included in the notice of waiver , including documentation of the mhc's conclusion that a waiver would be consistent with the fiduciary duties of the board of directors of the mhc .

the dodd - frank act and the federal reserve regulation include a streamlined approval process for dividend waivers by certain "grandfathered mhc's. .

under the statute , the federal reserve may not object to a proposed waiver of dividends for an mhc that waived dividends prior to december 1 , 2009 , ( grandfathered mhc's ) provided "the waiver would not be detrimental to the safe and sound operation of the ... [mutual savings bank]" ; and , the mhc's board "expressly determines the waiver to be consistent with its fiduciary duties to the mutual members of the mhc. .

for mhcs that do not meet the criteria for grandfathering , regulation mm specifies conditions under which the federal reserve will not object to a waiver of dividends for non - grandfathered mhcs .

among them are a vote of the members of the mhc approving the waiver of dividends ; a determination that the mutual savings bank is operating in a safe and sound manner , which will not be jeopardized by the waiver ; and an affirmation that the mhc is able to meet any obligations in connection with any loan for which the mhc has pledged the stock of the subsidiary mutual savings bank .

policy discussion .

in prior circumstances , the federal reserve identified a number of issues related to dividend waivers by the holding company .

one of the reasons for retaining dividends is so the mhc could serve as a source of strength to its subsidiary bank .

if the mhc retains the dividend payments from the subsidiary , then an mhc can transfer its excess capital to the subsidiary when the subsidiary might need a capital infusion .

if there is no requirement for a mandatory vote of mhc shareholders , the waiver would rest exclusively with the mhc's board , who may have a financial interest in the waiver as minority shareholders in the bank .

in issuing the regulations implementing the dodd - frank dividend waiver provisions , the federal reserve also noted that dividend waiver by the mhc without corresponding waiver by the minority ( i.e. , non - member ) shareholders poses an "inherent conflict of interest" because it might result in unequal distribution of equity between mutual owners of the mhc and minority shareholders .

in essence , it could result in a transfer of equity from mutual owners to minority shareholders .

supporters of s. 1484 cite similar reasons as those that opposed the implementation of regulation mm's dividend waiver requirements in 2011 .

they fear that the fed will erroneously block waivers under regulation mm , thereby harming mhcs and discouraging capital formation .

they assert that if the mhc waives the dividends , greater capital is retained by the subsidiary , which would enhance the safe and sound operation of the subsidiary savings bank .

further , they state , waiving dividends for majority shareholders while retaining them for minority shareholders may be necessary in order to offer the latter a market rate of return .

lastly , the supporters state that when the mhc receives the dividends from the subsidiary it must pay taxes on the dividends received , thereby reducing the overall franchise value .

the supporters of s. 1484 also state that distinguishing between grandfathered mhcs and the rest of the mhcs leads to different classes of mhcs .

they also assert that the cost of obtaining the vote of the members could be cost prohibitive and lead to additional unnecessary administrative and financial costs .

previously , in similar circumstances , the banking regulators have allowed waiver of dividends by the mhc and those dividends to be retained by the bank .

in such instances , the regulators required specific accounting procedures to allocate the value of those dividends to the members of the mutual institution .

this process helped delineate the increase in value of the mhc to be properly apportioned between the members and minority shareholders .

appendix a. indexing of bank regulatory relief provisions for gdp growth certain provisions of s. 1484 / s. 1910 with exemptions based on size are indexed by "such amount is adjusted annually ... to reflect the percentage change for the previous calendar year in the gross domestic product of the united states , as calculated by the bureau of economic analysis of the department of commerce. .

indexing reduces the number of firms that "graduate" from the exemption over time as they grow in size , in nominal or real terms .

nominal price increases are caused by inflation , whereas real price increases refer to those in excess of the inflation rate .

table a - 1 summarizes those provisions that apply to banks .

section 110 of s. 1484 ( section 911 of s. 1910 ) indexes exemptions found in a few provisions of existing law ( all added by the dodd - frank act ) while making no other changes to those provisions , except 110 ( b ) , which also raised the threshold and is discussed in the section above entitled " cfpb supervisory threshold . .

the other exemptions are found within other sections of the bills that make broader changes to current law .

in addition , section 108 of s. 1484 ( section 909 of s. 1910 ) indexed thresholds for exemptions from points and fees for manufactured housing for inflation ( as measured by the consumer price index ) instead of gdp .

gdp is revised repeatedly and is not available on the first of the year , so regulators would have to formulate a method for making this calculation .

the bills do not specify whether regulators should use the nominal or real gdp growth rate — nominal gdp growth is equal to real gdp growth plus the inflation rate .

if regulators used the real gdp growth rate , gdp in some years could be negative or lower than the inflation rate .

in most years , gdp grows faster than inflation , so the thresholds would be increasing in real terms over the long run .

total assets of the financial system also generally increase more rapidly than inflation , so indexing by gdp growth instead of inflation would make it less likely that an increasing number of firms would not be subject to the exemption over time .

appendix b .

provisions in the financial regulatory improvement act covered in this report table b - 1 lists the provisions in s. 1484 , the financial regulatory improvement act , that are covered in this report and the corresponding section in s. 1910 , financial services and general government appropriations act , 2016 , and related house bills .

appendix c. provisions in the financial choice act covered in this report table c - 1 lists the provisions in h.r .

5983 , the financial choice act , that are covered in this report and related house and senate bills .

appendix d. provisions in the fixing america's surface transportation act covered in this report h.r .

22 , the fixing america's surface transportation act , was signed into law as p.l .

114-94 on december 4 , 2015 .

division g of h.r .

22 contained 19 titles related to financial services .

table d - 1 lists the provisions of division g that are covered in this report and the corresponding section in s. 1484 and related house bills .

