a "pit" is the core of the primary stage of a thermonuclear weapon .

its key ingredient is weapons - grade plutonium ( wgpu ) , which is composed mainly of the fissile isotope plutonium - 239 ( pu - 239 ) .

detonating the pit provides the energy to detonate a weapon's secondary stage .

during the cold war , the rocky flats plant ( co ) made up to 2,000 pits accepted for use in the stockpile per year .

production at rocky flats halted in 1989 .

since then , the united states has made 29 such pits in total .

yet the department of defense ( dod ) stated it needed the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , the separately organized agency within the department of energy ( doe ) that maintains the u.s. nuclear stockpile , to have the capacity to produce 50 to 80 pits per year ( ppy ) .

pits are to be made at los alamos national laboratory ( lanl , nm ) in the pf - 4 building , potentially in proposed smaller structures called modules connected to pf - 4 by tunnels , or in both .

pits are made by casting two hemishells , or half - pits , then welding them together .

in section 3112 of p.l .

113-291 , the carl levin and howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 , congress directed nnsa to demonstrate the capacity to produce at a rate of 80 ppy for at least a 90-day period in 2027 .

accordingly , this report takes as its focus how to move toward that requirement .

producing 80 ppy requires enough "material at risk" ( mar ) and space .

doe defines mar as "the amount of radioactive materials … available to be acted on by a given physical stress," such as an earthquake .

it is measured in units of pu - 239 equivalent ( pe ) .

space is laboratory floor space available for plutonium operations .

this report uses "margin" to measure "enough. .

margin is space available for pit production and supporting tasks minus space required for them to be able to produce at a specified rate , and mar available for pit production and supporting tasks minus mar required for them to do so .

space and mar margins are separate ; both must be greater than zero to produce pits at the specified rate .

mar and space also figure in analytical chemistry ( ac ) , a production support function .

ac determines the composition of very small samples of plutonium .

the radiological laboratory - utility - office building ( rluob ) , which was completed in 2010 and is near pf - 4 , is to house most ac .

there are figures for available space and mar , but figures for space and mar required to produce 80 ppy have never been calculated rigorously , so this report cannot determine what options would provide enough margin for producing 80 ppy .

nor can it address whether certain options could meet the 2027 date because time to implement them cannot be determined .

instead , the report presents 16 options that increase the feasibility of producing at a rate of 80 ppy rate by 2027 .

a decision will likely weigh such factors as margin , cost , schedule , throughput , and safety .

this report shows options , many of which nnsa and its labs are pursuing , that can help move toward the ability to manufacture pits at a rate of 80 per year by 2027 .

one option by itself will not suffice to meet that requirement .

as a result , nnsa faces the prospect of assembling a package of options , and congress faces the prospect of evaluating , perhaps amending , and approving it .

any package would need to optimize among such goals as margin , cost , worker safety , and throughput .

questions and tradeoffs to consider in formulating a package include: mar reduction techniques include strengthening pf - 4 , using special containers for plutonium not in use , and removing contaminated gloveboxes .

would all such techniques be needed , or would some provide enough mar margin ? .

using a different wind model and more realistic assumptions could reduce calculated dose by more than half in a major accident at pf - 4 , permitting more than doubling the mar allowance for pf - 4 quickly and at essentially no cost .

would that suffice ? .

techniques to increase space margin include removing contaminated gloveboxes , setting up a production line able to make 50 ppy with one shift per day and operating it with two shifts per day , and building a module for pu - 238 work .

which combination of techniques would be most cost - effective ? .

a module for pu - 238 work would permit moving much mar out of pf - 4 and freeing some space there .

would that module be cost - effective , or would other alternatives render it unnecessary ? .

would other advantages argue for building a pu - 238 module even if enough margin could be obtained by other means ? .

using conservative rather than very conservative assumptions to calculate dose could reduce the need for costly , time - consuming changes to pf - 4 .

would that increase risk to workers and the public substantially ? .

what is the risk - benefit balance ? .

in sum , while arriving at a satisfactory package will require complex analyses , many options offer the potential to boost u.s. pit production capacity toward , if not to , the congressionally mandated requirement of 80 pits per year by 2027 .

