the unresolved political crisis in the tiny central african nation of burundi is among several threats to stability and humanitarian welfare in the turbulent great lakes region of central africa .

in 2015 , president pierre nkurunziza — age 53 , in office since 2005 — was reelected to a third term , despite domestic and international criticism that his candidacy violated a landmark peace agreement signed in 2000 .

nkurunziza's third - term bid sparked divisions in the ruling party , an attempted military coup , and an elections boycott by most opposition parties .

since then , more than 400,000 burundians have fled to neighboring states as refugees , while over 200,000 are reportedly displaced internally .

the majority of burundi's refugees are reportedly children .

regional efforts to broker talks between the government and opposition have stalled , and east african leaders in 2017 have voiced growing acceptance of nkurunziza's continued tenure and opposition to western sanctions .

burundi's government has effectively blocked a united nations ( u.n. ) security council - authorized police deployment to monitor abuses against civilians , and has restricted the movement of u.n. and african union ( au ) human rights observers .

congress has influenced u.s. policy toward burundi through its authorization and appropriation of foreign aid and through oversight .

several members have expressed concern about the situation in burundi , its impact on the region , and its implications for longstanding u.s. efforts to promote stability and democratic governance on the continent .

of particular concern to some is the potential impact on burundi's participation in the au mission in somalia ( amisom ) , which is fighting the al qaeda - linked group al shabaab .

burundi is the second - largest troop contributor , and u.s. military assistance has been extensive since amisom deployed in 2007 .

the full picture of the trump administration's approach to burundi remains to be seen .

as u.s. officials weigh policy options , they may examine the impact and effectiveness to date of u.s. and european union efforts to isolate key actors viewed as fueling instability , through tools such as targeted sanctions , aid restrictions , and regional diplomatic outreach .

the new administration's emphasis on national security as its top foreign policy priority may suggest a reduced emphasis on the types of human rights and democracy concerns that drove u.s. engagement in burundi in 2014-2016 .

the administration's fy2018 budget proposal would also decrease bilateral health and economic aid for burundi , along with funding for global humanitarian and food aid programs of which burundi has been a recipient .

statements by u.s .

permanent representative to the u.n. nikki haley decrying human rights violations nonetheless suggest some continuity with the previous administration's burundi policy ( see " u.s. policy and aid " ) .

the obama administration framed its approach to burundi through two stated policy initiatives: an effort to prevent "mass atrocities" abroad , and a principled opposition to efforts by some african presidents to abrogate or circumvent legally established term limits .

some members of congress have supported such policies with regard to burundi and more broadly .

in the 114 th congress , the house passed h.res .

310 , which called on the obama administration's interagency atrocities prevention board to pay "particular regard" to certain "troubled countries," including burundi , and the house and senate each passed resolutions urging respect for constitutional term limits in neighboring democratic republic of congo ( drc ) .

the 115 th congress may assess the future prospects for , effectiveness of , and resources devoted to such policies .

in advance of the 2015 elections , the cndd - fdd split over the issue of nkurunziza's candidacy , with several leading figures ( including top military commanders ) signaling objections .

large demonstrations erupted in the capital , bujumbura , and other cities following nkurunziza's nomination in april 2015 .

after a failed coup attempt by senior military officers in may 2015 , the government purged the army of suspected opponents .

holdovers from the largely tutsi pre - civil war army were reportedly initial targets , followed by suspected ruling party dissidents , including officers who had fought alongside the president in the cndd - fdd rebellion .

security services arrested , attacked , and intimidated protesters , civil society , and independent media , which the government accused of supporting the coup .

an ensuing election boycott by most opposition parties cleared the way for dominance by nkurunziza and the cndd - fdd , which won 77 out of 100 directly - elected legislative seats .

despite supporting the boycott , an opposition coalition between long - time former governing party uprona ( tutsi - led ) and the hutu - led former rebel fnl party won 21 seats .

after the fnl decided to take up its seats , leader agathon rwasa — previously seen as a key nkurunziza rival — became the deputy speaker of parliament , further dividing the opposition .

all but three of the uprona representatives elected under the coalition declined to participate in the government .

political and security conditions have deteriorated since the election .

armed groups , some led by cndd - fdd dissidents , have emerged , stoking state repression of the opposition and embroiling the country in a low intensity conflict .

elements in both government and opposition camps have reportedly used violence , including extrajudicial killings , assassinations , grenade attacks , and torture .

on the pro - government side , the internal security forces have reportedly worked with the cndd - fdd youth wing , the imbonerakure ( "those who see far" ) , to target perceived political opponents .

the imbonerakure and security forces have also reportedly attacked and extorted money from civilians attempting to flee the country , and have targeted refugees outside of burundi's borders .

according to u.n. human rights officials , the imbonerakure have employed sexual violence as a deliberate intimidation tactic , explicitly promoting the rape of women from the opposition so "that they give birth to imbonerakure . .

in june 2017 , u.n. investigators accused the national intelligence service , police , and imbonerakure of crimes against humanity .

tit - for - tat killings suggest a widening rift in the army , previously viewed as a triumph of post - conflict integration .

in april 2017 , the international crisis group characterized the army as "impoverished and ethnically and politically polarized" and "reforming around a loyalist hard core. .

some burundian civil society activists assert that ruling party hardliners are deliberately attempting to weaken the army so that it can no longer serve as a national institution protective of the civilian population .

since late 2015 , according to u.n. investigators , "the level of overt violence has declined , [but] the overall level of oppression and control over the society has increased… .

burundian society is becoming more and more repressive [and] less tolerant of dissent. .

a number of critical civil society groups and media outlets have either been explicitly banned or operate under severe restrictions or from exile ; in december 2016 , the government banned burundi's oldest human rights organization , league iteka .

the government has remained defiant in the face of international criticism , withdrawing from the international criminal court ( icc ) and rejecting proposed u.n. and au peacekeeping or monitoring forces .

it has also restricted the movements of au and u.n. observers .

the crisis has caused growing ethnic polarization , as elites on both sides have appealed to hardline sentiment and existential fears .

ruling party figures reportedly have denounced a supposed tutsi plot to return to a tutsi - dominated state , which they portray as backed by neighboring ( tutsi - led ) rwanda .

others have used ethnically divisive rhetoric harkening back to burundi's civil war or the rwandan genocide .

in august 2016 , the u.n. special adviser on the prevention of genocide voiced concern at "inflammatory statements made by public officials that could constitute incitement to violence. .

at the same time , reports suggest that security forces continue to crack down on perceived opponents of nkurunziza regardless of ethnicity , and that attacks have often targeted members of the hutu - led fnl ( as during the 2010-2015 period ) .

poverty and food insecurity have long been widespread in burundi , where previous cycles of displacement and land disputes have fueled grassroots tensions .

since 2015 , political tensions , population displacements , cuts to donor aid , and government macroeconomic and border control policies have deepened humanitarian challenges .

a shortage of foreign exchange , a dramatic depreciation of the burundian franc , and fuel shortages have crippled business .

the el niño weather pattern also negatively impacted burundi's agricultural production — and thus , food security — in 2015-2016 , by causing late , irregular , and insufficient rainfall .

the economy contracted by nearly 4% in 2015 and further by 1% 2016 , according to the international monetary fund .

food prices increased dramatically in 2016 , while 8% of burundians were chronically malnourished .

the government has cut funding for healthcare and other services in its own budget , causing drug shortages , while annual malaria cases have spiked .

the world health organization reports that the number of burundians requiring humanitarian aid has tripled since early 2016 .

burundi has restricted foreign aid and charity activity by placing tight controls on local and foreign organizations' finances , forcing them to keep their accounts in foreign currency in the central bank , with high administrative fees and deposit requirements .

such actions may be partly motivated by a demand for hard currency as reserves shrink — amid cuts in donor budget support — as well as by fears of external influence .

in 2017 , u.s. diplomats at the united nations have expressed serious concern with human rights violations in burundi , with a particular focus on abuses attributed to government forces .

u.s. officials have also expressed diplomatic support for the eac mediation led by mkapa .

in april 2017 , u.s .

permanent representative to the u.n. nikki haley accused the burundian government of "using human rights violations to stifle dissent. .

this followed a u.s. statement at the u.n. human rights council that , while acknowledging "efforts at destabilization by the armed opposition" called on the burundian government to "take responsibility for its actions" and to "end extrajudicial killings , enforced disappearances , arbitrary arrests , unknown places of detention , and torture with impunity. .

the statement also criticized new legal restrictions on non - governmental organizations in burundi , noted "significant restrictions" on opposition political parties , and expressed support for the mkapa mediation as "a critical avenue to reach a peaceful resolution to the current standoff. .

such statements suggest some degree of u.s. policy continuity with the obama administration , although it is possible that various u.s. policies and aspects of their implementation remain under interagency review .

for its part , the obama administration portrayed its approach to the burundi crisis as rooted in a broader effort to prevent "mass atrocities" abroad , and in its opposition to moves by some african presidents to abrogate or circumvent legally established term limits .

administration officials urged nkurunziza not to seek reelection in 2015 and condemned the circumstances of his electoral victory .

the administration subsequently backed eac - led efforts to mediate an inclusive dialogue .

u.s. officials expressed support for initial au plans ( from which the au subsequently retreated ) for a military intervention to protect civilians , and later for a u.n. police force and au human rights monitors ( neither of which fully materialized ) .

the obama administration also took steps to isolate key figures whom they viewed as seeking to destabilize burundi , in an effort to deter abuses and apply pressure for political concessions .

such moves were undertaken unilaterally , albeit with some apparent coordination with the eu , amid a reported lack of consensus on burundi in the u.n. security council .

in november 2015 , shortly after the eu undertook a similar step , president obama signed executive order ( e.o. ) .

13712 , authorizing targeted financial sanctions against individuals who threaten peace and security , undermine democratic institutions , or commit human rights abuses in burundi .

president obama designated eight individuals — four state security officials , three dissident security commanders who participated in the 2015 coup attempt , and one civilian opposition leader — under the e.o .

also in 2015 , president obama revoked burundi's eligibility for u.s. trade preferences under the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa , reauthorized in p.l .

114-27 ) .

the trump administration's fy2018 budget request proposes a sharp decrease in bilateral aid to burundi , among various other countries , under what the administration has portrayed as an effort to cut costs , achieve greater efficiencies , and focus resources on top policy priorities .

global health program funding for burundi would decrease from $30 million in fy2016 ( latest available data ) to $13 million in fy2018 ; $1.3 million in economic aid would be eliminated ; and the global food for peace ( ffp ) program under p.l .

480 , which provided $18.7 million in food aid to burundi in fy2016 , would end entirely .

the fy2016 figures do not encompass additional emergency humanitarian aid provided to burundi and burundian refugees ; aid funding allocated from regional and global programs , starting in fy2014 , in support of atrocity prevention ; or regional security assistance programs .

since fy2006 , the united states has allocated some $300 million in security assistance for burundi , most of it intended to support the military's counterterrorism and peacekeeping capabilities .

such funding has largely been provided through regionally and centrally managed programs , and is not reflected in the state department's annual bilateral budget request for burundi .

the top sources of this assistance have been: 1 ) the state department's peacekeeping operations ( pko ) account , with some funds provided under the u.s. africa contingency operations training and assistance ( acota ) program and others budgeted as u.s. bilateral aid for somalia ; and 2 ) defense department - administered training and equipment provided under authorities enacted by congress in annual defense authorization measures since fy2006 .

in mid - 2015 , the obama administration announced the suspension of several security assistance programs for burundi .

assistance to the police ceased due to implication in political repression , while u.s. military training within burundi ( including acota pre - deployment aid to amisom contingents ) was suspended due to security concerns .

funding for international military education and training ( imet ) , under which foreign military officers travel to the united states , has continued .

u.s. advisory support within somalia to burundian troops deployed under amisom has also been maintained , and some transfers of equipment have also occurred .

burundi is subject to certain aid restrictions in fy2017 and prospectively in fy2018 under the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( tvpa , division a of p.l .

106-386 ) , as amended , due to its tier 3 ( worst ) ranking by the state department in 2016 and 2017 .

president obama invoked his authority to waive such restrictions for fy2017 , asserting that such aid "would promote the purposes of the act or is otherwise in the national interest of the united states. .

president trump's approach to the designations remains to be seen .

president nkurunziza currently appears likely to seek to remain in office beyond 2020 , which could lead to increased political tensions and violence .

critical flashpoints could arise as early as the end of 2017 , when the government's commission on constitutional amendments is due to render its findings .

burundi's outlook at this time appears bleak: continued violent repression and spiraling poverty at present , with risks of wider conflict and civil unrest in the future .

the opposition's internal divisions and weak organizational capacity will likely impede its ability to present a united front on the terms or content of any future negotiations .

endemic corruption has made the contest to control state resources a high - stakes , zero - sum game , which appears likely to remain the case .

in the absence of competitive political space , more parties may turn to violent tactics including guerrilla combat , as some already have .

many key political figures , including nkurunziza himself , are former combatants .

burundi presents a challenge for u.s. policymakers seeking to work with regional leaders to promote respect for democratic norms and the protection of civilians from state - backed abuses .

the au and eac appear unable or unwilling to pressure burundi's government to respect constitutional term limits or power - sharing arrangements .

a lack of regional condemnation of a similar term limits crisis in the democratic republic of congo , combined with successful moves by incumbents to remove or bypass term limits in countries such as uganda , rwanda , gabon , and republic of congo ( brazzaville ) , arguably decrease nkurunziza's incentives to negotiate and may bolster his claims to legitimacy .

the rift between regional leaders , who have grown more tolerant of nkurunziza , and that of donors , who remain highly critical , has inhibited a unified international approach and could prove damaging to u.s. leverage in other african contexts .

the evolving u.s. response to the situation in burundi may raise several issues for congress .

as congress considers the trump administration's fy2018 aid budget proposals , members may examine the scope and impact of funding for health , conflict mitigation , and humanitarian relief in burundi .

congress has also regularly enacted provisions in aid appropriations measures that reflect criticism of rwandan involvement in neighboring conflicts .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 , division j , §7042 ) requires the secretary of state to report that governments in the great lakes region are "not facilitating or otherwise participating in destabilizing activities in a neighboring country" prior to providing certain military aid .

the effectiveness of u.s. democracy promotion and atrocity - prevention efforts in burundi may be of interest to some members .

the extent of the trump administration's prioritization of both objectives has been subject to widespread scrutiny .

some observers view the administration as seeking to exclude democracy and human rights as core u.s. foreign policy interests , although statements by ambassador haley may suggest otherwise with regard to burundi .

in the context of congressional oversight of u.s. diplomatic engagements in africa , members may consider arguments for and against efforts to isolate key burundian leaders internationally , as well as any efforts to allay the government's claims of unfair western persecution .

in light of the burundian military's internal divisions and polarization , congress may continue to examine the u.s. security assistance that has supported burundi's deployments in somalia ( where its troops make up a quarter of the authorized total for amisom ) and the central african republic .

a statement by secretary of state tillerson on burundi's national day on july 1 , 2017 , cited "the positive impact its troops have had in somalia," but human rights issues and security conditions are likely to continue to pose policy and practical constraints on military aid .

abuse allegations have also dogged the burundian contingent in car .

congressional deliberations may include potential contingency plans in case of a burundian withdrawal from either mission .

