flows of foreign fighters to the current conflicts in syria and iraq are recent examples of a broader phenomenon that has seen tens of thousands of individuals travel to various conflict zones in the middle east , north africa , and elsewhere over the last three decades .

in february 2015 , the u.s. intelligence community assessed that more than 20,000 foreign fighters — including at least 3,400 westerners — had traveled to the syria - iraq region since 2011 .

u.s. national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) director nicholas rasmussen has asserted that the numbers of those seeking to fight in syria or iraq are "unprecedented," that they "are going up," and that the majority of recent recruits are joining the islamic state terrorist organization ( also known as isil or isis ) .

among western citizens who have become foreign fighters in syria and iraq in the last few years , the largest contingents are believed to be from countries in europe .

some european estimates of foreign fighter flows ( from official and unofficial sources ) are higher than u.s. assessments , and suggest that upward of 4,000 or 5,000 europeans may have traveled to the conflict zone .

smaller numbers of americans , canadians , and australians have also sought to join the fighting .

as of february 2015 , u.s. officials estimated that more than 150 u.s. persons had traveled or attempted to travel to syria to support armed groups there since the start of the syrian conflict in 2011 .

there are no unclassified comprehensive figures available on how many americans have joined the islamic state organization relative to other armed groups , in part because the affiliation of many individuals is revealed only following their detention or death .

while there is limited data that would allow a definitive assessment of the threat posed by individuals who have traveled to iraq , syria , or elsewhere as foreign fighters , u.s. officials have noted that there is a risk that "these individuals may eventually return to their home countries battle - hardened , radicalized , and willing to commit violence. .

such fears have been heightened considerably by the january 2015 terrorist attacks in france , in which at least 17 people were killed over the course of several days in three related incidents that targeted the paris headquarters of the french satirical magazine charlie hebdo , police officers , and a kosher supermarket .

the perpetrators of the attacks were french - born muslims ; at least one suspect reportedly traveled to yemen in 2011 for terrorist training , while another pledged allegiance to the islamic state group .

prior to the paris attacks , the may 2014 murder of four people at the jewish museum in brussels , belgium — allegedly carried out by a french muslim who had spent a year with islamist fighters in syria — also raised alarm bells in both europe and the united states about returning fighters .

in addition , security services in western countries are increasingly concerned that some citizens and residents may be inspired by islamist extremist propaganda to commit attacks at home without ever traveling abroad .

many point to the two separate attacks in canada in october 2014 , which targeted members of the armed forces and the canadian parliament , and the hostage - taking incident in sydney , australia , in december 2014 , as worrisome examples of "lone wolf" attacks carried out by "self - radicalized" muslims .

fears of "copycat" incidents have also increased following the february 2015 shootings in copenhagen , denmark , in which a gunman killed two individuals and wounded several police officers at two separate locations — a cafe hosting a free speech discussion and a synagogue — broadly mirroring the paris attacks .

the suspect , a young danish - born citizen of palestinian descent , appears to have been radicalized in prison and may have been interested in traveling to fight in syria or iraq .

u.s. and european officials further note the potential propaganda value of western muslims engaged in fighting in iraq or syria .

some analysts have speculated that the islamic state group may view americans or other english speakers as particularly useful for targeting potential recruits in western countries .

western fighters have appeared in several islamic state propaganda videos .

intelligence services believe that the beheadings of three americans and two united kingdom citizens between august and november 2014 , videotaped and posted online , were carried out by a british member of the islamic state organization .

some intelligence officials have also suggested that the islamic state group recruits americans and other westerners specifically for their presumed ability to reenter the united states and europe with less scrutiny .

the united states has close , long - standing bilateral law enforcement and intelligence relations with most european countries .

since the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , the united states and the 28-member european union ( eu ) have also worked to enhance their counterterrorism and homeland security cooperation .

in recent years , u.s. and european policymakers have sought to exchange "best practices" on ways to prevent radicalization , counter violent extremism ( cve ) , and tackle the potential foreign fighter threat .

the united states and european governments also worked together to pass u.n. security council resolution 2178 in september 2014 , which seeks to combat the foreign fighter phenomenon worldwide .

in the wake of the paris attacks , the white house convened a "summit on countering violent extremism" on february 17-19 , 2015 , in washington , dc .

this three - day event featured discussions with u.s. community leaders , civil society groups , and law enforcement officials on domestic cve efforts , as well as talks with u.s. business and technology leaders on tackling radicalization online .

the summit also included an international component in which representatives from over 60 countries ( including the mayor of paris and other high - ranking european and eu officials ) discussed preventive measures and shared "best practices. .

u.s. officials and analysts contend that the potential foreign fighter threat underscores the importance of close law enforcement ties with key european allies and existing u.s. - eu information - sharing arrangements , including those related to tracking terrorist financing and sharing airline passenger data .

some u.s. policymakers , including several members of congress , have expressed particular worries about european fighters in syria and iraq because of the u.s. visa waiver program ( vwp ) .

the vwp permits short - term visa - free travel to the united states from 38 countries , most of which are in europe ( see appendix a ) .

in july 2014 , u.s. attorney general eric holder asserted during a speech in norway , that "we have a mutual and compelling interest in developing shared strategies for confronting the influx of u.s. and european - born violent extremists in syria .

and because our citizens can freely travel , visa - free ... the problem of fighters in syria returning to any of our countries is a problem for all of our countries. .

hearings in the 113 th and 114 th congresses have addressed the potential foreign fighter threat , and several pieces of legislation have been introduced on the vwp .

while some members of congress appear to support limiting or suspending the vwp , others indicate a preference for strengthening its existing security controls .

the obama administration continues to support the vwp as a key facilitator of transatlantic trade and tourism .

in november 2014 , however , the u.s. department of homeland security announced that vwp travelers would be required to submit additional advanced biographic information to enable more accurate and comprehensive screening because of the possible dangers posed by foreign fighters .

this report discusses u.s. and european assessments of and responses to the foreign fighter phenomenon .

it focuses on government policies primarily in western european countries and analyzes eu measures to counter the foreign fighter threat given the eu's largely open internal borders and that 23 eu member states belong to the u.s. visa waiver program .

it also briefly evaluates foreign fighter outflows and responses in the western balkans and russia .

the report concludes with a discussion of u.s. - european cooperation , primarily in the law enforcement and intelligence areas , and addresses issues of particular concern for congress , such as the vwp .

conflicts in syria and iraq have attracted thousands of individuals from dozens of countries to fight alongside a broad spectrum of armed groups over the last 10 years .

in iraq , the anti - u.s. insurgency and the outbreak of sectarian warfare drew thousands of fighters to the country , particularly during 2003 to 2008 , and predominantly from the arab countries of the middle east and north africa .

iran supported shiite militia groups during this period .

while the vast majority of insurgent operations in iraq were carried out by iraqis , sunni foreign fighters actively participated in fighting against u.s. forces , and some sources suggest that foreigners disproportionately were employed by some sunni insurgent forces — including antecedents of the islamic state organization — in suicide bombings and other high - profile attacks .

in 2008 , u.s. military sources estimated that foreigners made up roughly 10% of the personnel of the islamic state of iraq ( also known as al qaeda in iraq , the predecessor to the islamic state ) , who were then estimated to have declined from as many as 10,000 fighters to roughly 2,000 to 3,000 fighters .

these sources further reported that , in 2008 , foreigners constituted roughly 1% of the 23,000 detainees in u.s. custody in iraq .

u.s. officials accused the syrian government of president bashar al asad of facilitating the flow of foreign fighters through syria into iraq during this period , and the u.s. military reportedly took action inside syria in at least one instance in part to disrupt such flows .

an outflow of foreign fighters from iraq increasingly was reported by the international media from 2008 onward .

in subsequent years , some governments in the middle east and north africa took steps to prosecute , monitor , and / or rehabilitate foreign fighters and individuals who facilitated their travel to iraq , with varying outcomes .

several congressional hearings in the 113 th and 114 th congresses have focused on or addressed the foreign fighter phenomenon , especially as related to europe .

senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee , "cybersecurity , terrorism , and beyond: addressing evolving threats to the homeland," 113 th congress , 2 nd session , september 10 , 2014 ; house homeland security committee , subcommittee on border and maritime security , "one flight away: an examination of the threat posed by isis terrorists with western passports," 113 th congress , 2 nd session , september 10 , 2014 ; house homeland security committee , "worldwide threats to the homeland," 113 th congress , 2 nd session , september 17 , 2014 ; house foreign affairs committee , subcommittee on europe , eurasia , and emerging threats , "islamist foreign fighters returning home and the threat to europe," 113 th congress , 2 nd session , september 19 , 2014 ; house foreign affairs committee , joint hearing of the subcommittee on terrorism , nonproliferation and trade , and the subcommittee on the middle east and north africa , "isis and the threat from foreign fighters," 113 th congress , 2 nd session , december 2 , 2014 ; house homeland security committee , "countering violent islamist extremism: the urgent threat of foreign fighters and homegrown terror," 114 th congress , 1 st session , february 11 , 2015 ; senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee , "visa waiver program: implications for u.s. national security," 114 th congress , 1 st session , march 12 , 2015 ; house homeland security committee , subcommittee on border and maritime security , "combating terrorist travel: does the visa waiver program keep our nation safe ? .

114 th congress , 1 st session , march 17 , 2015 ; house homeland security committee , "a global battleground: the fight against islamist extremism at home and abroad," 114 th congress , 1 st session , march 24 , 2015 .

in many of these hearings , the u.s. visa waiver program figured prominently given that a number of participating countries in europe have sizeable foreign fighter contingents in syria and iraq .

as discussed previously , the vwp permits short term visa - free travel ( up to 90 days ) for business or pleasure to the united states from 38 countries , most of which are in europe .

congressional concerns about the ability of terrorists to enter the united states under the vwp are not new .

following the september 11 , 2001 , attacks and the realization that terrorists with european citizenship had traveled to the united states under the vwp ( including the "20 th " september 11 hijacker , zacarias moussaoui , and airplane "shoe bomber" richard reid ) , congress sought to strengthen the program's security components in legislation , such as the enhanced border security and visa reform act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-173 ) and the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) .

among other provisions , p.l .

110-53 called on participating vwp countries to meet certain security and passport standards and to sign on to a number of information - sharing agreements .

p.l .

110-53 also required visitors entering the united states under the vwp to submit biographical information to u.s. authorities through a new web - based electronic system for travel authorization ( esta ) at least two days before traveling .

esta became operational in 2009 .

esta checks the biographical information submitted against relevant law enforcement and security databases ; those individuals not approved under esta must obtain a u.s. visa .

prior to esta's implementation , the first time an individual traveling to the united states under the vwp was screened was at the port of departure ; information submitted for esta is largely the same as that required by the previous i - 94w form that individuals arriving under the vwp were required to complete en route to the united states .

amid growing concerns about terrorist threats emanating from the syria - iraq region , including the increasing numbers of foreign fighters , several pieces of legislation on the vwp were introduced in the 113 th congress .

some proposed measures largely aimed to enhance the security of the vwp further ( see h.r .

5470 , introduced september 15 , 2014 by representative candice miller , and s. 2869 , introduced september 23 , 2014 , by senator dan coats ) .

others would have temporarily suspended the vwp or the participation of certain countries ( see h.r .

5434 , introduced september 10 , 2014 , by representative doug collins ; and h.r .

5594 , introduced september 18 , 2014 , by representative tulsi gabbard ) .

at the start of the 114 th congress , representative candice miller reintroduced legislation to strengthen the vwp's security elements ; it would also specify that the department of homeland security can suspend a country's participation in the vwp should the country fail to provide the united states with pertinent traveler information related to security concerns ( see h.r .

158 , the visa waiver program improvement act of 2015 , introduced january 6 , 2015 ) .

similarly , senator dan coats has reintroduced legislation that , among other counterterrorism provisions , aims to improve the vwp's existing security controls ( see s. 542 , the counterterrorism border security enhancement act , introduced february 24 , 2015 ) .

regarding the vwp , s. 542 would expand pre - travel clearance procedures and increase information - sharing requirements for vwp participating countries ; s. 542 would also specify that dhs may suspend a country from the vwp for not fully cooperating with such information - sharing requirements .

the terrorist attacks in paris and copenhagen in early 2015 have prompted even more intense congressional scrutiny of the vwp .

while some members of congress continue to express reservations about the program on security grounds , many recognize its importance in facilitating international trade and tourism of considerable economic significance for the united states .

others note the resource difficulties that the u.s. department of state would face if the vwp was terminated .

in fy2013 , about 20 million people arrived in the united states under the vwp , representing more than one - third of all temporary visitors , and spent almost $80 billion while traveling to and within the united states .

the obama administration continues to support the vwp as a key facilitator of transatlantic commerce and tourism and rejects calls to suspend it because of the potential foreign fighter threat .

u.s. officials point out that esta's introduction has greatly strengthened the vwp's security controls over the last few years and that the program's information - sharing provisions with participating countries help to enhance u.s. intelligence about known and suspected terrorists and other criminals .

in november 2014 , the u.s. department of homeland security announced that vwp travelers would be required to submit more biographic information through esta to help address growing security concerns about foreign fighters .

u.s. officials contend that the additional esta requirements will enable more accurate and comprehensive screening of vwp visitors , while preserving legitimate trade and travel .

in addition to voicing concerns about the vwp , some members of congress have questioned whether current european counterterrorism laws are equipped to combat the emerging foreign fighter threat .

as discussed earlier , while some european countries already have laws in place that criminalize traveling abroad for terrorist purposes or the facilitation of such travel , others are in the process of considering or enacting such legislation .

the eu may also amend its common definition of terrorism to make so - called "jihadi travel" and other related foreign fighter activities ( such as receiving terrorist training ) criminal offenses throughout the eu , both to take into account the requirements of unscr 2178 and to avoid prosecution gaps among member states .

administration officials assert that the united states is continuing to encourage all partners , including in europe , to meet their obligations under unscr 2178 .

the united states would likely welcome an eu decision to update its common terrorism definition .

however , many experts note that efforts to criminalize foreign fighter - related offenses could be controversial in some european countries seeking to balance security concerns with integration and rehabilitation imperatives .

meanwhile , reaching agreement at eu level on harmonizing member state laws on "jihadi travel" may face hurdles given differences in member states' legal systems , and lag times between when an agreement is reached by eu officials in brussels and when it is implemented or enforced at the national level .

in the wake of the paris and copenhagen attacks , several members of congress have also noted concerns about the extent and robustness of european information - sharing , both among european countries and with the united states .

many members of congress have expressed support for the eu - wide proposal on airline passenger name record data as a way to help improve european capabilities to track potential foreign fighters .

congressional support has been consistently strong for the u.s. - eu pnr accord and the u.s. - eu swift agreement as vital tools in the fight against terrorism .

u.s. border control measures and visa policy may continue to be salient issues for congress as the united states seeks to address the potential foreign fighter threat .

congressional decisions related to intelligence - gathering reforms and data privacy and protection issues may have implications for u.s. - european counterterrorism cooperation and the future of u.s. - eu information - sharing agreements in the years ahead .

members of congress may be able to help shape european views and responses to the foreign fighter phenomenon through ongoing contacts with european lawmakers in national parliaments and in the european parliament .

appendix a .

membership in the european union , schengen area , and the u.s. visa waiver program the following chart details participation of european countries in the 28-member european union , the schengen area of free movement , and the u.s. visa waiver program ( vwp ) .

* monaco , san marino , and vatican city are considered de facto members of the schengen free movement area ; they do not have border controls with the schengen countries that surround them , but they are not official schengen members because they have not signed the schengen agreement .

appendix b .

foreign fighter recruitment patterns the dynamics of the syrian conflict are such that the predominantly sunni muslim insurgents' requests for material support often make reference to islamic religious injunctions to defend co - religionists .

such requests appear to have strong appeal in some muslim communities around the world .

nevertheless , one also could argue that the power of these requests to convince individuals to become foreign fighters may be relatively limited , given that while foreign fighter flows to syria have been large relative to similar flows to other conflicts in the past , these flows are relatively small when considered as a proportion of the large global sunni muslim population ( which may exceed one billion people ) .

groups or individuals sympathetic to syrian insurgents also have other means of providing support , including political advocacy and financial donations .

imbalances in the relative flow of fighters to syria from particular countries or communities may suggest important differences in underlying social and political conditions in those areas or differences in the approaches taken by domestic authorities to prevent foreign fighter recruitment and / or restrict foreign fighter travel .

in august 2014 , the islamic state organization issued a lengthy appeal to potential foreign recruits in its english - language web magazine ( see figure b - 1 ) .

the appeal described travel to iraq and syria by foreign recruits in support of the islamic state as analogous to the hijrah , a centerpiece of islam's foundational story in which the prophet mohammed and his earliest supporters fled persecution in mecca for the relative safety of yathrib ( medina ) and later used yathrib as a base for their subsequent military campaign against their detractors in the arabian peninsula .

other salafist - jihadist groups have used similar analogies in other contexts as a means of associating their appeals for military and financial support with religious and historical imagery intimately familiar to many muslims .

in the words of the islamic state's appeal: every muslim professional who delayed his jihad in the past …should now make his number one priority to repent and answer the call to hijrah , especially after the establishment of the khilafah [caliphate , announced by the islamic state in june 2014] .

this khilafah is more in need than ever before for experts , professionals , and specialists , who can help contribute in strengthening its structure and tending to the needs of their muslim brothers .

… so abandoning hijrah – the path to jihad – is a dangerous matter .

in effect , one is thereby deserting jihad and willingly accepting his tragic condition of being a hypocritical spectator .

the islamic state organization also warns prospective recruits of potentially difficult conditions and advises individuals to "keep in mind that the khil a fah is a state whose inhabitants and soldiers are human beings .

they are not infallible angels .

you may see things that need improvement and that are being improved. .

in january 2015 , islamic state spokesman abu mohammed al adnani reiterated his call for supporters to join the group's ranks and to carry out attacks in their home countries .

in march , the group's english - language magazine featured a lengthy article extolling the virtues of male and female foreign recruits , and provided imagery of a young traveler in a western airport en route to "the land of islam" ( see figure b - 2 ) .

