the department of defense ( dod ) has long relied on contractors to provide the u.s. military with a wide range of goods and services , including weapons , vehicles , food , uniforms , and operational support .

without contractor support , the united states would not be able to arm and field an effective fighting force .

costs and trends associated with contractor support provide congress more information upon which to make budget decisions and weigh the relative costs and benefits of different force structures and different military operations — including contingency operations and maintaining bases around the world .

this report examines ( 1 ) how much money dod obligates on contracts , ( 2 ) what dod is buying , and ( 3 ) where that money is being spent .

this report also examines the extent to which these data are sufficiently reliable to use as a factor when developing policy or analyzing government operations .

related crs products include crs in focus if10887 , the fy2019 defense budget request: an overview , by brendan w. mcgarry , and crs report r44329 , using data to improve defense acquisitions: background , analysis , and questions for congress , by moshe schwartz .

when congress appropriates money , it provides budget authority — the authority to enter into obligations .

obligations occur when agencies enter into contracts , submit purchase orders , employ personnel , or otherwise legally commit to spending money .

o utlays occur when obligations are liquidated ( primarily through the issuance of checks , electronic fund transfers , or the disbursement of cash ) .

in fy2017 , the u.s. federal government obligated $507 billion for contracts for the acquisition of goods , services , and research and development .

the $507 billion obligated on contracts was equal to approximately 13% of total fy2017 federal budget outlays of $3.98 trillion .

as noted in figure 1 , in fy2017 dod obligated more money on federal contracts ( $320 billion ) than all other federal agencies combined .

dod's obligations were equal to 8% of all federal spending .

from fy2010 to fy2017 , the federal government obligated both a smaller amount of money and a smaller percentage of the overall budget to contract acquisitions .

in addition , the dod share of overall contract obligations decreased relative to the rest of the federal government ( see table 1 ) .

dod relies on contractors to support operations worldwide , including operations in afghanistan , permanently garrisoned troops overseas , and ships docking at foreign ports .

because of its global footprint , this report will look at where dod obligates contract dollars in two ways: 1. by geographic region , and 2. domestic vs. overseas .

the gao , crs , and other organizations have raised some concerns about the accuracy of procurement data retrieved from the federal procurement data system ( fpds ) .

for detailed information on the history of fpds data validity concerns , see appendix a .

appendix a. fpds background , accuracy issues , and future plans according to the federal acquisition regulation , fpds can be used to measure and assess "the effect of federal contracting on the nation's economy and ... the effect of other policy and management initiatives ( eg , performance based acquisitions and competition ) . .

fpds is also used to meet the requirements of the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-282 ) , which requires all federal award data to be publicly accessible .

congress , legislative and executive branch agencies , analysts , and the public all rely on fpds as the primary source of information for understanding how and where the federal government spends contracting dollars .

congress and the executive branch rely on the information to help make and oversee informed policy and spending decisions .

analysts and the public rely on the data in fpds to conduct analysis and gain visibility into government operations .

data reliability is essential to the utility of fpds .

as gao has stated , "[r]eliable information is critical to informed decision making and to oversight of the procurement system. .

according to officials within the white house's office of federal procurement policy , "[c]omplete , accurate , and timely federal procurement data are essential for ensuring that the government has the right information when planning and awarding contracts and that the public has reliable data to track how tax dollars are being spent. .

if the data contained in fpds are not sufficiently reliable , the data may not provide an appropriate basis for measuring or assessing federal contracting , making policy decisions , or providing transparency into government operations .

the result could be the implementation of policies that squander resources and waste taxpayer dollars .

according to gao , "[f]ederal agencies are responsible for ensuring that the information reported in [the fpds] database is complete and accurate. .

history of fpds on august 30 , 1974 , congress enacted the office of federal procurement policy act , which established an office of federal procurement policy ( ofpp ) within omb and required the establishment of "a system for collecting , developing , and disseminating procurement data which takes into account the needs of congress , the executive branch , and the private sector. .

one of the goals of establishing a system for tracking procurement data was to "promote economy , efficiency , and effectiveness in the procurement of property and services. .

in february 1978 , the ofpp issued a government - wide memorandum that designated the department of defense as the executive agent to operate the federal procurement data system .

agencies were instructed to begin collection of procurement data on october 1 , 1978 , and to report the data to dod in february 1979 .

since 1982 , the gsa has operated the system on behalf of the ofpp .

today , fpds is the only government - wide system that contains all publicly available federal procurement data .

fpds data are used by other federal - spending information resources , including usaspending.gov .

almost from fpds's inception , the gao expressed concerns about the accuracy of the information in the database .

omb attempted to eliminate many of the errors in fpds by introducing a successor system — the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds ) , which began operation on october 1 , 2003 .

fpds was to "rely less on manual inputs and more on electronic 'machine - to - machine' approaches. .

despite the systems update , gao said "[i]nformation in fpds can only be as reliable as the information agencies enter though their own systems. .

in september 29 , 2009 , testimony before the senate homeland security and governmental affairs subcommittee on contracting oversight , william t. woods , gao's director of acquisition and sourcing management , said the following about fpds information: our past work has found that federal contracting data systems , particularly fpds - ng , contain inaccurate data .

fpds - ng is the primary government contracting data system for obligation data .

despite its critical role , gao and others have consistently reported on fpds - ng data quality issues over a number of years .

a 2012 gao report reiterated its finding that dod needs to "obtain better data on its contracted services to enable it to make more strategic workforce decisions and ensure that it maintains appropriate control of government operations. .

and a 2015 report by the inspector general of the department of commerce found that "the department needs to improve ( a ) its process for entering accurate and reliable data into fpds - ng. .

data reliability concerns persist according to gsa , agencies are required to validate their data annually .

agency statements regarding data accuracy are independent of the fpds systems and outside the authority of gsa .

for dod specifically , components ( at the service branch level ) are required to submit to defense procurement and acquisition policy ( dpap ) an annual certification of reported data , summary of data verification and validation efforts , and agency fpds data quality certifications .

continued concerns raised over the reliability of data have prompted many analysts to rely on fpds primarily to identify broad trends and make rough estimations .

according to one gao report dod acknowledged that using fpds - ng as the main data source for the inventories has a number of limitations .

these limitations include that fpds - ng does not provide the number of contractor ftes performing each service , identify the requiring activity , or allow for the identification of all services being procured .

officials from the gsa , the agency that administers fpds , stated that data errors in fpds do not substantively alter the larger context of 1.4 million actions and billions of dollars of obligations entered into the system by dod every year .

officials have also indicated that whenever possible and feasible , steps are taken to improve the reliability and integrity of the data contained in fpds .

for example , in early 2016 , crs noted discrepancies in reported contract obligations associated with public - private competitions under omb circular a - 76 .

despite a prohibition on new public - private competitions under circular a - 76 ( see p.l .

111-8 , the fy2009 omnibus appropriations bill ) , fpds reported a large number of contracts in this category in each subsequent fiscal year .

dod reported that a - 76 contracts , for example , represented approximately 1% of all contract obligations in fy2013 , fy2014 , and fy2015 ( roughly $3 billion in each fiscal year ) .

when asked for clarification , dod's defense procurement and acquisition policy office stated that the majority of these contract obligations were in fact coding errors in fpds .

that same year , crs observed that dod's fpds - reported a - 76 obligations were restated , to approximately $150 million per year from fy2013 to fy2015 .

despite the limitations of fpds , imperfect data may be better than no data .

some observers say that despite its shortcomings , fpds is one of the world's leading systems for tracking government procurement data .

fpds data can be used to identify some broad trends and rough estimations , or to gather information about specific contracts .

understanding the limitations of data — knowing when , how , and to what extent to rely on data — could help policymakers incorporate fpds data more effectively into their decisionmaking process .

appendix b .

obligations trends by psc product and service codes ( pscs ) are used "to describe the products , services , and research and development ( r&d ) purchased by the federal government. .

fpds sorts contract obligations into 33 overarching pscs: nine product codes , 23 service codes , and one r&d code .

each of the nine product codes are represented by numbers from 1-9 .

each of the service codes is represented by a single letter , and r&d is represented by the letter "a. .

figure b - 1 depicts changes in dod contract obligations by psc , from fy2008-fy2015 .

each of the 33 pscs for services has a description identifying the types of contracts contained in the category ; the nine pscs for products do not have a description .

without a clear and logical system for categorizing products into overarching psc categories — including descriptions for each category — sorting such data is of limited value .

to better understand what is contained in each product category , see the notes for figure b - 1 .

appendix c. top 20 foreign countries where dod obligates contracting dollar .

