the post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance act of 2008 ( post - 9 / 11 gi bill ® ) — enacted as title v of the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-252 ) — provides educational assistance payments to eligible individuals ( servicemembers and veterans , and their dependents ) from the department of veterans affairs ( va ) in accordance with their military service .

the department of education's ( ed's ) federal pell grants , as authorized by title iv - a - 1 of the higher education act ( hea ) , provide grant aid payments to eligible undergraduate students in accordance with their financial need , regardless of military service record .

timely , efficient , and student - friendly administration is important in ensuring that each federal program achieves its policy objectives with respect to the target population .

each program has developed administrative processes , systems , and procedures designed to streamline aid administration .

this report compares and contrasts administration of post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits and pell grant payments .

some participants have criticized the administration of post - 9 / 11 gi bill payments for taking too long and asserted that the penalties for participants who received an overpayment of benefits are too high as compared to ed student aid programs .

some participant criticism is a result of simultaneous experience navigating the processes to receive post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits and pell grant payments .

since passage of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill , the house veterans' affairs committee has held several oversight hearings to ensure administration of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill meets the needs of servicemembers transitioning to civilian life .

the hearings have focused on automation , timeliness of payments , and accuracy of benefits .

some of the differences in aid processing are a consequence of the programs' purposes .

however , other differences in the processing design and operation may expose opportunities for improvement .

this report is designed to assist congressional staff seeking an exploration of ways in which the administration of post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits might be improved through the adoption of practices employed in the administration of title iv aid .

the report approaches this task through an examination of the statutory and regulatory provisions that are pertinent to the design and administration of post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits and pell grants , the title iv aid program that is seemingly the most comparable to post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits .

the report also examines the operational practices employed to implement statutory and regulatory provisions .

information on operational practices , particularly those relevant to aid administration , has been obtained through a review of sub - regulatory guidance materials , manuals providing guidance to staff involved in administering aid , and through a limited set of interviews and site visits with individuals at federal agencies and colleges who are directly involved in administering aid .

the report presents a thorough description of the administrative practices used for each of these educational assistance programs and attempts to identify differences and reasons for differences in the administrative practices used across the programs .

it also identifies some ways in which existing practices might be enhanced , and discusses possible ways post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefit administration might be improved by adopting some title iv practices .

it is hoped that this examination can help inform the dialogue on ways in which practices employed in the administration of one program may warrant consideration for their potential to streamline or enhance the administration of the other .

the report does not intend to compare benefit levels , evaluate the process and rationale for calculating benefit amounts , or contrast the processes for approving gi bill programs of education and for determining institutional eligibility and eligible programs of education for the pell grant program .

of the gi bills administered by the va and federal student aid programs administered by ed , the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and pell grant programs were chosen for this analysis because of their commonalities .

neither program requires recipients to repay the funds , barring extenuating circumstances .

both programs are the largest educational assistance direct payment programs in terms of the numbers of participants and direct funding in each agency .

this report begins with a brief overview of the two programs and a table summarizing the key administrative activities and differences .

please note that the statutory authorizations and administrative processes are designed and implemented independently without any required intersection .

subsequent sections of the report provide an in - depth explanation of the administrative activities from the application process to the calculation of benefits to the disbursement of funds and the process for participants and educational institutions to resolve gi bill payments that exceeded a participant's eligibility ( overpayments ) .

the final section highlights associated and articulated issues and concerns about the administrative processes to explicate opportunities for improvement in each .

for assistance with frequently used acronyms , see appendix b .

this section provides a brief overview of program aspects that are helpful in understanding key similarities and differences in their administration .

while the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and pell grant programs are mutually exclusive , an individual may receive benefits from both programs concurrently if the individual is eligible for both programs independently .

for a more detailed description of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill , see crs report r42755 , the post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance act of 2008 ( post - 9 / 11 gi bill ) : primer and issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

for a more detailed description of the federal pell grant program , see crs report r42446 , federal pell grant program of the higher education act: how the program works and recent legislative changes , by [author name scrubbed] .

there are several differences in the administration of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and pell grant programs .

table 2 provides a succinct overview of some key differences .

a full explanation of each is available in the appropriate section following the table .

some of the administrative differences may be a consequence of the relatively younger age of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill ; what may arguably be termed greater benefit complexity for the post - 9 / 11 gi bill ; and the complexity of dod records .

because the post - 9 / 11 gi bill was enacted in 2009 and the pell grant program was enacted in 1973 , ed , ihes , and congress have had more time and resources to develop a suite of fully automated and integrated information systems , which administer pell grants in concert with the other hea title iv aid programs , and to improve process and system efficiency through administrative , regulatory , and legislative enhancements .

and although the va has administered several gi bill programs since 1944 , the post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefit architecture was not compatible with the legacy gi bill information systems .

pell grants are a single payment type intended to cover educational costs ; while the most common post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefit includes four different payments ( tuition and fees , yr , housing , and books ) intended to cover different educational costs and thus requiring differing award rules .

besides the most common post - 9 / 11 gi bill payments , there are additional payment types covering less commonly utilized educational costs that require different information for certification and payment .

differences in the level of automation are crucial to processing speed and accuracy .

finally while ed checks several pell grant eligibility criteria through automated database matching programs with other federal agencies , va has been unable to fully automate the calculation of qualifying active duty service .

as a consequence , initial fafsa processing is automated , but initial processing of applications for veterans education benefits is primarily manual .

it may be of note that despite initial fafsa automation , at least one data element on the application of almost half of all eligible applicants is verified manually by an faa to ensure system integrity .

both programs allow individuals to apply online .

the post - 9 / 11 gi bill application requires most applicants to choose the most advantageous gi bill .

the pell grant application requires more information , including personal financial information , that confuses some applicants .

a veteran may apply for and receive a certificate of eligibility for post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits at any time within their entitlement period even if he or she does not plan to use the benefits in the immediate future .

a pell grant application is only processed for eligibility during college admissions or while attending college .

the initial benefit application is processed to determine eligibility .

with respect to the post - 9 / 11 gi bill , the va cross references dod data and several legacy systems and issues a certificate of eligibility ( coe ) to the individual within approximately 20 days .

the coe summarizes the individual's qualifying service and resulting benefit level ( 40% - 100% ) , remaining entitlement , and delimiting date ( the last date of eligibility for education benefits ) .

with respect to pell grants , ed's central processing system ( cps ) automatically verifies basic eligibility for hea title iv aid , not necessarily the pell grant program in particular , by matching data from several federal agency databases .

within 3-5 days , cps provides the applicant with a student aid report ( sar ) that summarizes the application data and data match results , indicates the applicant's expected family contribution ( efc ) and resulting potential pell grant amount , and provides additional hea title iv aid information for the application academic year .

after the initial application process , the va and educational institutions share processing responsibility for post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits , whereas the remaining pell grant processes are primarily the responsibility of the ihes .

this difference may contribute to the differences in the time required to pay benefits and concerns regarding who is responsible for post - 9 / 11 gi bill overpayments — the participant or educational institution .

an overpayment occurs when a benefit amount is paid on behalf of a post - 9 / 11 gi bill participant to the participant or to the educational institution , and then it is subsequently determined that the individual is eligible for a smaller amount .

secondary claim / application processing determines benefit payment amounts based on actual or planned enrollment .

an ihe may complete secondary processing in order to inform prospective students of their hea title iv aid package and encourage enrollment .

the va completes secondary processing only to award payments .

for registered or enrolled students , the educational institution reports enrollment to the va in order for the va to calculate and make post - 9 / 11 gi bill payments accordingly .

the federal government encourages educational institutions to counsel gi bill participants on the complexities of higher education and financial aid .

for registered or enrolled students , the ihe may in special circumstances adjust some data elements used in calculating the hea title iv aid package , including pell grant payments , and make payments accordingly .

the ihe reports pell grant payments to ed for payment .

the key differences between the handling of overpayments from the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and pell grant programs have to do with the total amount of the overpayment and the related programs .

a pell grant overpayment occurs when a student receives more aid than that which he or she is eligible .

a single post - 9 / 11 gi bill payment may exceed $20,000 .

a single pell grant disbursement in fy2014 was no more than $2,865 .

for purposes of post - 9 / 11 gi bill payments , va first sends debt notification letters to the participant explaining how the participant may choose to resolve the debt , before va notifies credit reporting agencies and refers the debt to the department of the treasury .

for purposes of pell grants , the faa will first adjust a student's title iv aid package during the current award year to eliminate an overpayment and then attempt to recoup the funds from the student before referring the debt to ed's debt resolution services .

the onus is primarily on the participant for post - 9 / 11 gi bill purposes and on the ihe for pell grant purposes .

one difference key to every process step is the greater transparency in the post - 9 / 11 gi bill program from the perspective of the participant .

many veterans may with little assistance correctly assess their post - 9 / 11 gi bill eligibility and the payment amounts that they may receive .

the eligibility criteria and calculations for pell grants would be difficult for students to duplicate accurately .

for example , the key criterion for post - 9 / 11 gi bill eligibility is the individual's service record , which may be obtained from their service unit if the exact dates are not remembered .

a key criterion for pell grant eligibility is efc , which is based on calculations using financial information , benefit receipt , and statutory provisions .

the first step in benefit administration is notification from the individual of a desire to take advantage of a benefit .

individuals must apply for the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and pell grant programs .

the veteran's application for benefits and the fafsa must be processed to verify the applicant's eligibility .

once initial claim and application processing determine eligibility , intervention by the prospective or actual educational institution or training establishment is integral in secondary processing , which may lead to a disbursement or payment of benefit funds .

after payment ( s ) for the initial academic term or pursuit have been distributed , subsequent payments may be distributed or previous payments adjusted .

both the post - 9 / 11 gi bill program and pell grant program have processes to ensure subsequent payments are made properly and adjustments are made to match the student's circumstances and the programs' objectives .

the resolution of overpayments is an issue for post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants and educational institutions , as well as ihes that participate in the hea title iv aid programs .

this section highlights a few salient and distinctive issues and concerns regarding the administration of benefit payments under the post - 9 / 11 gi bill .

this information supplements the administrative process descriptions by describing some consequences and challenges associated with various process steps .

where applicable , potential opportunities to address the issues by adopting mechanisms or practices employed in the administration of pell grants are explored .

in addition , possible limitations that may arise from applying pell grant administrative processes to the post - 9 / 11 gi bill processes are identified in order that they may be considered and mitigated .

some concerns have arisen about the extent to which individuals are maximizing the value of the assistance available through both programs .

individuals who meet the eligibility requirements for the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and for pell grants , and other hea title iv aid , may receive benefits from all of the programs concurrently .

in 2008 , congress excluded gi bill benefits from being counted in determining eligibility for hea title iv aid in order to maximize veteran eligibility for federal educational assistance .

in 2012 , congress enacted legislation to support "the best use of education benefits" by veterans through the provision of specified information .

at the educational institution , post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits are administered by the sco using va systems , guidance , and forms , and pell grants are administered by the faa using ed systems , guidance , and forms .

depending on the institution , the sco and faa may not be the same individual and may not be in the same organizational unit of the institution .

there is no statutory requirement for program coordination or intra - program consideration .

some participants and advocacy organizations are concerned that post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants may not be counseled on how to maximize program benefits and minimize future loan liability .

this concern can be related to acceptance of pell grants and is often related to hea title iv loans .

for example , a combined sco / faa may counsel a student to use hea title iv aid while pursuing an associate's degree at a community college and subsequently combine post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits and hea title iv aid while pursuing a bachelor's and master's degree at more expensive four - year institutions .

in another example , a combined sco / faa may stress to a post - 9 / 11 gi bill recipient that the individual may choose to accept none of or less than the maximum hea title iv loan for which he / she is eligible given the amount of post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits that may be received .

alternatively , this same information could be relayed directly from either the department of veterans affairs or department of education , or both , through other disclosures and outreach .

at issue is whether or not benefit recipients have a clear sense of the most advantageous sequence or combination in which to use each form of assistance .

there are options that may help beneficiaries of gi bill benefits and hea title iv aid maximize those benefits .

statutory provisions could require that the sco , faa , and student jointly review the student's long - term educational objectives and plan and review benefits eligibility .

if the sco and faa were the same person , consideration of both benefits may occur spontaneously ; however , some expertise in the programs and focus on each target population may be lost as the sco / faa is required to do more .

alternatively , the administrative processes or systems could be merged to consider both forms of assistance .

in 2008 , congress excluded gi bill benefits from consideration in the calculation of hea title iv aid to reduce the perceived financial harm to veterans that was occurring with the coordination of benefits and thus increase college aid and support for veterans and military families .

another option that could occur outside the administration of benefits is to ensure beneficiaries receive financial counseling and understand the information specific to the coordination of benefits .

the post - 9 / 11 gi bill requires many eligible individuals to make significant and sometimes irrevocable decisions and actions in order to use their benefits as desired .

a lack of understanding regarding these actions or improper timing may result in unfulfilled educational objectives and unused benefits that could have been beneficial .

three key actions are the selection of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill , the irrevocable election to relinquish another gi bill , and finally the designation of dependents to which to transfer benefits .

the application form requires eligible individuals to choose the gi bill for which they are applying .

for a small minority of individuals , the post - 9 / 11 gi bill is not the most advantageous gi bill .

most individuals who serve on active duty on or after september 11 , 2001 , are eligible for more than one gi bill .

it is the individual's responsibility to choose the applicable and most beneficial gi bill from which to receive benefits during the application process .

the va does make tools available through its website and the va call center to help inform this decision if individuals choose to avail themselves of them .

some stakeholders have suggested requiring that all eligible individuals receive benefit counseling prior to using their benefit ; however , this may be resource intensive and may be insulting or irksome to eligible individuals who are informed .

in addition , the application form requires individuals who are also eligible for the montgomery gi bill - active duty ( mgib - ad ) , montgomery gi bill - selected reserve ( mgib - sr ) , or reserve educational assistance program ( reap ) to make a dated irrevocable election to receive post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits in lieu of one of those other gi bills .

some participants and advocacy organizations have indicated the choices may be confusing .

the va office of inspector general ( oig ) indicates that many veterans do not know which gi bills they are eligible for and which to relinquish .

failure to relinquish a benefit or date it correctly has delayed the receipt of benefits for some individuals .

the suggestion of requiring benefit counseling prior to using their benefit would also address this issue .

servicemembers may transfer their post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits to eligible family members while serving on active duty or in the selected reserve , after serving at least six years , and upon promising to serve an additional four years .

some individuals have not designated any transfer or not updated the designation with new dependents while serving .

this failure has disappointed some eligible individuals who have no recourse to transfer those benefits after retirement or discharge .

dod and the service branches provide some outreach to servicemembers regarding this limitation .

one option for helping active duty members would be including this information in the mandatory portions of the transition assistance program , which provides pre - separation services and counseling on a number of transition - related topics to separating members of the armed forces .

in general , pell grant applicants and recipients are not required to make any decisions regarding program eligibility .

with respect to selecting a gi bill and relinquishing a gi bill , lts or the vce could make a default decision unless the applicant opts for an alternative .

conversely , congress could eliminate the likelihood of individuals being eligible for multiple gi bills by consolidating or eliminating some gi bills .

perhaps , the only analogous decision required of pell grant eligible students is the rare decision not to accept a pell grant award presented in their financial aid package .

a savvy and informed student may choose to bank their pell eligibility for periods of greater personal need .

there is no requirement that faas help students discern whether to decline a pell award because the assumption is that pell - eligible students are financially needy .

post - 9 / 11 gi bill claimants and scos would like easily accessible real - time information on the status of claims , eligible benefit amounts , expected payment dates , or pending issues .

although a claimant and sco can check the status of their claim by calling the va , the va call center is not considered easily accessible in the age of online information .

ebenefits provides information on entitlement and school enrollment , but does not yet provide real - time access to information such as claim status , payment amounts , and remaining entitlement .

the hea title iv aid process does make more real - time information available .

the status of an applicant's fafsa ( complete or incomplete data entry , selection for verification , efc , and loans outstanding ) is available online either immediately if submitted online or within 7-10 days of processing if submitted by mail .

however , pell grant applicants are similarly limited to real - time information on the secondary school processing by calling or contacting their faa .

despite improved claim processing speeds since 2009 , a major complaint continues to be the length of time required to process original claims , in particular .

the va has indicated that additional funds for information technology improvements could facilitate streamlining the initial claims processing .

for example , vadir lacks some service information , thus preventing an automated eligibility determination .

service records for individuals in the reserves or national guard often required additional research ; however , system interfaces have been improved to reduce this .

also , for example , vonapp and lts are not currently interfaced .

in addition to system issues , claimants make errors or miss questions on the application that require the claimant's and vce's time to resolve with proper documentation .

for example , individuals may not ( 1 ) make the requisite irrevocable election , ( 2 ) date the irrevocable election properly , or ( 3 ) choose a program for which they are eligible .

in addition to va processing systems , the va office of inspector general ( oig ) has indicated that processing delayed by the submission of inaccurate and incomplete applications ( especially the selection of an irrevocable election ) might be improved by better educating veterans on the form .

another issue that has arisen in all phases of post - 9 / 11 gi bill claims processing is rpo and lts errors .

one example is vces not computing an individual's qualifying length of service properly .

another example is incorrect payment calculations as programmed into lts .

a similar common audit finding by ed for hea title iv aid is the incorrect calculation of pell grant amounts by faas .

ed suggests that ihes improve their internal controls , training , procedures , and internal audits .

the options for expediting processing and improving calculation accuracy could include information technology systems improvements , a simplification of the eligibility requirements and process steps , and improved training and resources for vces .

for example , the hea title iv aid information technology systems are continually updated by ed contractors to reduce the incidence of issues and remain current with legislative changes .

however , despite the mature hea title iv aid information technology systems , fafsa data entry errors must be corrected manually and almost half of eligible applicants are flagged for verification of at least one application question .

the tracking and manual work required of scos to properly certify , including amendments , adjustments , and terminations ; record payments ; verify proper payments ; and research issues results in an administrative burden on educational institutions and training establishments , slows the disbursement of post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits , and results in improper payments .

scos must complete calculations for certifications and amendments , adjustments , and terminations before manually entering the requested data in va - once .

educational institutions have invested in or developed their own post - 9 / 11 gi bill application forms , software systems , or spreadsheets to track the requisite underlying data and administer the benefits .

the va oig determined that approximately half of va improper payments for housing allowances and book and supplies stipends may be related to inaccurate and / or incomplete information on certs .

the additional burden on scos to administer post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits is mirrored by the additional burden on faas to administer pell grants .

ihes often purchase or develop auxiliary software to support data entry into ed - funded software systems .

ed has found that ihes have difficulty reporting changes in student enrollment status accurately , measuring and monitoring satisfactory academic progress , and reporting in a timely manner .

some ihe representatives have indicated that this student tracking and the subsequent calculation of the amount of aid to return is excessively complicated and burdensome .

this results in some students receiving hea title iv aid for which they are not eligible .

both the gi bill programs and pell grant program pay institutions a fee to defray the cost of the administrative burden based on the number of beneficiaries .

it would be difficult for either federal agency to redevelop their systems to accommodate the variety of internal systems used by educational institutions , ihes , and training establishments to track their own students and trainees .

the va and ed could provide a single interface or system and calculate benefits using the same information in order to reduce the institutional burden .

a long - standing complaint of post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants and educational institutions regarding benefit administration is late payments .

a few months after initial implementation of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill in october 2009 , average processing time for initial applications and eligibility determinations ( original claims ) exceeded 59 days , and the average processing time for enrollments and payments ( supplemental claims ) exceeded 48 days .

the va implemented several short - term solutions to increase the processing speed and continued implementation of its long - term solution ( lts ) , an automated processing system .

in fy2014 , the average processing time was reduced to 17 days for initial claims and six days for supplemental claims .

payments have also been delayed as a result of inclement weather events affecting rpo operations , educational institutions and training establishments not submitting certs in a timely manner , remarks entered in va - once that require manual follow - up by vces to resolve , and individuals not requesting benefits in a timely manner .

in 2014 , the va office of inspector general ( oig ) indicated that processing is delayed when certs are submitted late ( i.e. , after the academic term begins ) .

the oig recommended that processing speeds could be improved by educating veterans and scos on their responsibilities and having the rpo effectively monitor the timeliness of sco submissions .

as a result of some payment delays , some educational institutions make special allowances for post - 9 / 11 gi bill recipients for whom tuition and fees are not received by institutional deadlines , including short - term loans or extended deadlines .

there is anecdotal evidence that some post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants have had to change housing arrangements or withdraw from school as a result of delayed payments .

there are several options for expediting payments .

while lts and the remainder of the va processing architecture automate many but not all of the required processes , additional automation and system integration could reduce processing times .

for example , ed relies on a suite of automated and integrated systems , including cod , cps , and nslds , to facilitate processing hea title iv aid .

automating the paper certs may reduce the burden on individuals , educational institutions , and training establishments .

in addition , the va , state approving agencies ( saa ) , and va education liaison representatives ( elrs ) could conduct or make available additional training and outreach to improve the accuracy and timeliness of certs .

timing of the housing allowance payment has created issues for some individuals .

statutory provisions require that educational assistance benefits be paid only for periods of enrollment or pursuit unless an individual qualifies for an advance payment .

the first monthly housing allowance of an academic term is paid , at the earliest , after the term begins — typically at the beginning of the second month for the previous month's enrollment .

some individuals would like to receive the first housing allowance of the term before the term begins .

pell grant awards provide a lump sum payment up to 10 days prior to the start of the payment period that may , if adequate , be used to defray housing costs throughout the payment period .

the post - 9 / 11 gi bill could consider a similar lump sum payment prior to the start of the academic term ; although , this would likely increase the incidence and amount of overpayments and debts .

the possible variation in tuition and fees payment amounts from term to term for individuals attending private educational institutions may make personal financial management more difficult .

statutory provisions define the maximum annual tuition and fees benefit for individuals attending private educational institutions .

the va allows individuals attending private educational institutions to receive the maximum annual tuition and fees benefit in the first academic term of the academic year if eligible .

therefore , the tuition and fees benefit in subsequent terms of the same academic year may be lower or $0 unless the individual is eligible for a yellow ribbon payment .

for example , if a student attending a private educational institution in academic year 2014-2015 is charged $12,000 tuition and fees for the fall term , $12,000 tuition and fees for the spring term , and $6,000 tuition and fees for the summer term , the student could receive post - 9 / 11 gi bill tuition and fees benefits of up to $12,000 for the fall term , $8,235.02 for the spring term , and $0 for the summer term ( $12,000 + $8,235.02 + $0 = $20,235.02 , the academic year 2014-2015 tuition and fees cap ) .

the payment differences may affect recipient attendance decisions .

the pell grant disbursement methodology attempts to avoid this inconsistency by calculating a maximum award amount for the year and disbursing no more than a prorated amount based on the number of expected payment periods in the year .

for example , an individual with a maximum award of $5,000 for the year will receive no more than $2,500 for the fall semester and $2,500 for the spring semester .

the post - 9 / 11 gi bill tuition and fees at private and foreign institutions could follow a similar methodology to reduce the variation in amounts from term to term .

there are , however , several potential issues that may arise with such a change .

pell grant recipients do not receive the maximum award amount to which they are eligible for the year if they do not enroll in each of the expected payment periods .

for example , in the above scenario , the student would not receive the remaining $2,500 of the $5,000 maximum if not enrolled in the spring semester .

this change may reduce the perceived benefit of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and affect recipient's attendance decisions .

in addition , the change may affect the cost of the yellow ribbon program .

complaints have arisen because educational institutions and post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants believe that overpayments are erroneously assigned to them , and they have been unable to resolve overpayments or the ensuing debt with the least amount of difficulty or without adverse consequences .

specifically , both educational institutions and participants are unclear of the process required to resolve overpayments and debts .

in addition , the process is perceived as being unnecessarily punitive .

reports indicate that this confusion has variously resulted in students dropping out of school to resolve overpayments , schools reassigning debt to students , and students' credit ratings being reduced .

there are several options for diminishing confusion and adverse consequences .

the va could improve communication .

for example , the va could improve its explanation of the genesis of each overpayment and the steps for resolution .

although all of this information is included in the overpayment notification letters from the va rpo and dmc , the text of the letters and timeline for action may not be comprehensible to all parties .

the va could make real - time information on the status of overpayments and the timeline for action easily accessible , and make their resolution available online regardless of whether the overpayment / debt resides with the rpo , dmc , or treasury .

also along the lines of improved communication , the va could provide vces with access to view the claimant's overpayment , debt , timeline for action , and terms of the debt resolution so that the vces could assist gi bill participants with questions and issues .

the va could consider alternate forms of communication in addition to mail .

the va and congress could also change and / or clarify the process for mitigating adverse consequences .

for example , the va could complete implementation of monthly enrollment certification by participants .

in the event that scos do not notify the va of enrollment changes in a timely manner , the participant would at the end of each month have the opportunity to inform the va .

this may reduce the amount of some overpayments .

conversely , the va could induce or penalize scos to encourage the timely amendment or adjustment to certs .

another approach might be for the va to begin immediate and minimal collection of overpayments from future benefits such that some individuals who choose not to proactively resolve an overpayment in a timely manner could avoid referral to treasury and credit agencies .

the minimal reduction might encourage individual action toward a more beneficial resolution of the overpayment .

as an alternative to an automatic and minimal collection rate , the va could automatically offset each future post - 9 / 11 gi bill payment until the overpayment is resolved or the participant makes alternative arrangements .

finally , the rpo , dmc , and treasury could improve system coordination or communication such that debtors are not penalized for remitting payments to the wrong entity .

for example , a participant who sends a payment to the dmc after the debt has been referred to treasury may be subject to treasury action before the dmc , participant , and treasury have an opportunity to appropriately apply the payment .

issues related to assigning responsibility for hea title iv overpayments are not as prominent , but calculating the hea title iv debt amount is an issue .

ihes determine whether the student or ihe is responsible for the overpayment .

if the student is responsible for a pell grant overpayment , the faa will first attempt to resolve the overpayment through a reduction in subsequent disbursements in the same award year and then by contacting the student for repayment .

however , the calculation and process by which ihes complete a return of title iv funds is a major source of concern for ed and ihes .

ed has determined that ihes often make errors in calculating the amount of funds by using incorrect dates or making mathematical errors .

in addition , ihes fail to follow ed regulations and ihe policy regarding the timeframe for returning funds .

ihes have requested a simplified process and more time to process returns .

the adverse consequences of not resolving a gi bill or pell grant overpayment within the specified timeframes are very similar: individuals lose eligibility for future benefits , debts are referred to the next agency organizational level ( va dmc or ed's debt resolution services ) and finally treasury .

appendix a .

comparison of institutions of higher learning and institutions of higher education appendix b .

acronyms acronyms related to the post - 9 / 11 gi bill information systems programs other acronyms acronyms related to the pell grant program: information systems other acronyms appendix c. post - 9 / 11 gi bill secondary processing and disbursement of funds for additional forms of education and training the administration of post - 9 / 11 gi bill vocational flight training , apprenticeships or on - the - job training ( ojt ) , tutorial assistance , correspondence training , licensing and certification tests , national tests , and relocation differs significantly from the administration of other degree and non - college degree ( ncd ) programs at educational institutions .

the following explains the processes with respect to the secondary processing ( supplemental claims ) and disbursement of funds .

certification of flight training as part of the initial enrollment certification , the flight school must complete va - once or the applicable sections of the certifications for va enrollment certification ( va form 22-1999 ) .

this certification is used to indicate the student's eligibility for the flight training program and indicate the flight training plan .

the form requires the individual's identifying information ; name of program ; certification that the student has a private pilot's license ; certification that the student has a class i and / or ii medical certificate on file at the school , as applicable ; credit allowed for previous education and training ; number of hours / units of instruction in current training plan ; training dates ; and charges .

flight schools that are not institutions of higher learning ( ihls ) must certify the number of training hours completed by each student monthly using va - once or the monthly certification of flight training ( va form 22-6553c ) .

the form requires the individual's identifying information , course , type of instruction , applicable horsepower , hours , charge rate , total instructional charges , a summary of cumulative instruction , medical certification , course completion or interruption , remarks , and the signatures of the student and sco .

finally , the paper cert is signed by the student and sco and mailed to the appropriate rpo .

certification of apprenticeships or on - the - job training certs for pursuit of approved programs of apprenticeships or ojt are generally completed on paper and mailed or emailed to the relevant rpo .

the cert may be completed using va form 22-1999 , va enrollment certification , or on letterhead of the training establishment .

apprenticeship and ojt certs certify training completed in the previous month .

the earliest the cert can be submitted is the last calendar day of the month being certified .

the cert must identify the eligible individual , program of education , training dates , hours during which the individual was employed and training , and number of hours in a standard work week .

finally , the cert must be signed by both the eligible individual and certifying official .

in addition , the cert must be accompanied by a signed copy of the training agreement outlining the training program and wage scale .

the training agreement may be completed using va form 22-8864 , training agreement for apprenticeship and other on - the - job training programs , or another comparable method .

a training agreement describes the trainee , credit for previous training or experience , planned training period , wage progression , skills to be achieved and expected timing for achievement , and any required educational curriculum or training provided outside the job .

the training agreement must be signed by the va education liaison representative ( elr ) , trainee , and a designated representative of the training establishment .

the elr acts as the liaison between the rpo and area educational institutions and training establishments , conducts some program approval functions , and ensures educational institutions and training establishments follow laws and policies .

many individuals who pursue ojt or apprenticeship programs also enroll in ncd programs .

for example , individuals pursuing permanent employment as police officers may attend a ncd program at a law enforcement academy and pursue ojt through a field training program .

certification of tutorial assistance an application and enrollment certification for individualized tutorial assistance ( va form 22-1990t ) is used to certify tutorial assistance received in the previous month ( s ) .

the individual must need tutoring to pass a course in which he / she is currently enrolled and which is required for the approved program of education , and must be enrolled at least half - time in a postsecondary program .

the cert must be submitted no later than one year after the tutorial assistance .

the form requires the individual's identifying information , credit hour load , educational objective , course that requires tutoring , tutor's identifying information , and tutoring schedule and charges .

finally , the cert must be signed by the student , tutor , course professor or instructor , and sco and mailed to the applicable rpo .

certification of correspondence training correspondence training is certified by mail on va form 22-1999 ( enrollment certification ) .

the cert requires the individual's identifying information ; the type of training ( flight , correspondence , or apprenticeship or other on - the - job training ) ; the name of the approved program of education ; the number of credits the student received for previous training ; and the date and number of correspondence lessons sent to the student , including charges .

the cert must be signed by the sco of the educational institution .

in addition , the cert must be accompanied by a signed copy of the enrollment agreement affirming that the student has , upon reflection , determined that the course is suitable to the student's abilities and interests .

the enrollment agreement is completed using va form 22-1999c , certificate of affirmation of enrollment agreement correspondence course .

the enrollment agreement lists the trainee , course name , date agreement signed , educational institution , and credit for previous training or experience .

the enrollment agreement must be signed by the student and mailed to the educational institution .

the educational institution submits the enrollment agreement and cert to the applicable rpo .

certification of pursuit by eligible individual reimbursement for licensing and certification tests , national tests , and relocation only requires certification by the eligible individual .

licensing and certification tests eligible individuals who want to be reimbursed for approved licensing and certification tests must complete the application for reimbursement of licensing or certification test ( va form 22-0803-are ) or a self - prepared request for reimbursement .

va form 22-0803 provides the individual identifying information ; the applicable gi bill program ; the test name , date taken , and cost ; and the organization that issues the applicable license or certificate .

the eligible individual must sign and date the form or request .

the form or request and either ( 1 ) a copy of the test results or ( 2 ) proof of payment and a copy of the license or certification must be received by the appropriate rpo within one year of taking the test .

national tests eligible individuals who want reimbursement for approved national tests must submit a signed and dated request to the appropriate rpo .

the request must provide individual identifying information ; the test name , date taken , cost , and sponsoring organization ; a copy of the test results ; and , depending on the test , proof of payment .

relocation eligible individuals who want to be reimbursed for rural relocation expenses must complete the application for rural relocation benefit under the post - 9 / 11 gi bill ( va form 22-0848 ) .

the form requires the individual's identifying information ; current and prior addresses ; the nature of the relocation ; and proof of the rural address and air transportation , if applicable .

the eligible individual must sign and date the form before mailing it to the appropriate rpo .

processing of certifications flight certs for training that is not at an ihl are imaged into tims .

the vce re - verifies the claimant's eligibility as if issuing a coe and manually populates lts and bdn .

the vce verifies that the claimant's medical certification is up to date in tims .

the vce also verifies that the program of education is approved and is being pursued in accordance with the weams program requirements and va - form - 1999 training plan .

for example , the vce must ensure that individuals are not paid for flight training hours that exceed those required for the program .

the program approval in weams is captured in tims .

finally , the vce reviews prior flight training certs to ensure the current training is not duplicative .

the vce calculates the payment amounts .

apprenticeship , ojt , and correspondence training agreements and certs are imaged into tims .

the vce re - verifies the claimant's eligibility as if issuing a coe and manually populates lts and bdn .

the vce verifies that the program of education is approved in weams and cool ( a database of apprenticeship and ojt providers , including employer information , the sco's identifying information , program descriptions , journeyman rates , planned hours , and program length ) and is being pursued in accordance with the training agreement , including wage levels and program length .

the program approval in weams or cool is captured in tims .

lts calculates the books and supplies and housing stipends automatically , primarily based on the number of certified hours , but the vce may be required to make adjustments and manually calculate the amounts .

a monthly housing benefit is paid for completed and certified training .

the books and supplies stipend is paid as a lump - sum for upcoming training .

for individuals who do not complete their program , a portion of the books and supplies stipend may become an overpayment ( see overpayments section ) , but the housing stipend will not .

licensing , certification , and national test certs are imaged into tims .

the vce re - verifies the claimant's eligibility as if issuing a coe and manually populates lts and bdn .

the vce verifies that the program of education is approved and for what amount in weams and cool .

finding licensing and certification tests in weams involves a cumbersome text search by vces , especially since some test names may not be uniformly referenced .

the test approval in weams or cool is captured in tims .

if the test is not approved , the vce sends the claimant a denial letter that may advise the claimant to contact the saa to gain approval .

the vce also ensures that the claimant has sufficient entitlement remaining .

payments are generally made within two to three days of vce authorization .

