early in the 114 th congress , the house passed a proposed justice for victims of trafficking act ( h.r .

181 ) .

the senate took s. 178 , the senate companion to h.r .

181 , and added several other proposals from elsewhere .

the package subsequently passed into law as the justice for victims of trafficking act of 2015 , p.l .

114-22 .

p.l .

114-22 consists in large measure of new or expanded federal anti - trafficking programs which are beyond the scope of this report .

it does , however , include a number of substantive and procedural criminal law provisions which are discussed below .

most federal sex trafficking prosecutions arise under one of two statutes: 18 u.s.c .

1591 , which outlaws commercial sex trafficking that has an impact on interstate or foreign commerce , and the mann act , which outlaws transportation and travel for unlawful sexual purposes .

p.l .

114-22 addresses both .

p.l .

114-22 addresses three victim - related matters .

it expands the rights of those victimized by federal crimes , trafficking and otherwise ; creates a domestic trafficking victims fund fed by special assessments levied against trafficking offenders ; and adjusts federal forfeiture law to ensure victim restitution .

p.l .

114-22 bolsters existing law enforcement tools in the area of bail , wiretapping , and sex offender registration .

existing federal law states that an individual charged with a federal offense should be released on his own recognizance , unless the magistrate is convinced that certain conditions must be imposed to insure individual or community safety or to insure the appearance of the accused at subsequent judicial proceedings .

the government may seek pretrial detention of an accused charged with a crime of violence , a federal crime of terrorism , or with commercial sex trafficking .

p.l .

114-22 amends the definition of "a crime of violence" for these purposes to include any of the human trafficking offenses .

in the investigation of certain serious federal and state crimes , the electronic communications privacy act , sometimes referred to in part as title iii , authorizes federal and state law enforcement officials to engage in court - supervised surreptitious interception of telephone , face - to - face , or electronic communications .

the list of these federal crimes includes commercial sex trafficking ( 18 u.s.c .

1591 ) , but not any of the other offenses outlawed in the slavery , peonage , and forced labor chapter of the federal criminal code .

the list of state crimes includes murder , robbery , kidnaping , etc. , but not prostitution or human trafficking .

p.l .

114-22 permits federal court - ordered interceptions in connection with investigations involving peonage ( 18 u.s.c .

1581 ( peonage ) , 1584 ( involuntary servitude ) , 1589 ( forced labor ) , and 1592 ( trafficking - related document misconduct ) .

it also permits state prosecutors to engage in state court - supervised interceptions in cases of human trafficking , child pornography production , and child sexual exploitation , to the extent that state law permits .

the federal sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) , as the name implies , requires individuals convicted of a federal , state , tribal , foreign , or military sex offense to register with , and continue to provide current information to , state or tribal authorities ( jurisdictions ) in any location in which they live , work , or attend school .

the reporting obligations apply to those convicted of qualifying sex offenses either before or after the enactment of sorna .

sorna accomplishes its notification goal through the creation of a system which affords public online access to state and tribal registration information .

the system allows the public to determine either where a particular sex offender lives , works , and attends school , or the names and location of sex offenders who live , work , or attend school within a particular area .

sorna requires jurisdictions to satisfy minimum standards for the information they collect and maintain .

section 114 of sorna requires registrants to provide ( 1 ) their name and any alias ; their social security number ; ( 2 ) their place of residence ; ( 3 ) the name and address of their employer ; ( 4 ) the name and address of any school they are attending ; ( 5 ) the description and license plate number of any vehicle they own or operate ; and ( 6 ) any other information the attorney general requires .

section 114 requires jurisdictions to include within their registries ( 1 ) a physical description of the offender ; ( 2 ) the text of the statute defining the crime which requires the offender to register ; ( 3 ) the offender's criminal history ; ( 4 ) a current photograph of the offender ; ( 5 ) a set of the offender's fingerprints ; ( 6 ) a sample of the offender's dna ; ( 7 ) a copy of the offender's driver's license or other identification card ; and ( 8 ) any other information the attorney general requires .

p.l .

114-22 directs the secretary of defense to provide the attorney general with the information described in section 114 relating to military sex offenders whom sorna requires to register with state or tribal authorities .

the requirement would presumably apply to those convicted of registration - requiring offenses both before and after the enactment of sorna .

