federal crimes are usually punishable by a statutory maximum term of imprisonment — for example , "imprisoned for not more than 5 years. .

a surprising number also have statutory minimum terms of imprisonment — for example , "imprisonment which may not be less than 10 years or for life. .

under some circumstances , mandatory minimums have proven controversial .

opponents contend that in some instances they can be arbitrary and unduly severe .

proponents contend that they ensure the offenders of the most serious offenses will receive at least some minimum punishment .

legislative proposals in the 114 th congress reflect both perspectives .

federal courts are required to weigh the standards listed in 18 u.s.c .

3553 ( a ) before sentencing a defendant .

the standards include things like "the need for the sentence imposed ... to provide just punishment for the offense" and "the need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities ..." in doing so , however , the courts may not disregard any applicable statutory mandatory minimums .

s. 353 ( senator paul ) and h.r .

706 ( representative scott ( va ) ) would permit federal courts to impose a sentence below an otherwise applicable mandatory minimum when necessary to avoid violating the sentencing standards found in section 3553 ( a ) .

when exercising the authority , the court would have to provide the government and the defendant a chance to be heard , and to provide a written statement of the section 3553 ( a ) factors that justify the decision to sentence below the mandatory minimum .

the controlled substances act and the controlled substances import and export act establish a series of mandatory minimum sentences for violation of their prohibitions .

trafficking — that is , importing , exporting , manufacturing , growing , or possessing with the intent to distribute — a very substantial amount of various highly addictive substances such as more than a kilogram of heroin is punishable by imprisonment for not less than 10 years or more than life .

a subsequent conviction carries a sentence of imprisonment for not less than 20 years or more than life .

when substantial but lesser amounts are involved , such as100 grams of heroin , sentences of imprisonment for not less than five years or more than life are called for , and imprisonment for not less than 10 years or more than life in the case of a subsequent conviction .

as noted in table 1 below , s. 502 ( senator lee ) and h.r .

920 ( representative labrador ) would reduce the mandatory minimum sentences for drug traffickers engaged in manufacture , cultivation , or distribution .

they would not reduce the mandatory minimum sentences for traffickers engaged in importing or exporting , other than those who were simply acting as couriers ( mules ) .

this is a departure from the proposals in the 113 th congress , which would have reduced the mandatory minimum sentences for traffickers generally , without regard to whether they manufacture or import / export .

s. 502 ( senator lee ) and h.r .

920 ( representative labrador ) would also direct the attorney general to prepare two reports covering federal criminal statutes , generally both those that feature mandatory sentencing provisions and those that do not .

the first would address the impact of the bill's provisions , including an indication of how the savings realized from the reduction in mandatory minimum sentences would be used to reduce prison overcrowding and to contribute to crime prevention .

the second would provide an inventory of federal criminal statutory and regulatory offenses .

the report would be required to indicate the range of penalties that accompany each offense , the mens rea element for each offense , and the regularity with which each offense has been prosecuted .

for the regulatory offenses , inventory and related information would have to be broken down on an agency - by - agency basis .

the same provisions appeared in s. 1410 as it was taken to the floor during the 113 th congress .

section 924 ( c ) , in its current form , imposes one of several different minimum sentences when a firearm is used or possessed in furtherance of another federal crime of violence or drug trafficking .

the mandatory minimums , imposed in addition to the sentence imposed for the underlying crime of violence or drug trafficking , vary , depending upon the circumstances: imprisonment for not less than five years , unless one of the higher mandatory minimums below applies ; imprisonment for not less than seven years , if a firearm is brandished ; imprisonment for not less than 10 years , if a firearm is discharged ; imprisonment for not less than 10 years , if a firearm is a short - barreled rifle or shotgun or is a semi - automatic weapon ; imprisonment for not less than 15 years , if the offense involves armor - piercing ammunition ; imprisonment for not less than 25 years , if the offender has a prior conviction for violation of section 924 ( c ) ; imprisonment for not less than 30 years , if the firearm is a machine gun or destructive device or is equipped with a silencer ; and imprisonment for life , if the offender has a prior conviction for violation of section 924 ( c ) and if the firearm is a machine gun or destructive device or is equipped with a silencer .

h.r .

1254 ( representative scott ( va ) ) would convert all of section 924 ( c ) 's mandatory minimum penalties to maximum penalties .

each of its not - less - than penalties would become not - more - than penalties .

so , for example , possession of a shotgun in furtherance of a crime of violence or of drug trafficking would be punishable by imprisonment for not more than 10 years .

possession of a machine gun in furtherance of such an offense would be punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 years .

the scott bill would append in large measure the procedure used in controlled substance act cases to establish the existence of a qualifying prior conviction , 21 u.s.c .

851 .

it would , however , drop the provision in section 851 that affords the defendant the right to have the question presented to the grand jury in the case of serious enhancements .

it would also abandon the provision that bars questioning the validity of remote convictions .

h.r .

1254 is a twin of a proposal offered by representative scott in the 113 th congress .

s. 847 ( senator mccain ) and h.r .

1588 ( representative mcsally ) , in contrast , would enlarge the coverage of section 924 ( c ) by adding alien smuggling , 8 u.s.c .

1324 ( a ) , 1327 , or 1328 , to violent crimes and drug trafficking as predicate offenses which trigger section 924 ( c ) 's mandatory minimum sentences .

thus , for example , a defendant , in possession of a firearm in furtherance of alien smuggling , would be subject to imprisonment for not less than five years .

the proposal has a number of antecedents in the 113 th congress .

the mann act ( travel or transportation for unlawful sexual purposes ) and 18 u.s.c .

1591 ( commercial sex trafficking ) contain several provisions which outlaw sexual misconduct punishable by mandatory minimum sentences .

a number of proposals would either clarify or expand the reach of those provisions .

section 1591 outlaws commercial sex trafficking .

more precisely , it outlaws knowingly recruiting , enticing , harboring , transporting , providing , obtaining , or maintaining another individual knowing or with reckless disregard of the fact that the individual will be used to engage commercial sexual activity either as a child or by virtue of the use of fraud or coercion when the activity occurs in or affects interstate or foreign commerce , or occurs within the special maritime or territorial jurisdiction of the united states .

it outlaws separately profiting from such a venture .

offenders face the prospect of life imprisonment with a mandatory minimum term of not less than 15 years ( not less than 10 years if the victim is between the ages of 14 and 18 ) .

the same penalties apply to anyone who attempts to violate the provisions of section 1591 .

there have been suggestions to expand section 1591 to cover advertisers and to more explicitly cover the customers of a commercial sex trafficking scheme .

at first glance , section 1591 does not appear to cover the customers of a sex trafficking enterprise .

moreover , in the absence of a specific provision , mere customers ordinarily are not considered either co - conspirators or accessories before the fact in a prostitution ring .

nevertheless , the u.s. court of appeals found that the language of section 1591 ( a ) applied to the case of two customers caught in a law enforcement "sting" who attempted to purchase the services of what they believed were child prostitutes .

"the ordinary and natural meaning of 'obtains' and the other terms congress selected in drafting §1591 are broad enough to encompass the actions of both suppliers and purchasers of commercial sex acts," the court declared .

s. 178 , h.r .

181 , and a number of other bills would explicitly confirm this construction by amending section 1591 ( a ) to read in part "whoever knowingly ... recruits , entices , harbors , transports , provides , obtains , maintains , or patronizes , or solicits by any means any person ..." ( language of the proposed amendment in italics ) .

the same bills often amend the "knowledge of age" element in section 1591 ( c ) to reflect its clarifying amendment with respect to the customers of a commercial sex trafficking venture .

the law now absolves the government of the obligation to prove that the defendant knew the victim was a child , if it can show that the defendant had an opportunity to "observe" the victim .

the proposal would make it clear that the government would be equally absolved regardless of whether the defendant were a consumer or purveyor of a child's sexual commercial services , as long as it establishes that the defendant had an opportunity to observe the child: "in a prosecution under subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) in which the defendant had a reasonable opportunity to observe the person so recruited , enticed , harbored , transported , provided , obtained , maintained , patronized , or solicited the government need not prove that the defendant knew , or recklessly disregarded the fact , that the person had not attained the age of 18 years," 18 u.s.c .

1591 ( c ) ( language of the proposed amendment in italics ) .

proposals to explicitly cover advertisers might also be seen as a matter of simply sharpening existing law .

anyone who aids and abets the commission of a federal crime by another merits the same punishment as the individual who actually commits the crime .

liability for aiding and abetting requires that a defendant embrace the crime of another and consciously do something to contribute to its success .

one of section 1591's distinctive features is that its action elements — recruiting , harboring , transporting , providing , obtaining — are activities that might be associated with aiding and abetting the operation of a prostitution enterprise .

section 1591 , read literally , does not outlaw operating a prostitution business ; it outlaws the steps leading up to or associated with operating a prostitution business — recruiting , harboring , transporting , etc .

strictly construed , advertising in aid of recruitment , harboring , transporting , or one of the other action elements might qualify as aiding and abetting a violation of section 1591 ; advertising the availability of a prostitute might not .

yet one court suggests that section 1591 does outlaw operating a prostitution business , at least for purposes of aiding and abetting liability , and that by implication advertising might constitute aiding and abetting a violation of the section: pringler first argues that the evidence is insufficient to support his conviction for aiding and abetting the sex trafficking of a minor [in violation of section 1591].... we disagree .

the record is not devoid of evidence to support the jury's verdict and show pringler's integral role in the criminal venture .

pringler took the money that norman and b.l .

earned from their prostitution and used some of it to pay for hotel rooms where the women met their patrons .

pringler bought the laptop norman and b.l .

used to advertise their services .

he drove norman and b.l .

to "outcall" appointments , and he took photographs of norman , which he had planned for use in advertisements .

some bills , h.r .

285 and s. 572 , for example , would amend section 1591 ( a ) ( 1 ) to outlaw knowingly advertising a person , knowing the victim would be used for prostitution .

proponents might suggest that "advertising" would seem to fit snugly within the litany of section 1591's action elements .

section 1591 now requires the government to prove either that the defendant knew of the victim's underage or coerced status or recklessly disregarded it .

the proposal would expose the trafficker and the profiteer to liability based on different levels of knowledge .

the liability for advertising traffickers would require that they knew of or recklessly disregarded the victim's status .

the liability for advertising profiteers would require that they knew of the victim's status .

knowledge is obviously a more demanding standard than reckless disregard , but the dividing line between the two is not always easily discerned , in part because of the doctrine of willful blindness .

the doctrine describes the circumstances under which a jury may be instructed by the court that it may infer knowledge on the part of a defendant .

worded variously , the doctrine applies where evidence indicates that the defendant sought to avoid the guilty knowledge .

since the element is worded in the alternative — knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact — the courts have rarely distinguished the two .

one interpretation comes from comparable wording in an immigration offense which outlaws transporting an alien knowing or acting in reckless disregard of the fact that the alien is in this country illegally: "to act with reckless disregard of the fact means to be aware of but consciously and carelessly ignore facts and circumstances clearly indicating that the person transported was an alien who had entered or remained in the united states illegally. .

the courts refer to a similar unreasonable indifference standard when speaking of the veracity required for the issuance of a warrant .

the mann act criminalizes , among other things , ( 1 ) interstate or foreign transportation of a child for purposes of prostitution or other unlawful sexual purposes ; ( 2 ) interstate or foreign travel for purposes of engaging in "illicit sexual activity" with a child ; and ( 3 ) overseas travel of u.s. nationals followed by illicit sexual activities with a child .

defendants enjoy an affirmative defense in "illicit sexual activity" cases , if they can establish by a preponderance of the evidence that they reasonably believed that the victim was over 18 years of age .

s. 178 , h.r .

181 , and other bills would limit the defense to cases where the defendant establishes the reasonableness of his belief by clear and convincing evidence .

the difference between preponderance of the evidence and clear and convincing is the difference between more likely than not and highly probable .

many of these same proposals would amend the "illicit sexual activity" definition to include child pornography cases , with the result that interstate or foreign travel associated with the production of child pornography would be clear violations of the mann act's section 2423 ( b ) ( interstate or foreign travel for purposes of such production ) , section 2423 ( c ) ( foreign travel followed by such production ) , and section 2423 ( d ) ( commercially facilitating such travel ) , each of which is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 years .

