f unding for federal wildfire management — particularly for suppression operations on federal lands — raises several interrelated policy questions for congress to consider .

these questions include how much funding congress should provide for suppression purposes , an activity whose costs are generally rising but vary annually and are difficult to predict .

the federal agencies tasked with suppression activities may deplete their suppression resources rapidly , so congress also may consider if , and how , to provide these agencies with quick access to additional funds to enable continued federal services in response to wildfires .

in addition , congress may address questions related to the source of the suppression funds , such as if rising suppression costs should be offset by cuts to other agency programs , or if those costs should be considered outside of certain budgetary and procedural constraints .

furthermore , congress may consider options to enact budgetary controls on suppression spending or other methods to constrain rising federal costs .

this report provides background information and analysis of federal funding for wildfire suppression operations .

the report provides a discussion of the issues facing congress and concludes by summarizing several legislative proposals considered by the 114 th congress .

the term wildfire is defined as an unplanned , unwanted wildland fire , including lightning - caused fires , unauthorized human - caused fires , and escaped prescribed fire projects .

states are responsible for responding to wildfires that begin on nonfederal ( state , local , and private ) lands , except for lands protected by the federal agencies under cooperative agreements .

the federal government is responsible for responding to wildfires that begin on federal lands .

the forest service ( fs ) — within the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) — carries out wildfire management and response across the 193 million acres of the national forest system .

the department of the interior ( doi ) manages the wildfire response for more than 400 million acres of national parks , wildlife refuges and preserves , indian reservations , and other public lands .

the term wildfire suppression covers all of the work associated with extinguishing or confining a wildfire .

federal policy is generally to suppress wildfires unless a fire management plan identifies locations and conditions when monitoring or fewer suppression efforts are appropriate .

the primary federal responsibility for wildfire suppression is to protect lives , property , and resources on federal lands .

the federal government has other wildland fire management responsibilities that include programs to prevent the future risk of catastrophic fires , such as by reducing the accumulation of hazardous fuels .

the federal government also provides technical and financial assistance to states , local governments , and communities to protect nonfederal ( both government and private ) lands from wildfire damages .

the federal government — primarily through the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) — may provide disaster relief to state and local governments .

fema also may provide assistance to individuals and households if a major disaster declaration is issued as a result of the wildfire .

as stated earlier , funding for federal wildfire management is provided to both fs and doi .

funding for doi is provided to the department , which then allocates the funding to the office of wildland fire and four agencies — the bureau of land management ( blm ) , the bureau of indian affairs , the national park service , and the u.s .

fish and wildlife service .

both doi and fs receive annual discretionary appropriations through the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

each agency has two accounts for wildfire: a wildland fire management ( wfm ) account and a federal land assistance , management , and enhancement act ( flame ) account .

the flame account is a reserve fund for wildfire suppression that requires certain conditions be met in order to transfer funding from the flame account to the wfm account .

each agency's wfm appropriation is distributed among two subaccounts: fire operations and other fire operations .

the fire operations subaccount receives the bulk of the wfm appropriation and funds two programs: preparedness and suppression .

appropriations for preparedness are used to support efforts that assist with fire prevention and detection , equipment , training , and baseline personnel .

suppression appropriations are primarily used for wildfire response .

the other fire operations subaccount funds hazardous fuels reduction and fire assistance programs , as well as other activities that are more focused on decreasing the risk of future catastrophic wildfires .

appropriations for wildfire management have more than tripled over the past two decades in terms of fy2016 dollars ( see figure 4 ) , although the trend has fluctuated annually .

from fy1994 to fy2000 , annual appropriations averaged $1.6 billion ; since fy2001 , annual appropriations have averaged $3.7 billion .

since fy2001 , total annual wildfire appropriations have varied from a low of $2.8 billion in fy2012 to a high of $5.0 billion in fy2008 , the largest appropriation to date .

after fy2012 , annual appropriations increased in both fy2013 ( $3.5 billion ) and fy2014 ( $4.0 billion ) but decreased in fy2015 ( $3.5 billion ) .

the fy2016 fs and doi appropriation of $4.9 billion was the second - largest appropriation to date .

the rising cost of wildfire management , combined with annual spending fluctuations , makes budgeting for future wildfire spending difficult .

much of the increases , fluctuations , and unpredictability are driven by suppression costs .

analyzing wildfire funding trends over time — particularly prior to fy2001 — is challenging for many reasons .

the agency's account structures have changed , with different activities funded through different programs in different years .

additional accounts and programs have been created .

a further complication is that often the costs for one wildfire season ( using a calendar year ) are covered over two fiscal years ; sometimes appropriations are enacted in one fiscal year to cover costs incurred in previous fiscal years .

fs and doi must estimate future suppression spending years in advance , as well as during the wildfire season , to forecast spending levels and account balances ongoing in the current fiscal year .

the agencies formulate their budget requests for suppression operations using a rolling average of previous years' suppression spending ( including supplemental appropriations enacted for suppression purposes ) .

this method originated in the 1990s from an agreement between the house and senate committees on the budget , the congressional budget office , and the office of management and budget .

prior to the enactment of the flame act , the agencies' wfm suppression activity requests would equal their rolling 10-year suppression obligation averages .

from fy2010 to fy2014 , the agencies' wfm suppression activity requests plus their flame account requests equaled their rolling 10-year suppression obligation averages .

from fy2015 through fy2017 , the obama administration had requested a new funding mechanism for suppression operations , which included eliminating the flame reserve fund and requesting 70% of the rolling 10-year suppression obligation average for the wfm suppression activity .

due to the timing of the budget process , the suppression budget request for any given year is based on the rolling 10-year suppression obligation average calculated two fiscal years previously .

for example , the fy2016 suppression budget request was formulated using the fy2014 rolling obligation average .

this means that suppression spending from fy2005 through fy2014 was used to formulate the suppression budget request for fy2016 .

because it is based on past spending , the rolling 10-year suppression obligation average is a lagging indicator of future suppression spending .

lagging indicators , in general , demonstrate patterns across previous years but do not necessarily signal future trends .

as such , the rolling 10-year suppression obligation average may not be the most accurate method to predict future suppression spending needs during the budget formulation process .

for example , the rolling 10-year suppression obligation average has underestimated suppression spending for both fs and doi in all but 2 of the past 10 fiscal years ( fy2007-fy2016 ) .

on average , over the past 10 fiscal years , the rolling 10-year suppression obligation average has been nearly 50% below the obligations for fs and 6% below the doi suppression obligations .

when wildfire spending began to increase in the 2000s , gao noted that the agencies' forecasting methods were insufficient in terms of both annual and in - season budgeting .

fs reportedly analyzed alternative methods , but fs and doi still use the 10-year suppression obligation average to formulate budget requests , even though suppression spending surpasses the estimate most years .

an earlier proposed version of the flame act would have required the agencies to use a rolling 5-year suppression obligation average to formulate their budget requests .

a rolling 5-year average potentially would have predicted future suppression spending more accurately than a 10-year average , since the lower values from earlier years would drop out of the calculation .

however , because a rolling 5-year average still would have been based on past spending , it also would have been a lagging indicator and likely would have underestimated suppression spending .

the enacted version of the flame act did not contain that provision , however .

instead , the flame act requires the agencies to develop an estimate based on the best available science — the flame forecasts discussed below — but does not direct that these estimates or forecasts be used to formulate budget requests .

fs and doi also must predict suppression spending during a wildfire season to ensure the availability of funds and to determine if and how much additional funding is going to be necessary .

in response to flame act requirements , fs and doi began using regression models that incorporate weather and climate data , among other data , to forecast spending .

the models predict a range of suppression spending within a 90% confidence interval ( ci ) and are published four times per year: march , may , and june , with a september outlook for the upcoming year .

the flame forecasts vary ; for example , the estimate for the upper 90% ci ranged from $1.6 billion for fs in the march 2014 forecast to $2.0 billion in the may 2014 forecast three months later .

in the six years ( fy2011-fy2016 ) for which data are available , suppression obligations exceeded the annual average flame median forecast for the fs five times and doi four times , although only by $8 million in fy2016 .

suppression obligations exceeded the average upper 90% ci three times for fs , but not for doi ( see figure 8 and figure 9 ) .

the flame forecasts generally have not been the basis used for funding requests in the annual budget formulation process , although out - year forecasts are provided to the agencies two fiscal years in advance .

instead , the obama administration's budget requests for suppression have continued to use the 10-year obligation average but also have included requests for access to additional funds above the 10-year obligation average up to the upper forecast range .

the agencies have used the out - year and current - year forecasts to inform congressional decisionmakers about potential spending levels throughout a wildfire season or during budget hearings .

congress last enacted changes to the mechanisms for wildfire spending in the 110 th congress with the passage of the flame act .

the 114 th congress explored several interrelated issues pertaining to funding federal wildland fire management in general — and to wildfire suppression operations in particular — through congressional hearings , and it considered several legislative proposals .

congress considered several questions in addressing wildfire suppression spending issues in the 114 th congress , which included what level to appropriate for suppression activities ; how to provide for unpredictable costs quickly ; where the money should come from ; and whether suppression money should be subject to or outside of certain statutory budget controls .

these proposals may be of interest to the 115 th congress .

this section of the report discusses four proposals — s. 235 , h.r .

167 , s. 508 , h.r .

2647 — that were considered by the 114 th congress to address issues related to wildfire funding .

all four bills cited above contained provisions that were intended to address concerns that wildfire suppression activities have not been adequately funded each year .

three of the bills — s. 235 , h.r .

167 , and s. 508 — effectively would have allowed some funds provided for wildfire suppression activities that meet certain criteria to not be subject to the limits on discretionary spending .

under these proposals , varying levels of wildfire funding would not have needed to compete with other programs and activities that were subject to the limits .

these proposals also would have modified the existing disaster relief designation to interact with the additional wildfire spending that was provided pursuant to these new procedures .

h.r .

2647 would have provided a related discretionary spending option for wildfire suppression operations funding , but it took a different approach from the other three proposals .

two similar versions of the wildfire disaster funding act were introduced in the 114 th congress ( h.r .

167 and s. 235 ) .

the bills had minor differences from each other and from versions introduced in the 113 th congress ( s. 1875 and h.r .

3992 ) .

s. 235 was referred to the senate budget committee ; h.r .

167 was referred to the house budget committee , in addition to the agriculture and natural resources committees .

this section of the report provides an analysis of the proposals as introduced in the 114 th congress .

s. 235 and h.r .

167 would have amended the bbedca to add a new adjustment to the nondefense discretionary spending limit for "wildfire suppression operations," which would have included spending for the purposes of the emergency and unpredictable aspects of wildland firefighting , including support , response , and emergency stabilization activities ; other emergency management activities ; and funds necessary to repay any transfers needed for these costs .

there was a precondition for using this adjustment — that 70% of the 10-year average funding level for wildfire suppression operations must have been appropriated subject to the limits .

once that precondition was met , the amount of the adjustment for the additional wildfire suppression operations funding was capped each fiscal year .

in h.r .

167 , the wildfire adjustment was limited to $2.689 billion each fiscal year through fy2022 .

in contrast , the maximum amount of the wildfire adjustment in s. 235 started at $1.410 billion in fy2016 and gradually increased to $2.690 billion in fy2025 .

these proposals also would have affected the calculation of the maximum amount for the existing disaster relief adjustment — also referred to as the disaster cap — because the disaster cap calculation would have interacted with the proposed wildfire adjustment in two ways .

first , starting in fy2017 under h.r .

167 or fy2018 under s. 235 , the calculation of the 10-year rolling average for the disaster cap formula would have included any budget authority provided using the wildfire designation in previous fiscal years .

as a consequence , the amounts that were provided under the wildfire adjustment would have been gradually incorporated into the calculation of the 10-year rolling average for disaster relief .

second , after the disaster cap for a fiscal year was calculated ( including incorporating the amount of the prior - year wildfire adjustments into the calculation ) , the amount of the disaster cap was to be reduced by the amount of the previous fiscal year's wildfire adjustment .

for example , if $1.4 billion had been provided using the wildfire adjustment in fy2016 , the fy2017 disaster cap would have been lowered by $1.4 billion .

both s. 235 and h.r .

167 would have removed some budget process barriers for the provision of additional wildfire suppression funds , either through the annual appropriations process or through supplemental appropriations .

whatever amount , if any , congress elected to appropriate over the minimum 70% for wildfire suppression ( up to the specified maximum in each bill ) effectively would not have been subject to the discretionary spending limits established in the bca each year .

for example , were these proposals to have been in effect for fy2016 , congress could have appropriated the minimum of $1.057 billion for suppression operations , which was 70% of the combined fs and doi suppression obligation for fy2016 ( $1.510 billion ) .

but then congress could have appropriated an additional $2.689 billion under h.r .

167 or $1.410 billion under s. 235 in fy2016 , effectively outside of the budget controls discussed above .

this means the agencies could have been appropriated up to $3.746 billion in h.r .

167 , or $2.467 billion in s. 235 , with $1.057 billion of those amounts subject to the bca discretionary limits .

however , because these proposals left actual funding decisions to future congresses , congress could have chosen to appropriate less than the minimum 70% threshold so that the adjustments allowed would not have been triggered .

other potential budgetary and policy effects of both s. 235 and h.r .

167 were unknown .

it is not clear how these proposals would have interacted with the flame accounts .

the bills specified that at least 70% of the budget request would have to have been appropriated for suppression operations but did not specify whether the appropriations had to be in the agencies' respective wfm or flame accounts .

the flame accounts will expire if funds are not appropriated to ( or withdrawn from ) them for three consecutive years .

s. 235 and h.r .

167 also were silent as to fire borrowing .

if either of these proposals were enacted , it was unclear if fire borrowing authorities would have continued to be provided in appropriations laws .

both s. 235 and h.r .

167 would have required the usda and doi secretaries to continue to use the rolling 10-year average of suppression obligations to formulate their suppression budget requests .

the usda and doi secretaries also would have been directed to "promptly" submit any request to congress for supplemental wildfire suppression operations funding , and to submit a plan to congress explaining how the supplemental appropriations would be obligated within 30 days of receiving them .

this proposal would have largely codified recent agency practices , with some modifications .

this could have given congress more advance notice about the need for supplemental wildfire suppression operations appropriations , as well as information on how the agencies proposed to use those additional appropriations .

both this advance notice and additional information could have aided congress in appropriations decisionmaking and oversight .

they also might have added to the workload of both the fs and doi during a critical time of providing wildfire assistance .

this interaction between the proposed wildfire and existing disaster relief adjustments had a number of potential implications for the amount of the disaster cap in the future .

however , because these potential implications were highly sensitive to future appropriations decisions made by congress and the president each fiscal year , the extent to which the calculation for the disaster cap would have been affected by the use of the wildfire adjustment cannot be determined definitively .

assuming that the wildfire adjustment was first used in fy2016 , for the next several years , the disaster formula would have been based on 10 fiscal years of funding for disaster relief ( minus the highest and lowest fiscal year ) , but fewer than 10 fiscal years of the wildfire adjustment would have been available to be incorporated into the base calculation .

this would have had the potential to make the amount available for the disaster cap lower than it otherwise might have been .

on the other hand , appropriations for the full adjustment allowed by the disaster cap have not been made since fy2013 , which is causing the amounts that are used to calculate the 10-year rolling average for the amount of the cap in future fiscal years to be lower than they would have been had the full amount of the disaster cap been appropriated .

as a consequence , adding wildfire - designated spending into the formula might have had the effect of increasing the amount of the disaster cap above what it otherwise might have been .

another factor that affects these considerations is the amount that was assumed to be appropriated using the wildfire adjustment each fiscal year , because either the full amount allowed or a lesser amount might have been appropriated .

neither of these proposals received committee consideration prior to the conclusion of the 114 th congress , although other relevant action occurred in the context of the wildfire management budget requests , budget resolutions , and the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

the obama administration's fy2016 and fy2017 wildfire management budget requests included a proposal to change how suppression operations were funded , similar to h.r .

167 and s. 235 .

however , the obama administration's proposed maximum cap adjustment would have been the difference between the upper 90% confidence interval flame forecast and the rolling 10-year suppression obligation average .

 ( in fy2016 , this would be $854.6 million. ) .

the fy2016 budget resolution ( s.con.res .

11 ) included two procedural provisions related to wildfire suppression operations funding .

first , the senate budget committee - reported version included a spending - neutral reserve fund to "improve forest health" that , in part , would have allowed for the applicable committee allocations , aggregates , and other levels in the budget resolution to be revised to the purposes of measures relating to "reform of the process of budgeting for wildfire suppression operations. .

second , during senate floor consideration of the budget resolution , an amendment was adopted that would have provided a procedural adjustment to the budget enforcement limits associated with the budget resolution "if a measure becomes law that amends the adjustments to discretionary spending limits established under section 251 ( b ) of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( 2 u.s.c .

901 ( b ) ) for wildfire suppression funding" ( s.amdt .

434 ) .

this amendment was agreed to by unanimous consent .

both of these provisions , with minor changes , were included in the final version of the budget resolution agreed to by congress — at sections 3208 and 4319 .

the senate appropriations committee recommended a similar proposal in the committee - reported versions of the fy2017 interior , environment and related agencies appropriations bill ( s. 3068 ) .

title v of s. 3068 would have created a new adjustment for wildfire suppression operations and altered the calculation for the disaster cap based on the amount of wildfire adjustment appropriations that were ultimately provided .

there were three main differences between title v of the interior bill and h.r .

167 / s. 235 : the precondition for using the adjustment was that 100% of the 10-year average for wildfire suppression operations also must be appropriated subject to the bbedca spending limits .

the range specified for the wildfire adjustment was set initially at $1.410 billion for fy2017 and gradually increased to $2.690 billion for fy2026 .

fs and doi would have been required to submit a comprehensive report analyzing management decisions , fire activity , and fire accounting , among other topics .

the flame act amendments bill was introduced in the 114 th congress as s. 508 and referred to the senate committee on energy and natural resources .

an earlier version of the bill was previously introduced in the 113 th congress ( s. 2593 ) ; it received no further congressional action .

this section of the report provides an analysis of the wildfire spending provisions of s. 508 as introduced .

 ( s. 508 also contained additional titles addressing specific national forest management issues as well as stewardship contracting , which are not discussed. ) .

like s. 235 and h.r .

167 , s. 508 would have amended the bbedca to add a new adjustment for "wildfire suppression operations" spending .

however , this proposal would have imposed two different sets of preconditions to access the adjustment .

first , the bill required that a minimum amount subject to the statutory discretionary spending limits be appropriated to the doi and fs wildland fire management accounts .

this minimum amount was the greater of 100% of the average costs for wildfire suppression operations over the previous five years ; or the estimated amount of anticipated wildfire suppression costs at the upper bound of the 90% confidence interval for that fiscal year calculated in accordance with the flame act .

in addition , an amount equal to at least 50% of that minimum amount would be specified for various forest management activities to mitigate future fire risk , such as authorized hazardous fuels reduction projects and other activities of the secretary of the interior ; forest restoration and fuel reduction activities performed outside of the wui that are on condition class 3 federal land or condition class 2 federal land located within fire regime i , fire regime ii , or fire regime iii ; or timber sales , pre - commercial thinning , and salvage harvests performed on national forest system lands .

second , s. 508 would have required that all amounts in the flame fund be expended prior to the enactment of an appropriation subject to the wildfire adjustment .

once those preconditions were met , the measure would have provided an adjustment for wildfire suppression operations of up to $1 billion in additional new budget authority in each of fy2016 through fy2022 .

the allowable purposes for spending that used this adjustment were the same as those in s. 235 and h.r .

167 .

this proposal also contained provisions that would have affected the wildfire adjustment with the existing disaster designation , but in a different way than the proposals discussed in the previous section .

the formula for the disaster cap would have still involved the 10-year rolling average for disaster relief spending , minus the high and low fiscal years , plus any prior year carryover .

the amount of the wildfire adjustment from the previous fiscal year would also have been subtracted from that calculation .

however , the 10-year rolling average for the disaster relief designation would not have incorporated amounts appropriated pursuant to the wildfire adjustment .

the framework of s. 508 was similar to h.r .

167 and s. 235 in that it also would have removed some budget process barriers for the provision of additional wildfire suppression funds .

however , s. 508 differed from those other proposals in some significant ways .

first , under s. 508 , only up to an additional $1 billion for suppression spending could have been provided under the new adjustment .

second , the minimum amount required to be appropriated subject to those limits would have been the greater of the rolling five - year suppression obligation average or the upper bound of the flame forecast .

in addition , whatever amount congress had appropriated for suppression operations , an amount equal to half would have been required for various forest management activities , such as hazardous fuels reduction .

it was not clear if this other amount would have been half of the suppression operations appropriation or an additional amount equal to that half .

regardless , requiring an appropriation amount equal to half of the greater of the five - year suppression obligation average or the upper 90% flame forecast would have increased the agencies' investment in hazardous fuels reduction substantially .

over the past five fiscal years ( fy2012-fy2016 ) , an average of $327 million has been provided to the fs , and $163 million to doi , for the hazardous fuels activity within the agencies' respective wfm other operations accounts .

while the proposed additional funding could have funded activities that would have potentially mitigated future fire risk , these additional funds might have come at the expense of other agency programs .

s. 508 would have required the flame reserve funds to be depleted completely prior to authorizing any additional wildfire suppression funds through the wildfire adjustment .

this requirement had some potential implications for the timing of the additional wildfire appropriations .

if the flame fund had continued to receive annual appropriations , the wildfire adjustment generally could not have been used to provide additional funds in the same annual appropriations laws .

instead , such funds would have needed to be provided in supplemental appropriations acts once the flame funds were exhausted each year , which could have further added to congress's summer legislative agenda .

alternatively , if congress had wanted to provide these additional wildfire appropriations through the annual appropriations process , one way to do so would have been to discontinue providing appropriations to the flame fund and instead fund agency wildfire suppression operations entirely through their other accounts .

like h.r .

167 and s. 235 , the s. 508 formula also had potential implications for the amount available for the disaster cap in future fiscal years .

because the amount appropriated using the wildfire adjustment would have been subtracted from the disaster calculation and not factored into the 10-year rolling average , the use of the wildfire adjustment would have had the potential to make the disaster cap lower than it otherwise might have been .

however , the extent to which this would have occurred would depend on whether the full amount allowed for the wildfire adjustment or a lesser amount had been appropriated .

as was the case for s. 235 and h.r .

167 , these considerations were highly sensitive to future appropriations decisions by congress and the president each fiscal year .

consequently , the extent to which the calculation for the disaster cap would have been affected by the use of the wildfire adjustment could not be definitively determined .

s. 508 also would have amended the flame act .

the agencies would have continued to have their flame accounts for the most severe , complex , and costly wildfires , but the declaration criteria to access those funds would have changed .

the criteria would have been a minimum fire size of 1,000 acres ( up from 300 acres ) or that the fire had been within 10 miles of an urbanized area .

the secretaries still would have been able to access flame funds if their respective wfm suppression accounts were about to be depleted .

s. 508 also would have prohibited the agencies from transferring funds from other accounts for suppression purposes .

s. 508 was the only bill to address suppression forecasts .

s. 508 would have required fs and doi to calculate and report the rolling five - year suppression obligation average and the out - year flame forecasts in their annual budget requests .

the other bills continued the rolling 10-year suppression obligation average .

s. 508 did not receive any congressional action prior to the end of the 114 th congress .

see the s. 235 and h.r .

167 " legislative action " subsection , above , for a discussion of action related to the wildfire management budget requests , the fy2016 budget resolution , and fy2016 and fy2017 interior appropriations .

the resilient federal forests act of 2015 was introduced in the 114 th congress as h.r .

2647 and referred to the house committees on agriculture and natural resources .

the bill passed the house on july 9 , 2015 , and was referred to the senate committee on agriculture .

this section of the report provides an analysis of the wildfire suppression provisions contained in title ix of the measure .

 ( h.r .

2647 also contained additional titles addressing other federal forestry issues , which are not discussed in this report. ) .

title ix of h.r .

2647 would have broadened the purposes for major disasters under the stafford act to include "wildfires on federal lands" ( §901 ) , and it would have created a related budgetary mechanism that potentially could have been used to fund the response to each wildfire on federal land that had been declared to be a major disaster ( §902 ) .

under this proposal , the affected federal land management agency ( either the doi secretary or the usda secretary ) could request a presidential declaration of a major disaster for wildfire on federal lands if the following requirements were satisfied: the secretary made the request in writing .

the secretary certified that wildfire suppression operations appropriations that had been enacted for that fiscal year equaled or exceeded a certain minimum level , which was the rolling 10-fiscal - year average cost of wildfire suppression operations incurred by the federal land management agencies .

this minimum level included any concurrently enacted rescissions .

the unobligated balance of wildfire suppression operations funding , presumably from previous fiscal years , also could be credited to that minimum level for the purposes of this requirement .

the secretary certified that the amount available to the agency for anticipated and ongoing suppression operations for the wildfire on which the declaration request had been made would be obligated not later than 30 days after the notification .

the secretary specified the amount of the current fiscal year funds required for suppression operations related to the wildfire for which the declaration was requested .

title ix of h.r .

2647 would have required that the president establish a specific account from which available funds could be transferred to the doi secretary or usda secretary to conduct wildfire suppression operations if a declaration of a major disaster had been made .

this account could be used only to fund assistance for major disaster declarations for wildfires on federal lands and nonfederal lands pursuant to a fire protection agreement or cooperative agreement .

the bill would have established reimbursement procedures from the nonfederal entity if any of the funds transferred from this account were used for wildfires on nonfederal lands under a fire protection agreement .

this account could be funded in anticipation of one or more such major disasters , or in response to them , through regular or supplemental appropriations .

within 90 days after the end of a fiscal year in which a major disaster for wildfire on federal lands had been declared , the affected secretaries would have been required to submit reports detailing their wildland fire management decisions and cost expenditures to several congressional committees .

these reports were required to include the risk - based factors that influenced management decisions ; an analysis of the effectiveness of management decisions and cost factors across a statistically significant sample of large fires ; suppression operations expenditures broken out by fire size , cost , regional location , and other factors as deemed appropriate by each secretary ; and lessons learned .

section 903 of h.r .

2647 would have prohibited the agencies from transferring funds from their other accounts for suppression purposes , potentially eliminating the agencies' fire borrowing .

the budgetary mechanism under this proposal potentially could have provided an additional discretionary spending option for wildfire suppression operations funding related to the disaster relief designation .

as previously discussed , spending designated as "disaster relief," which is effectively exempt from the bca limits , may be provided only for activities carried out pursuant to a determination of a major disaster under section 102 ( 2 ) of the stafford act .

because h.r .

2647 would have amended the stafford act to include wildfires on federal land as an incident for which major disasters could be declared , these changes might have allowed appropriations for such activities to be disaster - designated under certain circumstances: first , the preconditions for requesting a major disaster declaration for wildfires on federal land would have to be fulfilled .

these preconditions included a minimum level of budgetary resources for wildfire suppression operations , and that minimum amount would need to have been appropriated ( and therefore would have been subject to the statutory discretionary spending limits ) .

second , even if disaster - designated funds were appropriated in anticipation of a major disaster for wildfires on federal lands , they could not be transferred and made available to the requesting agency until a major disaster had been declared by the president .

they would not have been available to the agencies prior to that time .

in the contexts of their various budget enforcement responsibilities , the house and senate budget committees , the congressional budget office , and the office of management and budget would have had to determine how the changes to the stafford act proposed by h.r .

2647 would have affected the bbedca disaster designation , if at all .

if the stafford act changes in title ix of h.r .

2647 had led to the use of the disaster designation for additional wildfire suppression operations funding , these changes would have had implications for the future operation of that designation .

in addition to allowing wildfires that meet certain criteria to be eligible for funding using the disaster designation , the calculation for the disaster cap would have only gradually incorporated appropriations for any major disaster declarations for wildfires on federal lands over the following 10 fiscal years .

this would have had the potential to increase the competition for budgetary resources that could be provided using the designation .

however , because appropriations for the full adjustment allowed by the disaster cap have not been made since fy2013 , adding purposes to the designation might have caused more of the allowable adjustment to be used and factored into future disaster cap calculations .

this might have had the effect of increasing the amount of disaster cap in future fiscal years above what it otherwise might have been .

because the amount available under the disaster designation is highly sensitive to future appropriations decisions , crs cannot determine the extent to which the calculation for the disaster cap would have been affected by this expansion of stafford act purposes .

the bill also would have prohibited fire borrowing , although it was unclear if fire borrowing authorities would continue to be provided in appropriations laws .

it was also unclear how h.r .

2647 would have impacted the agencies' budget formulation process .

the precondition to appropriate a minimum amount was based on the rolling 10-year suppression obligation average , but the rescissions and unobligated balances might have complicated that calculation .

h.r .

2647 would have required the agencies to provide congress and the public with reports analyzing cost expenditures and management decisions .

these reporting requirements could have provided congress — and the agencies — with more information on agency decisionmaking and spending to aid in future appropriations decisions and oversight .

however , the development and production of these reports and the required analyses potentially could have required substantial investments from the agencies .

h.r .

2647 passed the house on july 9 , 2015 , and was referred to the senate committee on agriculture .

other legislation introduced in the 114 th congress contained provisions to address wildfire funding in a similar manner to title ix of h.r .

2647 .

this legislation included s. 3085 , the emergency wildfire and forest management act of 2016 , introduced on june 22 , 2016 , and the house version of s. 2012 , the north american energy security and infrastructure act of 2016 .

s. 2012 was in conference to resolve differences between the house and senate versions when the 114 th congress adjourned .

