the internet is often described as a "network of networks" because it is not a single physical entity , but hundreds of thousands of interconnected networks linking hundreds of millions of computers around the world .

as such , the internet is international , decentralized , and comprised of networks and infrastructure largely owned and operated by private sector entities .

computers connected to the internet are identified by a unique internet protocol ( ip ) number that designates their specific location , thereby making it possible to send and receive messages and to access information from computers anywhere on the internet .

domain names were created to provide users with a simple location name , rather than requiring them to use a long list of numbers .

the domain name system ( dns ) is the distributed set of databases residing in computers around the world that contain the address numbers , mapped to corresponding domain names .

those computers , called root servers , must be coordinated to ensure connectivity across the internet .

the u.s. government has no statutory authority over the dns .

however , because the internet evolved from a network infrastructure created by the department of defense , the u.s. government originally funded and operated ( primarily through private contractors ) many of the key components of the network architecture that enabled the domain name system to function .

in 1998 , with the internet expanding beyond the academic and governmental spheres , the u.s. government transitioned the management of the dns to a newly created not - for - profit international organization based in california called the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers ( icann ) .

icann employed ( and continues to employ ) a multistakeholder system of governance whereby policy decisions are made by a board of directors with input from the various stakeholder groups that comprise the internet and the domain name system .

these stakeholders include owners and operators of servers and networks around the world , domain name registrars and registries , regional ip address allocation organizations , standards organizations , internet service providers , local and national governments , noncommercial stakeholders , business users , intellectual property interests , and others .

after the 1998 transition , the u.s. government , through the department of commerce's national telecommunications and information administration or ntia , retained a degree of authority over icann's management of the dns and other unique internet identifiers such as internet address numbers and protocols .

with respect to icann , the u.s. government first exercised its legacy authority through a memorandum of understanding ( 1998-2006 ) , followed by a joint project agreement ( 2006-2009 ) .

currently , ntia and icann are joint participants in an affirmation of commitments ( aoc ) agreement , in which both parties agree to scrutiny and evaluation by review boards .

the aoc is voluntary , and either icann or ntia can withdraw from the agreement at any time .

concurrently , a separate contract between the icann and ntia — specifically referred to as the "iana functions contract" — authorizes icann to manage the technical underpinnings of the domain name system ( dns ) .

the iana functions can be broadly grouped into three categories: 1 .

number resources — the coordination and allocation of the global pool of ip numbers ; 2 .

protocol assignments — the management of ip numbering systems in conjunction with internet standards bodies ; and 3 .

domain names — management of the dns authoritative root zone file .

additionally , and intertwined with the iana functions contract , a cooperative agreement between ntia and verisign ( the company that operates the .com and .net registries ) authorizes verisign to manage and maintain the official root zone file that is contained in the internet's root servers which underlie the functioning of the dns .

the iana functions contract gives the u.s. government , through ntia , the authority to approve various technical functions such as modifying the root zone file ( which would include , for example , adding additional generic top level domains [gtlds] to the root zone ) .

in this narrow sense , ntia's role is strictly clerical and administrative .

policymaking — such as decisions to make changes in the root zone file — is made by icann through its internal policy development process .

although it has the authority to do so under the iana functions contract , ntia has never refused to approve any iana related actions as directed by icann .

however , the iana functions contract , while primarily administrative in nature , carries broader significance because it has conferred upon the u.s. government a "stewardship" role over icann and the domain name system .

this stewardship role does not mean that the ntia controls icann or has the authority to approve or disapprove icann policy decisions .

rather , the u.s. government's authority over the iana functions has been viewed by the internet community as a "backstop" that serves to reassure internet users that the u.s. government is prepared and positioned to constitute a check on icann under extreme circumstances ( such as , for example , fiscal insolvency , failure to meet operational obligations , or capture or undue influence by a single stakeholder or by outside interests ) .

meanwhile , the u.s. government continues to participate in the icann policy development process through membership in the governmental advisory committee ( gac ) , which provides advice to icann on issues of public policy , especially where there may be an interaction between icann's activities or policies and national laws or international agreements .

however , while all governments have access to membership in the gac , the u.s. government arguably has had more influence over icann and the dns than other governments by virtue of the iana functions contract with icann .

on march 14 , 2014 , ntia announced its intention to transition its stewardship role and procedural authority over key domain name functions to the global internet multistakeholder community .

ntia's stated intention was that it would let its iana functions contract with icann expire on september 30 , 2015 , if a satisfactory transition could be achieved .

with ntia having the option of extending the contract for up to two two - year periods through september 30 , 2019 , ntia announced on august 17 , 2015 , that it will extend the iana functions contract through september 30 , 2016 .

as a first step , ntia asked icann to convene interested global internet stakeholders to develop a proposal to achieve the transition .

specifically , ntia expects icann to work collaboratively with parties directly affected by the iana contract , including the internet engineering task force ( ietf ) , the internet architecture board ( iab ) , the internet society ( isoc ) , the regional internet registries ( rirs ) , top level domain name operators , verisign , and other interested global stakeholders .

in october 2013 , many of these groups — specifically , the internet technical organizations responsible for coordination of the internet infrastructure — had called for "accelerating the globalization of icann and iana functions , towards an environment in which all stakeholders , including all governments , participate on an equal footing. .

ntia has stated that it will not accept any transition proposal that would replace the ntia role with a government - led or an intergovernmental organization solution .

in addition , ntia told icann that the transition proposal must have broad community support and address the following four principles: support and enhance the multistakeholder model ; maintain the security , stability , and resilience of the internet dns ; meet the needs and expectation of the global customers and partners of the iana services ; and maintain the openness of the internet .

icann convened a process through which the multistakeholder community attempted to come to consensus on a transition proposal .

the process was divided into two separate but related parallel processes: ( 1 ) iana stewardship transition and ( 2 ) enhancing icann accountability .

figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of the two interlinked processes .

ntia has stated that it views these two processes as "directly linked" and that "both issues must be addressed before any transition takes place. .

on march 10 , 2016 , the icann board formally accepted the iana stewardship transition proposal and the enhancing icann accountability report .

the board formally transmitted the transition and accountability plans to ntia for approval .

concerns have arisen in congress over the proposed transition .

some members have argued that the transition requires additional scrutiny by congress , while others have questioned whether the transition should take place at all .

while the u.s. government has no statutory authority over icann or the dns , congress does have legislative and budgetary authority over ntia , which is seeking to relinquish its contractual authority over the iana functions .

as such , congress has keenly monitored the progress of the transition , primarily through congressional committees with jurisdiction over ntia .

these include the house energy and commerce committee and the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee .

additionally , the house and senate appropriations committees — which determine and control ntia's annual budget — could impact ntia's ability to relinquish its existing authority over the iana functions .

the future of how icann and the dns will be governed is highly relevant to the broader question of how the internet should be governed .

while it is true that icann's jurisdiction is limited to the technical underpinnings of the internet ( unique internet identifiers such as domain names and addresses ) , it is also true that icann policy decisions ( such as new gtlds ) can affect other areas of internet policy such as intellectual property , cybersecurity , privacy , and internet freedom .

as the internet expands and becomes more pervasive throughout the world in all aspects of modern society , the question of how it should be governed becomes more pressing , with national governments recognizing an increasing stake in icann policy decisions , especially in cases where internet dns policy intersects with national laws and interests .

icann is viewed by many as a ground - breaking example of multistakeholder governance .

while icann does not "control" the internet , how it is ultimately governed may set an important precedent in future policy debates — both domestically and internationally — over how the internet might be governed , and what role governments and intergovernmental organizations should play .

