in september 2014 , the obama administration announced a new central american minors ( cam ) refugee program: we are establishing in - country refugee processing to provide a safe , legal and orderly alternative to the dangerous journey that children are currently undertaking to join relatives in the united states... .

these programs will not be a pathway for children to join undocumented relatives in the united states .

the "children" referenced are minors from el salvador , guatemala , and honduras , who accounted for the surge in unaccompanied alien child arrivals in the united states between fy2012 and fy2014 that peaked in the summer of 2014 .

the establishment of in - country processing represents an effort by the obama administration to discourage children from attempting dangerous trips to the united states , by enabling at least some of them to be considered for refugee status at home .

in - country refugee processing refers to the processing of prospective refugees by the u.s. government from within their countries of origin for admission to the united states .

in addition to the new cam program , several ongoing in - country refugee processing programs are operating in fy2015 .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) defines a refugee , in part , as a foreign national who has experienced , or has a well - founded fear of , persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

refugees are processed and admitted to the united states from abroad .

they may legally live and work in the united states .

after one year , they may apply to adjust to lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status , subject to a set of requirements .

typically , a refugee being considered for resettlement in the united states is outside his or her country of origin ( in a host county ) and is referred to the u.s. program by the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) .

the first part of the ina definition of a refugee ( ina §101 ( a ) ( 42 ) ( a ) ) states that the term means: any person who is outside any country of such person's nationality or , in the case of a person having no nationality , is outside any country in which such person last habitually resided , and who is unable or unwilling to return to , and is unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of , that country because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

the ina also provides for the processing of refugees in their countries of origin for purposes of admission to the united states in some cases , as reflected in the second , alternate part of the definition of a refugee ( ina §101 ( a ) ( 42 ) ( b ) ) : in such circumstances as the president after appropriate consultation ( as defined in section 207 ( e ) of this act ) may specify , any person who is within the country of such person's nationality or , in the case of a person having no nationality , within the country in which such person is habitually residing , and who is persecuted or who has a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

over the years , the united states has utilized in - country refugee processing to address particular refugee populations and situations .

decisions about establishing in - country processing programs involve a range of considerations ; these include key considerations of foreign policy , diplomacy , and security , which are beyond the scope of this report .

dos has described in - country refugee processing as an "extraordinary" measure .

for example , in 2002 , in response to recommendations to establish in - country processing in haiti , the department wrote: we do not believe that the extraordinary remedy of an in - country refugee processing program for haitians is appropriate at this time .

given the level of economic desperation in haiti , an in - country program is likely to attract many more ineligible than eligible applicants .

we believe that existing protection options for haitians who may be at risk of persecution or torture are sufficient .

in annual presidential determinations on refugee admissions , presidents have specified , in accordance with ina §101 ( a ) ( 42 ) ( b ) , persons in certain groups who , if otherwise qualified , may be considered for refugee admission to the united states within their countries of origin .

a group commonly specified in presidential determinations issued in the 1980s , for example , was "present and former political prisoners and persons in imminent danger of loss of life , and their family members , in countries of latin america and the caribbean. .

since the late 1980s , presidential determinations on refugee admissions have typically specified three or four groups as being eligible for in - country processing .

these groups often included persons in cuba , the ( former ) soviet union , and vietnam .

since the presidential determination for fy2005 , the in - country processing list has also included the following: "in exceptional circumstances , persons identified by a united states embassy in any location. .

in considering in - country refugee processing by the u.s. government , it is important to keep in mind how this mechanism fits into the larger scheme of the u.s. refugee admissions program .

the ina definition of a refugee makes provision for in - country processing "in such circumstances as the president after appropriate consultation ... may specify. .

over the years , administrations — either on their own or prompted by congress — have used this authority in limited cases .

the 2002 remarks by the state department about haiti cited above suggest that some relevant considerations include likely effectiveness and the existence of sufficient alternatives .

relatedly , in - country processing programs are typically aimed at particular groups within a country and may require applicants to have some type of connection to the united states .

for example , the new in - country processing program for certain minors from el salvador , guatemala , and honduras requires the minors to have a lawfully present parent in the united states .

given such limitations , as important as in - country programs may be to prospective beneficiaries , out - of - country processing remains the norm .

