recent expansion in natural gas production — primarily the result of new or improved technologies ( eg , hydraulic fracturing and directional drilling ) used on unconventional resources ( eg , shale , tight sands , and coal - bed methane ) — has made natural gas an increasingly significant component in the u.s. energy market .

many in both the public and the private sectors have advocated for the increased production and use of natural gas because the resource is domestically available , economically recoverable , and a potential "cost - effective bridge" to a less polluting and lower greenhouse - gas - intensive economy .

many members of congress as well as the obama administration have supported this assessment .

when used as a fuel , natural gas has several advantages over other hydrocarbons ( eg , oil and coal ) .

natural gas is more versatile ; it can heat homes , fuel stoves , run vehicles , fire power plants , and , when liquefied , be exported to support the energy needs of u.s. allies and trading partners .

natural gas is cleaner - burning ; it emits less carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) than oil or coal when used to generate electricity in a typical power plant .

further , its combustion emits no mercury ( a persistent , bioaccumulative neurotoxin ) , virtually no particulate matter or sulfur dioxide , and less nitrogen oxides , per unit of combustion , than either oil or coal .

for these reasons , pollution control measures in natural gas systems have traditionally received less attention at the federal level relative to those in other hydrocarbon industries .

however , the recent increase in unconventional natural gas production has raised a new set of questions regarding human health , safety , and environmental impacts .

these concerns centered initially on water quality issues , including the potential contamination of groundwater and surface water from hydraulic fracturing and related production activities .

they have since incorporated other issues , such as water management practices ( both consumption and discharge ) , land use changes , and induced seismicity , as well as air pollution and greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions associated with natural gas production and transport activities .

recent reports in the scientific literature and popular press have created some confusion about the ghg emissions profile and the subsequent climate implications of natural gas .

on the one hand , a shift to natural gas is promoted as climate change mitigation because it has a lower co 2 emissions intensity than either oil or coal ( i.e. , it is commonly stated that natural gas has half the co 2 emissions intensity of coal ) .

on the other hand , methane — the primary constituent of natural gas — is itself a more potent ghg than co 2 per unit of mass , and some contend that methane leakage from the production , transport , and use of natural gas has the potential to offset the ghg emissions benefits of switching .

debate continues as to whether the increased production and use of natural gas brings net benefits to the general economy , including jobs , investments , infrastructure , national security , human health , safety , and the environment .

to answer these questions , more analysis is necessary along each of these lines of inquiry , as greater clarity would help inform domestic policy choices .

a full assessment would demand an integrated analysis across all issues .

such an analysis is not within the scope of this report .

similarly , this report does not investigate the economic or national security impacts .

nor does it attempt to assess the full environmental impacts ( eg , inclusive of the net benefits to meeting national ambient air quality standards , reducing emissions of hazardous air pollutants , improving water management and land use practices , among others ) .

this report focuses on one facet of the debate: the claim that the production and use of natural gas is less ghg - intensive than other fossil fuels .

specifically , it presents a comparative analysis of the potential climate implications of switching from coal to natural gas in the domestic electric power generating sector .

the findings are offered to help inform the larger conversation .

congressional interest in u.s. energy policy has focused in part on ways through which the united states could secure more economical and reliable fuel resources both domestically and internationally .

for some , the issue of energy policy centers on economic growth and domestic job creation ; for others , it focuses on national security ; for still others , it calls attention to public health , safety , and environmental concerns .

for many , the recent increase in domestic natural gas production has been a panacea , and they have advocated strongly for policies to accelerate this development .

while natural gas production in the united states is driven primarily by market forces , a number of recent proposals by congress and the obama administration have either explicitly or implicitly supported its development .

they include , but are not limited to , the following: bills that would amend various provisions in the tax code to incentivize natural gas production and use ( including h.r .

905 , s. 344 , and s. 948 ) ; bills that would support increased natural gas production on federal lands ( including h.r .

70 , h.r .

1330 , h.r .

1616 , h.r .

1647 , h.r .

1663 , h.r .

2295 , s. 15 , s. 411 , s. 1196 , and s. 1276 ) ; bills that would streamline the approval , permitting , and / or construction of natural gas infrastructure ( including h.r .

89 , h.r .

161 , h.r .

287 , h.r .

351 , h.r .

428 , h.r .

1487 , s. 33 , s. 280 , s. 1210 , s. 1228 , and s. 1581 ) ; bills that would transfer federal natural gas regulation , guidance , or permitting to state authorities ( including h.r .

866 , s. 490 , s. 828 , and s. 1230 ) ; and several proposed or promulgated rules by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) ( including ghg standards for new and existing power plants , mercury and air toxic standards for new and existing power plants , and ghg and criteria pollutant standards for new light - , medium - , and heavy - duty vehicles ) .

many of these proposals promote technology and infrastructure investments that could be significant and long lasting .

for this reason , some stakeholders recommend a thorough analysis of the costs and benefits of these proposals as well as a full assessment of the economic and environmental impacts of increased natural gas development .

some see a comparative analysis of the ghg emissions from the production and use of natural gas and other fossil fuels to be a significant component in this assessment .

they argue that if natural gas is to be considered a potential "cost - effective bridge" to a less polluting and lower ghg - intensive economy , it is worth investigating the length , breadth , and destination of this bridge .

life - cycle assessment ( lca ) is an analytic method used for evaluating and comparing the environmental impacts of various products ( eg , the climate change implications of natural gas and coal resources ) .

in this way , lcas are used to identify , quantify , and track emissions of co 2 and other ghgs arising from the development of these hydrocarbon resources and to express them in a single , universal metric ( eg , co 2 equivalent [co 2 e] of ghg emissions per unit of electricity generated ) .

lcas commonly strive to be comprehensive , and the ghg emissions profiles modeled by many are based on a set of boundaries referred to as "cradle - to - grave. .

"cradle - to - grave" assessments for fossil fuels in the power sector aim to encompass the emissions associated with the entire life - cycle of the fuel — from site preparation to the extraction , gathering , and processing of the resource ; the transport of refined product to market ; the combustion of the fuel in the power plant ; and the transmission of the electricity to the consumer .

the results of an lca can be used to evaluate the ghg emissions intensity of various stages of the fuel's supply chain or to compare the emissions intensity of one type of fuel or method of production to another .

while there are many uses for natural gas ( both as a fuel and as a chemical feedstock ) , this report focuses on natural gas as a fuel for the electric power generating sector .

 ( other end - use sectors would require different lcas , as supply chains and combustion infrastructure would vary .

see figure 1 . ) .

the methodology of this report is as follows: 1 .

the report begins by assessing the ghg emissions associated with the burning of various fossil fuels on a per - unit - of - energy basis , focusing on natural gas and coal .

2 .

the report then proceeds with an analysis of the ghg emissions associated with the burning of these fuels in various types of electric power generating facilities .

3 .

the report then expands its analysis beyond the combustion of fuels at the power plant to incorporate an lca of the fuels' entire supply chains ( i.e. , inclusive of the ghg emissions released during the fuels' extraction , processing , and transport , as well as the transmission of electricity ) .

4 .

finally , the report looks into two aspects of the assessment that have shown the greatest levels of uncertainty: ( 1 ) the fugitive emissions of natural gas during production activities , and ( 2 ) the time period over which the impacts are estimated .

5 .

the report ends with a cumulative summary of the findings and a discussion of policy considerations .

in debates about energy policy , many assert that natural gas has approximately half the co 2 emissions of other fossil fuels .

while this statement is accurate in some cases and under certain conditions , it is not complete .

the net climate impact of replacing other fossil fuels with natural gas depends upon a number of analytic choices , including the following: the fuel being replaced ( eg , coal , fuel oil , gasoline , diesel ) , the end - use sector ( eg , electricity generation , transportation , home heating ) , the equipment or facility within the sector ( eg , all existing power plants , only the least efficient existing power plants , new power plant configurations ) , the rate and extent to which a sector will be converted , the time period over which the impacts will be estimated , the fuel cycle ( eg , combustion cycle , production cycle , "cradle - to - grave" ) and specific production processes modeled ( eg , conventional vertical wells , hydraulically fractured horizontal wells ) , and the ghgs modeled ( eg , co 2 , methane , nitrous oxide ) .

analyzing the fullest practicable range of these choices and using the best available data and scientific understanding , the following results are reported: comparisons of the life - cycle ghg emissions intensities for natural - gas - fired and coal - fired power generation are sensitive to each assessment's reported data as well as the choice of boundaries and input parameters .

in some cases , the accuracy of data is as uncertain as it is significant .

natural gas combustion , on a per - unit - of - energy basis , produces approximately 56% of the co 2 emissions of coal .

natural gas , when combusted at different types of existing u.s. power plants , produces anywhere from 42% to 63% of the co 2 emissions of coal , depending upon the power plant technology .

however , in order to more fully assess the climate impacts of a fuel employed in the power sector , analyses aim to aggregate emissions across the entire supply and utilization chain ( i.e. , from extraction to end use ) .

such analyses are referred to as life - cycle assessments ( lcas ) .

due to its potency as a ghg , methane lost to the atmosphere during the production and transport of fossil fuels can greatly impact the life - cycle ghg emissions estimates for power generation .

doe and epa currently estimate a fer of around 1% in natural gas systems ; a number of academic studies estimate fers in the range of 2% - 4% .

estimates for coal production are similarly uncertain .

further , due to its chemical composition , methane's climate impacts are significantly more pronounced in the short term as compared to the long term .

thus , when considering existing power plants , a natural - gas - fired combined cycle power plant produces approximately 50% of the life - cycle ghg emissions of a coal - fired steam generator , both in the short and the long terms , given a fer of around 1% in natural gas systems .

however , when considering other existing natural - gas - fired technologies ( e.g .

single cycle ) , or advanced technologies , the comparative life - cycle emissions benefits of natural gas are reduced .

further , when considering the possibility of higher fugitive emissions rates for natural gas production and transport activities ( eg , 2% - 4% ) , the life - cycle ghg emissions of existing natural - gas - fired technology could be comparable to coal - fired power generation initially ( within 5% - 35% ) and could remain within range of the coal plant's life - cycle emissions over the first 20 after the emissions ( within 20% - 40% ) .

similarly , when comparing advanced power plants under the possibility of higher fugitive emissions rates ( eg , 2% - 4% ) , the life - cycle ghg emissions of natural - gas - fired technology could be near or greater than coal - fired power generation initially ( from 20% less to 20% greater ) and could remain within range of the coal plant's life - cycle emissions over the first 60 years after the emissions ( within 20% - 35% ) .

the results illustrate that the choices made in power generation regarding supply chains , production technologies , and consumption patterns can impact a fuel's life - cycle ghg emissions in ways both large and small .

for this reason , lca has become an important decision - support tool that has been used to identify the most effective improvement strategies and avoid "burden shifting" from one activity or sector to another .

given the results , several points of interest emerge for the consideration of future policy: natural gas resources and technologies are not homogenous .

neither are coal's .

the choice of fuel resources , fuel extraction processes , transport options , and power plant technologies for both coal and natural gas returns significant differences in life - cycle ghg emissions estimates .

effective policy considerations would require appropriate specificity and detail .

due to its potency as a ghg , the amount of methane lost to the atmosphere during the production and transport of fossil fuels can greatly impact the life - cycle ghg emissions estimates for power generation .

in order to fully understand the climate implications of switching from coal to natural gas in the domestic power sector , improvements are required in the measurement and validation of emissions inventories ( i.e. , for both coal production and natural gas production ) .

effective policy considerations would require strategies to attain these inventory improvements .

further , in order to most fully realize the climate benefits of switching from coal to natural gas in the domestic power sector , a fer of approximately 1% is required from natural gas systems .

studies have shown that cost - effective technologies exist to mitigate fugitive emissions from some activities in the natural gas supply chain .

additionally , epa has recently finalized performance standards for the oil and natural gas sector that may serve to reduce fugitive emissions .

effective policy considerations would require strategies to attain and / or maintain these targeted emissions rates .

given methane's unique characteristics as a ghg ( eg , its short - term potency compared to co 2 ) , effective policy considerations would require an analysis of both the short - term and the long - term climate implications of a fuel's life - cycle ghg emissions .

the analysis would likely spur debate over the proper weight to place on both short - and long - term assessments of the costs and benefits of fuel - switching strategies .

this report compares the life - cycle ghg emissions between coal and natural gas in the domestic power sector .

it does not analyze other fuel - switching strategies that support natural gas ( eg , from coal - fired electricity to distributed natural gas in the home heating sector , from petroleum products to compressed natural gas in the domestic transportation sector , or from regional coal to imported liquefied natural gas in international markets ) .

these other scenarios would require different analytic inputs and wholly separate assessments .

effective policy considerations would require data and analysis with the appropriate lcas .

this report compares the life - cycle ghg emissions between coal and natural gas in the domestic power sector .

it does not analyze other energy options .

a full assessment of the climate implications of fuel - switching strategies in the domestic power sector would require a series of lcas for the full range of energy options , including other fossil fuels and their derivatives , as well as biofuels , biomass , hydropower , nuclear , geothermal , solar , wind , and other renewables .

this report compares the life - cycle ghg emissions between coal and natural gas in the domestic power sector .

it does not analyze the net benefits of natural gas to the general economy ( i.e. , inclusive of jobs , investments , infrastructure , national security , human health , safety , and other environmental impacts ) .

a full assessment of the costs and benefits of fuel - switching strategies would demand an integrated analysis across all issues .

