the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) defines the employment - population ratio as the ratio of total civilian employment to the civilian noninstitutional population .

simply put , it is the portion of the adult population ( 16 years and older ) that is employed .

the ratio is one of several indicators used to assess labor market strength , and is reported monthly alongside the unemployment rate and other statistics by bls .

it is used primarily as a measure of job holders and to track the pace of job creation , relative to the adult population , over time .

recent estimates show that employment as a percentage of the civilian population has not returned to pre - recessionary levels .

in november 2007 , the employment - population ratio was 62.9% , indicating that 62.9% of the adult population had a job in that month .

this rate fell steadily during the recession and several months beyond , before stabilizing around 58.5% in october 2009 .

between october 2009 and march 2014 , the ratio fluctuated within 0.3 percentage points of 58.5% .

since then , the employment - population rate has climbed slowly to 59.3% , its value in april 2015 .

the slow pace of growth in the employment - population ratio in the post - recessionary period is further remarkable because it coincided with a sharply falling unemployment rate .

this is interesting because , in recent decades , the employment - population ratio has tracked the unemployment rate closely in the united states , though moving in opposite directions .

based on this pattern , the expectation was that falling unemployment would be met with a rising employment - population ratio ; but this has not been the case .

the new pattern points to significant changes in the labor force participation rate ( i.e. , a decline ) that counterbalance the effects of a lower unemployment rate on adult employment .

this report provides an overview of the employment - population ratio .

it opens with a discussion of its value as a labor market indicator , noting its key features and limitations .

this is followed by an examination of long - term and recent trends .

the contribution of demographic and economic factors to recent patterns is explored at the close of the report .

several features of the employment - population ratio make it an attractive employment indicator for labor market analysis .

it is easy to interpret , and can be used to make meaningful comparisons across time and groups with dissimilar population size .

because it takes into account the impacts of both labor force participation and unemployment , it is a useful summary measure when those forces place countervailing pressures on employment .

 figure 1 plots the employment - population ratio from january 1950 to april 2015 .

in addition to providing a long - term view of the employment - population ratio , the figure illustrates the indicator's cyclical nature .

sharp declines in the ratio coincide with each of the 10 recessions shown in the figure , followed by growth during expansions .

between 1960 and 2000 , the employment - population ratio more than recovered from each economic downturn and followed an upward trend .

after peaking at 64.7% in april 2000 , however , the trend reversed .

although the employment - population ratio continued to rise during periods of expansion , its gains were not sufficient to offset the large declines that occurred during the 2001 and 2007-2009 recessions .

consequences of the new employment - population ratio trend depend importantly on what is driving the change , and whether recent developments are permanent or transitory .

some information about drivers and the permanency of the new trend can be gained from a look at the employment - population ratio's principal components: the unemployment rate and the labor force participation rate .

 figure 2 plots the employment - population ratio ( blue line , left axis ) and the unemployment rate ( red line , right axis ) from january 1995 to april 2015 .

it shows that , until recently , movements in the employment - population ratio mirrored those of the unemployment rate , falling with a rising unemployment rate and rising as the unemployment rate falls .

the close tracking of the employment - population ratio and unemployment rate can be seen until the beginning of 2010 .

after that point , the unemployment rate falls steadily , with little movement in the employment - population ratio .

these patterns suggest that between 1995 and 2010 , the unemployment rate ( i.e. , the success rate of jobseekers ) was the driving factor behind movement in the employment - population ratio .

more recently , however , the disconnect between the employment - population ratio and the unemployment rate patterns points to changes in labor force participation .

several factors can affect labor force participation .

demographics such as age and gender have played an important role in the recent decline in the overall labor force participation rate .

the ongoing retirement of baby boomers , for example , accounts for some downward pressure on the overall labor force participation rate .

younger workers' decisions to pursue or extend schooling have affected participation rates at the other end of the age spectrum .

the rise in married women's labor force participation was a central driving force of the steep rise in labor force participation from 1965 to the late 1980s .

by contrast , men's labor force participation has declined steadily since the 1950s , and the pace of decline accelerated during the most recent recession .

in january 1950 , 86.2% of men participated in the labor market .

this rate fell to 77.8% in january 1980 and 71.2% in january 2010 .

in february 2015 , men's labor force participation rate was 69.4% .

labor market conditions also play a part if they increase the number of discouraged workers or other persons marginally attached to the labor force .

demographic and labor force factors can be interrelated ; for example , poor labor market opportunities may influence the timing of retirement and choices about educational investment .

trends in the employment - population ratio for "prime - age" individuals — those between 25- to 54-years old — can shed light on the extent to which recent patterns are driven by labor force participation patterns among older and younger workers .

the aging population and the tendency for labor force participation rates to slow down for older workers imply a sizable structural decline in overall labor force participation .

despite an increase in their participation rate over the past 20 years , older individuals' ( 55 years and older ) participation rate is more than 40 percentage points below the rate for their prime - age counterparts .

at the same time , younger adults ( i.e. , those in the 16- to 24-year - old - age group ) — whose participation rates are relatively low — are delaying entry into the labor market and their participation rates are drifting further downward .

see figure a - 1 for additional details on labor force participation trends by age .

the employment - population ratio for the prime - age population is interesting in this context because this group is much less likely to be affected by retirement trends and schooling decisions than older and younger age groups .

their labor force participation rates are , however , likely to respond to overall labor market conditions , like labor demand , among other factors .

comparing employment - population ratio trends of the prime - age population to the full adult population ( i.e. , 16 years and older ) can therefore provide some information about whether and to what extent the ratio's slowdown is influenced by economic versus age factors .

figure 3 compares the standard employment - population ratio ( for individuals 16 and older ) and the employment - population ratio for the prime - age population .

there are some similarities in employment - population ratio patterns across the two groups of workers: the employment - population ratios for both prime - age individuals and the full adult population declined sharply during the most recent recession and for a short period thereafter and have been slow to approach their pre - recession values .

the trends differ in notable ways as well: prime - age workers' employment - population ratio fell by 4.9 percentage points — a 6.1% loss — between november 2007 ( 79.7% ) and december 2009 ( 74.8% ) , when its decline came to a halt .

over the same period , the employment - population ratio for the full adult population fell by 4.6 percentage points ( a 7.3% decline ) .

the employment - population ratio for prime - age workers has made more progress toward recovery .

since reaching its low - point of 74.8% in december 2009 , prime - age workers have recouped more than half of the 4.9 percentage point loss in ratio .

by contrast , the full adult population has recovered less than a quarter of its 4.6 percentage point loss .

in april 2015 , the employment - population ratio among prime - age individuals was at nearly 97% of its pre - recession value .

for the full adult population it remained at 94% of its pre - recession value .

taken together , these similarities and differences suggest that recent labor force participation patterns of young and older individuals have placed downward pressure on the overall employment - population ratio , but age factors do not fully explain its slow recovery .

trends in the employment - population ratio also reflect labor market differences between men and women .

figure 4 charts the employment - population ratio for prime - age men and women from january 1995 to april 2015 .

the recent experience of prime - age men and prime - age women — that is , since the onset of the 2007-2009 recession — is particularly interesting .

prior to 2008 , prime - age men's and women's employment - population ratios moved more - or - less in concert , although separated by approximately 15 percentage points .

during the recent recession and the years thereafter , however , prime - age men's employment - population ratio has been more volatile than that of prime - age women .

although moving in the same general direction , men experienced a greater loss during the recession , and a more pronounced recovery in the years that followed .

additional insights can be gained by unpacking the employment - population ratio into its principal components: the unemployment rate ( figure 5 ) and labor force participation rate ( figure 6 ) .

although both sexes experienced a sharp rise in unemployment during the most recent recession , the rise was experienced to a much greater degree by prime - age men .

at the same time , prime - age men's labor force participation rate , already on a downward trajectory , continued to decline , while prime - age women's labor force participation rate was temporarily elevated and flat .

labor market differences between men and women are likely to be the product of several factors .

among them is the tendency for men to be employed in occupations that experience relatively high job loss during recessions ( eg , production , construction , and material transport jobs ) .

women's labor participation rates — elevated and flat during the recent recession — may reflect women's labor market entry in response to lost income ( i.e. , from job loss of another household member ) , or as suggested by hotchkiss and rios - avila , they may have delayed a planned departure from the labor market until the end of the economic downturn .

