small businesses have always been of interest to congress when discussing tax policies to promote economic growth and job creation .

within these discussions it is common to equate , or at least associate , "small" businesses with pass - through businesses ( eg , sole proprietorships , partnerships , limited liability companies , s corporations ) .

an obvious question is then , are all small businesses also pass - throughs ? .

relatedly , are all large businesses also c corporations ? .

answering these questions may help to better target particular tax , and nontax , policies .

this report uses 2015 u.s. census data to investigate how the size of businesses varies by legal form ( corporate and pass - through ) , as well as the distribution of employment across firm types .

firm size is measured by using employment .

the majority of both corporations and pass - throughs in 2011 had fewer than five employees ( 55% of c corporations and 64% of pass - throughs ) .

nearly 99% of both corporations and pass - throughs had fewer than 500 employees , the most common employment - based threshold used by the small business administration ( sba ) .

thus , it appears that based on an employment - based measure of size most businesses were small , with the exact share depending on the definition chosen .

looking further into the data reveals that while the majority of firms were small , the largest firms accounted for the majority of employment .

for example , about 53% of all employees worked at firms with 500 or more employees .

this statistic is being driven mostly , but not wholly , by corporate employment .

roughly 76% of corporate employees worked at firms with more than 500 employees .

in contrast , 25% of pass - through employees worked at firms with more than 500 employees .

thus , a nontrivial share of pass - through workers were employed at the largest firms , but not to the same degree as in the corporate sector .

this report may prove useful to congress when considering tax and nontax policies directed at businesses based on size .

this report does not analyze questions related to the economics of providing preferential tax treatment for small businesses , or the extent to which small businesses are responsible for job creation in the economy .

before discussing the data in greater detail it may be helpful to briefly review the tax treatment of business income .

in the united states , how a business is taxed at the federal level is partly dependent on how it is organized .

the income of c corporations , often referred to as simply corporations , is taxed once at the corporate level according to the corporate tax system , and then a second time at the individual - shareholder level according to the individual tax system when corporate dividend payments are made or capital gains are realized .

this leads to the so - called double taxation of corporate profits .

the income of pass - through businesses is , in general , taxed only once at individual income tax rates .

that is , the income of certain businesses passes through to the individual business owners and is taxed according to individual income tax rates .

the most popular forms of these alternative pass - through forms of organization are sole proprietorships , partnerships , limited liability companies ( llcs ) , and subchapter s corporations .

while this report relies on data from tax year 2015 , it is important to note that the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 ) made significant changes to the federal tax system that affected corporations and pass - throughs .

a detailed discussion of these changes is beyond the scope of this report ; however , it is worth highlighting two changes starting in 2018 .

first , the revision permanently reduced the top corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% .

second , the revision provided pass - throughs , depending on their size and line of business , with a special deduction equal to up to 23% of their income .

the deduction reduces the amount of income subject to tax at the individual income tax rates , thus reducing the effective tax rate on qualifying pass - throughs .

this change is scheduled to expire after 2025 .

comparing the size of pass - throughs and corporations is complicated by the fact that there are several different ways to measure firm size .

size could be measured by employment , profits , assets , or a variety of other statistics .

additionally , two different industries may require different measures of size .

for example , one industry may be more capital intensive ( i.e. , more machines and equipment per worker ) than another , leading firms in that industry to naturally have more capital assets , whereas firms in another industry may generally have fewer capital assets while employing a large number of workers .

still , given the association of small businesses with pass - throughs , and small businesses with job creation , particularly startups , the presentation below relies on an employment - based measure of firm size .

settling on an employment - based metric to measure size still leaves another unresolved issue: what is the employment threshold between small businesses and large businesses ? .

a business with only a handful of employees would constitute being a small business in nearly all cases .

but what if a business has 50 , 100 , 200 , or even 500 employees ? .

currently , there is no consensus on a single criterion that determines the threshold between large and small businesses .

for most industries the small business administration ( sba ) considers a business small if it has 500 or fewer employees , although this threshold can reach 1,500 employees in some cases .

this report does not attempt to resolve the debate over what exactly constitutes a small business .

the data presented below are from the census bureau's 2015 statistics of u.s .

businesses , the most recent census data by legal form .

the census provides data separately for businesses with no employees ( their nonemployer data ) and businesses with at least one employee ( their employer data ) at some point in the year .

this report uses employer data only , mainly because nonemployers generate less than 4% of all business sales and receipts according to census , and because census excludes nonemployers from the majority of its own statistics .

it could also be argued that many nonemployers likely represent individuals involved in side work or short - term contract work , which can be viewed as distinct from the more traditional businesses captured in the employer data .

in 2015 , 124.1 million people were employed by employer firms .

c corporations accounted for approximately 54.9 million employees ( 44.2% ) , s corporations accounted for 32.6 million employees ( 26.2% ) , partnerships accounted for 14.3 million employees ( 11.6% ) , sole proprietors accounted for 4.7 million employees ( 3.8% ) , nonprofits accounted for 15.7 million employees ( 12.6% ) , governments accounted for 1.3 million employees ( 1.0% ) , and 0.5 million employees were categorized as being employed at "other" entities ( 0.4% ) .

corporations and pass - throughs account for a combined 96.5 million workers , with 55% employed at corporations and 45% employed at pass - throughs .

in 2015 , there were 5.5 million corporations and pass - throughs with at least one employee at some point during the year .

there were 2.9 million s corporations , 1.0 million c corporations , 0.9 million sole proprietorships , and 0.7 million partnerships .

as a percentage of the total , c corporations accounted for 18.1% of firms while pass - throughs accounted for 81.9% , with 52.9% of all firms being s corporations , 16.3% being sole proprietorships , and 12.7% being partnerships .

the analysis presented here sheds light on the distribution of small and large businesses , the distribution of employment across businesses of various sizes , and differences in the employment patterns and sizes of corporations and pass - throughs .

understanding these data may help policymakers when considering tax policy .

for example , particular attention is often given to the effect tax policy may have on pass - throughs under the assumption that pass - throughs and small business are synonymous .

but the analysis presented here shows this is not the case .

additionally , 99% ( 968,134 ) of c corporations have less than 500 employees , which is the most common employment - based threshold used by the sba .

not considering the ramifications of particular policies on small c corporations could result in a large share of small businesses being overlooked .

additionally , when formulating policy it may be useful to keep in mind the distribution of employment across firm size .

while the vast majority of corporate and pass - through businesses are small in terms of number of employees , the 0.4% ( 21,561 ) of firms with more than 500 employees account for over 50% of all employees .

