usaspending.gov , available to the public at http: / / www.usaspending.gov , is a government source for data on federal grants , contracts , loans , and other financial assistance .

the website enables searching of federal awards from fy2008 to the present by state , congressional district ( cd ) , county , and zip code .

grant awards include money the federal government commits for projects in states , local jurisdictions , regions , territories , and tribal reservations , as well as payments for eligible needs to help individuals and families .

contract awards refer to bids and agreements the federal government makes for specific goods and services .

usaspending.gov also provides tools for examining the broader picture of federal spending obligations by categories , such as budget function , agency , and object class .

budget function refers to the major purpose that the spending serves , such as social security , medicare , and national defense .

object class refers to the type of item or service purchased by the federal government , such as grants , contracts , and personnel compensation and benefits .

for congress , the ability to more accurately track these federal awards is necessary to better inform oversight of federal spending .

in recent years , congress has passed laws to create and improve systems used by government departments and agencies to report and input data on federal awards for contracts , grants , and other financial assistance: p.l .

109-282 , the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( ffata ) , called for the creation of a database that became usaspending.gov .

the publicly available database replaced data collection and annual reports issued for more than 30 years in the census bureau's federal aid to states ( fas ) report and consolidated federal funds report ( cffr ) .

p.l .

111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , required federal agencies awarding stimulus funding and state and local recipients of such funding to report spending back to the arra recovery board ; this reporting also became a part of usaspending.gov .

p.l .

113-101 , the digital accountability and transparency act of 2014 ( data act ) , transferred responsibility for usaspending.gov from the office of management and budget ( omb ) to the department of the treasury and required that expenditures data be added to the federal agency obligations data already included in the usaspending.gov database .

the data act also required treasury and omb to develop government - wide data standardization to facilitate consolidating , automating , and simplifying reports on grant awards and contracts and to improve usaspending.gov underreporting and inconsistencies .

however , finding accurate and complete data on federal funds received by states and congressional districts continues to be challenging due to ongoing data quality problems identified by the government accountability office ( gao ) in june 2014 .

a gao report released in november 2017 assessed the quality of data reported by agencies in may 2017 under new data act standards .

gao identified issues and challenges with the completeness and accuracy of the data submitted , use of data elements , and disclosure of data limitations on what was , at the time , a beta version of the new usaspending.gov website .

the beta version has since become the official site as of march 2018 and the previous version is no longer available .

according to a note on the site , data quality and display improvements will be continually made on a rolling basis .

users of usaspending.gov should be aware that although search results may be useful for informing consideration of certain questions , these results may also be incomplete or contain inaccuracies .

data foundation and deloitte , "data act 2022: changing technology , changing culture," report , may 2017 , at http: / / www.datafoundation.org / data - act - 2022 / .

u.s. senate , permanent subcommittee on investigations , committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , "federal agency compliance with the data act," report , july 2018 , at https: / / www.hsgac.senate.gov / subcommittees / investigations / media / new - psi - report - details - failure - of - federal - agencies - to - submit - accurate - data - on - how - they - spend - taxpayer - dollars .

urban institute , "follow the money: how to track federal funding to local governments," research report , february 26 , 2018 , at https: / / www.urban.org / research / publication / follow - money - how - track - federal - funding - local - governments .

