the stated policy of the united states is to assist the creation of a more stable , democratic , and prosperous pakistan that is actively combating religious militancy .

this has been among the most important u.s. foreign policy efforts in the post - 9 / 11 period .

senior u.s. officials commonly emphasize that the united states has vital interests at stake in u.s. engagement with pakistan .

these are related to regional and global terrorism ; efforts to stabilize neighboring afghanistan ; nuclear weapons proliferation ; pakistan - india tensions and conflict ; democratization and human rights protection ; and economic development .

as a haven for numerous islamist extremist and terrorist groups , and with the world's fastest growing arsenal of nuclear weapons , pakistan is at the top of many governments' international security agendas .

the u.s. government has sought to help develop pakistan's economy and boost the effectiveness of its security forces .

islamabad has been among the leading recipients of u.s. foreign assistance in the 21 st century , receiving more than $20 billion in overt transfers since 2001 .

while such assistance has contributed to some successes , pakistan remains racked by militancy and terrorism , and is suffering through an extended period of domestic insecurity and weak economic growth .

in 2009 , the 111 th congress formally endorsed a policy approach to pakistan that would demonstrate a u.s. commitment to "strategic" ties with that country backed by ample , condition - free economic aid meant to benefit all strata of pakistani society .

this tack was intended to transcend what had until then been perceived as engagement almost wholly based on security and military - to - military ties .

however , 2011 was marked by a series of crises in the relationship , leading to serious rancor in both capitals and open talk of a "divorce" by year's end .

congress subsequently made existing conditions on aid both more rigorous and expanded them to include all forms , economic and military , alike .

today , some members urge an outright cutoff of aid , while others seek a new and more punitive approach , given a perception that islamabad has "failed to combat terrorists. .

the may 2011 revelation that al qaeda founder osama bin laden had enjoyed apparently years - long and undisturbed refuge inside pakistan led to intensive u.s. government scrutiny of the bilateral relationship , and sparked much congressional questioning of the wisdom of providing significant u.s. foreign assistance to a government and nation that may not have the intention and / or capacity to be an effective u.s. partner .

long - held doubts about islamabad's commitment to core u.s. interests deepened over the course of 2011 , with u.s officials more often describing pakistan's military and intelligence services as too willing to distinguish among islamist extremist groups , maintaining links to afghan insurgent and anti - india militant organizations operating from pakistani territory as a means of promoting what pakistan perceives to be its security interests .

several most - wanted enemies of the united states still are widely believed to reside in pakistan , among them al qaeda chief ayman al - zawahiri , afghan taliban chief mullah omar , and afghan insurgent haqqani network leader sirajuddin haqqani .

in june 2014 , after years of u.s. government prodding , the pakistani military launched major offensive operations against islamist militant groups sheltered in the country's remote federally administered tribal areas ( fata ) abutting afghanistan .

the action has buoyed u.s. officials' confidence in pakistan's cooperation with international efforts to stabilize afghanistan .

the november 2014 visit to washington , dc , of pakistan's powerful chief of army staff — the first such visit in four years — thus came in a somewhat improved atmosphere .

weeks later , the 23 rd round of the bilateral defense consultative group met in washington , dc , where the two delegations reviewed ongoing pakistani military operations , as well as the security transition in afghanistan .

for january 2015's strategic dialogue session in islamabad , secretary of state john kerry met with pakistani adviser to the prime minister on national security and foreign affairs sartaj aziz to review progress in the existing five working group areas ( economic and finance ; defense ; law enforcement and counterterrorism ; security , strategic stability , and nonproliferation ; and energy ) , and welcomed the creation of a sixth group — on education , science , and technology — set to meet later in 2015 .

a notable outcome of the engagement was pakistan's agreement , after reported prodding from secretary kerry , to formally ban the haqqani network of afghan insurgents that operates from its territory .

pakistan has a leading role in south asia's security interactions .

any ( further ) stiffening of the official pakistani perspective on the peace process with neighboring rival india — perhaps to include intransigence on the major issue of kashmir and / or restrictions on commercial relations — could be harmful to the already hamstrung development of south asian regionalism , as well as hamper a u.s. policy that seeks to better link india with central asia .

geopolitically , it could boost new delhi's motivation to develop iran's chabbahar port , bypassing pakistan for access to central asia .

this could risk u.s. opprobrium by engaging in mutually beneficial ties with a u.s. adversary , as well as reinforce the rivalry between india and china , pakistan's main international benefactor .

the following are among the possible questions members may wish to consider during the 114 th congress: what are the ideal levels of u.s. foreign assistance for pakistan ? .

what is the ideal proportion of such assistance that should go toward economic and development versus security - related aid ? .

should congress continue to place conditions on assistance to pakistan and , if so , should such conditionality be more or less rigorous than that currently in place ? .

are u.s. national security interests well served when the administration exercises its authority to waive congressionally mandated restrictions on assistance ? .

should congress continue to authorize the pentagon to provide pakistan with "coalition support fund" reimbursements now that most international forces have departed afghanistan ? .

if so , does that authorization require substantive amending and should such reimbursements continue to be subject to the same conditionality that is currently in place ? .

what is the progress of pakistan's military operations against militants in the federally administered tribal areas ? .

are there ongoing indications / suspicions that pakistan's military and intelligence services play a "double game" with the united states by maintaining friendly links with afghan insurgent and anti - india militant groups ? .

if so , what congressional action might best address this issue ? .

are u.s. uav strikes on militant targets in pakistan a legitimate and effective tactic ? .

what role can and should congress play in oversight of this program ? .

are pakistan's governmental and civil society institutions making effective efforts to combat the spread of religious extremism and militancy there ? .

what congressional actions might bolster such efforts ? .

has the u.s. sale and granting of major military supplies to pakistan over the past 15 years substantively improved that country's counterterrorism capabilities ? .

are pakistan's civilian government and military playing sufficiently positive roles in efforts to stabilize afghanistan ? .

what are the trends in pakistan - india relations and what are the prospects for peaceful resolution of the kashmir dispute ? .

what congressional actions might be helpful in improving these circumstances ? .

is china increasing its presence and influence in pakistan and , if so , how might this affect u.s. and indian interests ? .

is pakistan's civilian government an effective u.s. ally ? .

what congressional actions might strengthen the process of democratization in islamabad ? .

is the pakistani government taking effective action to protect the human rights of its citizens , perhaps in particular of its religious minorities ? .

would a phased reduction of tariffs on pakistani textile imports to the united states be an effective means to help develop pakistan's economy , as some analysts argue ? .

