successive administrations have identified iran as a key national security challenge .

the trump administration encapsulated its assessment of the threat posed by iran in a late september 2018 state department report entitled "outlaw regime: a chronicle of iran's destructive activities. .

it outlines iran's malign activities as well as a litany of other activities the administration terms "the iranian regime's destructive behavior at home and abroad. .

the u.s. intelligence community testified in january 2019 that "iran's regional ambitions and improved military capabilities almost certainly will threaten u.s. interests in the coming year , driven by tehran's perception of increasing u.s. , saudi , and israeli hostility , as well as continuing border insecurity , and the influence of hardliners. .

an annual defense department report on iran's military power required by successive national defense authorization acts ( ndaas ) , generally contain assessments similar to those presented publicly by the intelligence community .

iran's foreign and defense policies are products of overlapping , and sometimes contradictory , motivations .

one expert asserts that iran has not decided whether it is a "nation , or a cause. .

iran employs a number of different methods and mechanisms to implement its foreign policy .

iran has pursued a wide range of defense programs , as well as a nuclear program that the international community perceived could be intended to eventually produce a nuclear weapon .

these programs are discussed in the following sections .

the trump administration has articulated a multilayered strategy to try to counter iran's malign activities and "roll back" iranian influence in the region .

the centerpiece of the strategy is to utilize economic sanctions to change iran's behavior and deny iran the resources it needs to continue its regional operations .

the state department's 2018 report "outlaw regime: a chronicle of iran's destructive activities" asserts that iran has spent over $16 billion since 2012 "propping up the assad regime and supporting [iran's] other partners and proxies in syria , iraq , and yemen. .

the administration has also articulated 12 specific demands for iran to change its behavior in exchange for a new jcpoa and normalized relations with the united states and the international community .

the demands pertaining to iran's regional activities , as stipulated in the may 21 , 2018 , speech by secretary of state pompeo at the heritage foundation are that iran: end support to middle east terrorist groups , including lebanese hizballah , hamas , and the palestinian islamic jihad .

respect the sovereignty of the iraqi government and permit the disarming , demobilization , and reintegration of shia militias .

end military support to the houthi militia and work toward a peaceful political settlement in yemen .

withdraw all forces under iranian command throughout the entirety of syria .

end support for the taliban and other terrorists in afghanistan and the region , and cease harboring senior al - qaeda leaders .

end the irgc - qf's support for terrorists and militant partners around the world .

end its threatening behavior against its neighbors , including threats to destroy israel , firing of missiles into saudi arabia and the uae , threats to international shipping , and destructive cyberattacks .

coalition building .

moreover , the administration has sought to build alliances to counter iran strategically .

some initiatives , such as the formation of a "middle east strategic alliance," are discussed below .

building a coalition to counter iran was a key component of secretary of state pompeo's trip to the gcc states , iraq , jordan , and egypt in january 2019 , as well as a ministerial meeting in poland during february 13-14 , 2019 .

threatening military action .

the administration also has threatened military retaliation for iranian direct action .

on september 21 , 2018 , secretary of state pompeo threatened action against iran also for activities undertaken by iran's proxies .

according to the secretary , "we have told the islamic republic of iran that using a proxy force to attack an american interest will not prevent us from responding against the prime actor. .

in early may 2019 , the united states sent accelerated the deployment of an aircraft carrier group and sent a bomber group to the persian gulf region in response to what the administration said were "troubling ; and escalatory indications and warnings" related to iran .

the united states also works with local leaders and factions that seek to counter iranian influence .

the applications of administration strategy are discussed in the sections below .

iran's relations with countries in the caucasus , central asia , and south asia vary significantly , but most countries in these regions conduct relatively normal trade and diplomacy with iran .

some of them face significant domestic threats from radical sunni islamist extremist movements similar to those that iran characterizes as a threat .

most of the central asia states that were part of the soviet union are governed by authoritarian leaders .

afghanistan remains politically weak , and iran is able to exert influence there .

some countries in the region , particularly india , seek greater integration with the united states and other world powers and tend to downplay cooperation with iran .

the following sections address countries that have significant economic and political relationships with iran .

iran attaches significant weight to its relations with russia — a permanent member of the u.n. security council , a supplier of arms to iran , a party to the jcpoa , and a key supporter of the asad regime .

russia appears to view iran as a de facto ally in combating sunni islamist extremist movements , which have conducted attacks in russia .

russian president vladimir putin visited iran on november 23 , 2015 , to attend a conference of major international natural gas producers , and also held talks with supreme leader khamene'i and president rouhani , resulting in an announcement of a $5 billion line of credit to iran for possible joint projects , including additional natural gas pipelines , railroads , and power plants .

rouhani visited moscow on march 28 , 2017 , to discuss with president putin the issues discussed below .

during putin's visit to tehran on november 1 , 2017 , the two countries agreed to collaborate on "strategic energy deals" valued at about $30 billion .

russia opposed the u.s. exit from the jcpoa and has said it would not cooperate with reimposed u.s. secondary sanctions on iran .

u.s. officials express concern primarily with iran - russia military cooperation , particularly in syria .

russia - iran cooperation has been pivotal to the asad regime's recapture of much of rebel - held territory since 2015 .

yet , the two countries' interests do not align precisely in syria because iranian leaders express far greater concern about protecting hezbollah in any post - asad regime than do leaders of russia , whose interests appear to center on preserving the asad regime and on russia's overall presence in the middle east .

in august 2016 , iran allowed russia to stage bombing runs in syria from a base in western iran , near the city of hamadan .

the russian use of the base ran counter to iran's constitution , which bans foreign use of iran's military facilities , and iran subsequently ended the arrangement after russia publicized it .

russia has been iran's main supplier of conventional weaponry and a significant supplier of missile - related technology .

in february 2016 , iran's then - defense minister hosein dehgan visited moscow reportedly to discuss purchasing su - 30 combat aircraft , t - 90 tanks , helicopters , and other defense equipment .

under resolution 2231 , selling such gear would require security council approval - until the provision sunsets in october 2020 - and u.s. officials have said publicly they would not support such a sale .

russia previously has abided by all u.n. sanctions to the point of initially cancelling a contract to sell iran the advanced s - 300 air defense system — even though resolution 1929 , which banned most arms sales to iran , did not specifically ban the sale of the s - 300 .

after the april 2 , 2015 , framework nuclear accord was announced , russia lifted its ban on the s - 300 sale , and the system became operational in iran in 2016 .

in january 2015 , iran and russia signed a memorandum of understanding on defense cooperation , including military drills .

russia built and still supplies fuel for iran's only operating civilian nuclear power reactor at bushehr , a project from which russia earns significant revenues .

since december 2015 , russia has shipped out of iran of almost all of iran's stockpile of low - enriched uranium — helping iran meet a key requirement of the jcpoa .

the u.s. ending of sanctions waivers that allowed for the shipments could complicate this technical assistance provided by russia .

iran's foreign policy is focused on urging the european countries to continue providing iran with the economic benefits of the jcpoa in the wake of the may 2018 trump administration pullout from that accord .

the eu is struggling with that effort , insofar as european countries have substantial engagement in the u.s. economy and are reluctant to risk that business to maintain economic ties to iran .

still , rouhani and his subordinates regularly visit european capitals and engage european leaders , daily flights from several european countries to iran continue , and many iranian students attend european universities .

while the european countries oppose the u.s. withdrawal from the jcpoa , they are critical of iran for recent alleged iranian plots to assassinate dissidents in europe ( discussed above ) .

in january 2019 , in response to a dutch letter linking iran to assassinations of dutch nationals of iranian origin in 2015 and 2017 , the eu sanctioned the internal security unit of iran's intelligence ministry and two iranian operatives for sponsoring acts of terrorism .

it is the terrorism issue that has , in the past , disrupted iran - europe relations .

during the 1990s , the united states had no dialogue with iran at all , whereas the eu countries maintained a policy of "critical dialogue" and refused to join the 1995 u.s. trade and investment ban on iran .

but , that dialogue was suspended in april 1997 in response to the german terrorism trial ( "mykonos trial" ) that found high - level iranian involvement in killing iranian dissidents in germany .

east asia includes three of iran's five largest buyers of crude oil and one country , north korea , that is widely accused of supplying iran with missile and other military - related technology .

the countries in asia have not extensively intervened militarily or politically in the middle east , and iran rarely criticizes countries in asia .

some u.s. officials and some in congress have expressed concerns about iran's relations with leaders in latin america that share iran's distrust of the united states .

some experts and u.s. officials have asserted that iran has sought to position irgc - qf operatives and hezbollah members in latin america to potentially carry out terrorist attacks against israeli targets in the region or even in the united states itself .

some u.s. officials have asserted that iran and hezbollah's activities in latin america include money laundering and trafficking in drugs and counterfeit goods .

these concerns were heightened during the presidency of mahmoud ahmadinejad ( 2005-2013 ) , who made repeated , high - profile visits to the region in an effort to circumvent u.s. sanctions and gain support for his criticisms of u.s. policies .

however , few of the economic agreements that ahmadinejad announced with latin american countries were implemented , by all accounts .

president rouhani has expressed only modest interest in expanding ties in latin america , perhaps in part because latin america is not pivotal to iran's economy .

he made his first visit to the region in september 2016 in the course of traveling to the annual u.n. general assembly meetings in new york .

he went to several of the countries that foreign minister zarif did in august 2016: cuba , chile , bolivia , ecuador , nicaragua , and venezuela — countries in that region that ahmadinejad visited during his presidency as well .

iran's officials have stated that the purpose of the visits were to expand economic relations with latin american countries .

in the 112 th congress , the countering iran in the western hemisphere act , requiring the administration to develop a strategy to counter iran's influence in latin america , was enacted ( h.r .

3783 , p.l .

112-220 ) .

the required report was provided to congress in june 2013 , asserting that "iranian influence in latin america and the caribbean is waning" in part because of u.s. efforts to cause latin american countries to assess the costs and benefits of closer relations with iran .

observers have directed particular attention to iran's relationship with venezuela ( an opec member , as is iran ) because of its avowed anti - u.s. posture , and argentina , because of the iran - backed attacks on israeli and jewish targets there .

iran's relations with cuba have been analyzed by experts in the past , but the u.s. opening to cuba that began in late 2014 have eased concerns about cuba - iran relations .

u.s. counterterrorism officials also have stated that the tri - border area of argentina , brazil , and paraguay is a "nexus" of arms , narcotics and human trafficking , counterfeiting , and other potential funding sources for terrorist organizations , including hezbollah .

assertions in 2009 by some u.s. officials that iran was significantly expanding its presence in nicaragua were disputed by subsequent accounts .

sub - saharan africa has not generally been a focus of iranian foreign policy , perhaps because of the relatively small size of most african economies and the limited ability of african countries to influence the actions of iran's main regional rivals .

former president ahmadinejad sought to deepen diplomatic and commercial ties to some african countries , focusing on those that have had historically tense relations with western powers ( such as sudan , zimbabwe , and south africa ) .

many african countries , however , apparently did not want to risk their relationships with the united states or blowback from domestic sunni constituencies by broadening relations with iran .

the overwhelming majority of muslims in africa are sunni , and muslim - majority african countries have tended to be responsive to financial and diplomatic overtures from iran's rival , saudi arabia .

amid the saudi - iran dispute in january 2016 over the nimr execution , several african countries that iran had cultivated as potential allies broke relations with iran outright , including djibouti , comoros , and somalia , as well as sudan .

senegal , at one time seen as a primary focus of ahmadinejad's africa outreach , and sudan have supported the saudi - led military effort against the iran - backed houthis in yemen — in sudan's case with some forces .

the uae , in particular , has actively sought allies in the horn of africa to reduce iranian influence , including by facilitating uae operations against the iran - backed houthi rebels in yemen .

west africa's large lebanese diaspora communities may also be a target of iranian influence operations and a conduit for hezbollah financial and criminal activities .

rouhani has made few statements on relations with countries in africa and has apparently not made the continent a priority .

tehran appears , however , to retain an interest in cultivating african countries as trading partners — an interest that might increase now that the trump administration has decided to exit the jcpoa and reimpose all u.s. sanctions .

iran's leaders also apparently see africa as a market for its arms exports and as sources of diplomatic support in u.n. forums .

african populations may also be seen as potential targets for iranian "soft power" and religious influence .

iran's al mustafa university , which promotes iran's message and shia religious orientation with branches worldwide , has numerous branches in various african countries .

the irgc - qf has reportedly operated in some countries in africa , in part to secure arms - supply routes for pro - iranian movements in the middle east but also to be positioned to act against u.s. or allied interests , to support friendly governments or factions , and act against sunni extremist movements .

several african countries have claimed to disrupt purportedly irgc - qf - backed arms trafficking or terrorism plots .

in may 2013 , a court in kenya found two iranian men guilty of planning to carry out bombings in kenya , apparently against israeli targets .

in december 2016 , two iranians and a kenyan who worked for iran's embassy in nairobi were charged with collecting information for a terrorist act after filming the israeli embassy in that city .

senegal cut diplomatic ties with iran between 2011 and 2013 after claiming that iran had trafficked weapons to its domestic separatist insurgency .

key questions include whether , and if so , how , u.s. actions might alter iran's behavior , and whether the united states and iran are on a collision course toward armed conflict .

to date , no u.s. strategy , by any administration , has reduced iran's inclination to intervene in the region or otherwise try to enhance its regional influence .

trump administration officials asserted that the sanctions relief of the jcpoa enabled iran to increase its regional malign activities , and that pulling out of the accord and reimposing sanctions were required .

however , it can be argued that the level of iran's regional influence is linked more to opportunities provided by the region's conflicts than to the level of iran's financial resources .

whereas deployments of additional u.s. military force to the region might deter some iranian actions , u.s. buildups arguably have never caused iran to alter its fundamental regional strategies .

as noted throughout , administration efforts against iran included imposition of sanctions on various iranian activities ; provision of advice , training , and counterterrorism assistance to regional leaders and groups who seek to limit iranian influence ; and deployment of u.s. forces to intercept iranian weapons shipments and deter iranian ground action .

additional u.s. pressure on iran — particularly if such pressure involves military action — could embroil the united states more deeply in regional conflicts .

those who argue that iran is an increasingly challenging regional actor maintain the following: iran is likely to continue to supply its regional allies and proxies with larger quantities of and more accurate weaponry , including short - range missiles .

iran might , through its allies and proxies in syria and iraq , succeed in establishing a secure land corridor extending from iran to lebanon and in pressuring israel from the syrian border as well as the lebanese border .

the potential for major iran - israel conflict in syria is significant .

a further prolongation of the intra - gcc rift could complicate u.s. efforts to contain iran militarily and hinder u.s. military operations in the region .

the lifting of the u.n. ban on arms sales to iran in october 2020 will enable iran to modernize its armed forces , possibly to the point where it can move ground forces across waterways such as the strait of hormuz .

iran could further increase its assistance to hardline opposition factions in bahrain , which has apparently been limited to date to only small , militant underground groups .

iran might succeed in emerging as a major regional energy and trading hub , both within and outside its participation in china's bri initiative , potentially expanding iran's political influence to an even greater extent .

various regional powers might establish or expand military cooperation with iran , a development that could strengthen iran's conventional capabilities .

on the other hand , in order to preserve at least some multilateral sanctions relief and avoid the potential for confrontation , iran might be induced to accept regional settlements that benefit u.s. and allied interests .

those who take this view argue the following: iran might be induced to cooperate in identifying an alternative to asad in syria that attenuates the civil conflict and permits iran to draw down its forces .

iran might be persuaded to curtail its delivery of additional long - range rockets or other military equipment to hezbollah and hamas , although iran is unlikely under any circumstances to reduce its political support for hezbollah .

iran might support a political solution in yemen that gives the houthis less influence in a new government than they are demanding .

iran and the uae might resolve their territorial dispute .

iran might gain admission to the sco and cooperate more systematically with its members against the islamic state or other terrorist organizations .

iran might seek to finalize regional economic projects , including development of oil and gas fields in the caspian sea ; gas pipeline linkages between iran and kuwait , bahrain , oman , and pakistan ; and transportation routes to china .

domestic iranian factors could cause iran's foreign policy to shift .

for example: protests that have taken place since late 2017 could escalate and cause the regime to reduce the scope of its interventions , cut its defense budget , or limit its missile development program .

if unrest escalates dramatically and the regime loses power , iran's foreign policy could shift dramatically , likely becoming far more favorable to u.s. interests .

the departure from the scene of the supreme leader could change iran's foreign policy sharply , depending on the views of his successor .

