the united states and bangladesh have generally enjoyed a positive working relationship .

the united states has sought to help bangladesh with its development goals , including in the areas of sustainable development , health , education , poverty reduction , disaster preparedness , and food security .

in recent years , the rise of islamist militancy has been a cause of concern to the united states and to bangladesh's prime minister , sheikh hasina , and her government .

the two nations hold an annual partnership dialogue and a security dialogue and have developed a cooperative relationship over the years to meet shared concerns .

bangladesh faces — and will continue to face — major challenges in the coming years .

bangladesh is undergoing a political struggle between those that would emphasize islamic religious identity over a relatively more secular identity based on bengali nationalism .

this tension manifests itself through demonstrations , political gridlock , and at times violent street protests .

rising conservative islamist sentiment may also increasingly become linked to militant organizations and international islamist movements .

a growing population , when combined with environmental stress brought on by natural disasters and climate change , may pose further challenges for bangladesh , particularly given its already high population density .

while the geopolitical rivalry between china and india may present opportunities for bangladesh , it may also create new tensions or place new demands on the country in the years ahead .

the recent arrival of hundreds of thousands of rohingya from burma is a potential source of instability and will likely have humanitarian , diplomatic , security , and geopolitical implications for bangladesh .

the united states has long - standing supportive relations with bangladesh .

bangladeshis tend to have a positive view of the united states: according to a 2014 pew opinion survey , 76% of bangladeshis had a favorable opinion of the united states , compared to 66% of respondents from the united kingdom .

the united states and bangladesh work together on several issues , including development , governance , trade , and security .

in august 2017 , u.s. acting assistant secretary of state for south and central asian affairs alice wells met with prime minister hasina to discuss u.s. - bangladeshi relations , including the two countries' efforts to cooperate on security and energy issues .

bangladesh is a parliamentary democracy with a unicameral legislature , the jatiya sangsad .

the 300 members of parliament are directly elected for five - year terms , and an additional 50 seats — which are reserved for women — are filled by the political parties in proportion to their respective vote shares .

the awami league , led by prime mister sheikh hasina , and the bangladesh national party , led by khaleda zia , are the two main political parties .

the awami league has been viewed as relatively more secular in its approach though some have recently accused the government of "pandering to islamist zealots. .

according to the international foundation for electoral systems , bangladeshi elections face several challenges , including a "restricted space for political dialogue ; [a] lack of coordination around electoral reform ; " and an "absence of leaders equipped to promote peaceful electoral and political processes. .

the united states has been concerned about political unrest and instability in bangladesh .

following bangladesh's most recent election in 2014 , former u.s .

principal deputy assistant secretary of state richard hoagland opined that "the political impasse and negative governance trends in bangladesh don't bode well for sustainable growth" in the country .

the al won the 2008 election , as well as the 2014 election that was boycotted by the bnp ( table 1 ) .

the bnp boycotted because the al government did not set up a neutral caretaker government prior to the vote .

starting in 1996 , caretaker governments oversaw bangladesh's general elections .

however , in 2011 , the al - controlled parliament ended the caretaker - government system .

partially as a result of the bnp's boycott , the al won an overwhelming majority in parliament in 2014 .

after the election , in january 2015 , the bnp called for a nationwide blockade and a series of strikes , known as hartals in south asia .

during the resulting demonstrations , over 120 people were killed .

khaleda zia's motorcade came under attack by al activists a few months later , while she was campaigning for her party's mayoral candidate in dhaka , the country's capital .

fifteen members of her entourage were injured .

in response to the postelection unrest , the state department issued a statement , saying it was "gravely concerned" about the "unrest and violence" in bangladesh .

at the moment , the jatiya party ( ershad ) is supporting the current al government , even though it is considered the opposition .

ji , the largest islamist party in bangladesh , historically has been allied with the bnp .

prior to the 2014 vote , the bangladesh election commission banned ji from participating in the election .

the commission , as well as the supreme court , ruled that the party's charter was not in accordance with the country's constitution .

in early 2017 , the al and bnp were able to work together to appoint a new election commission , but the bnp remains doubtful of the commission's independence .

the next national election is due in 2019 , and some observers believe that sheikh hasina is grooming her son , sajeeb ahmed wajed , to become the al's next leader .

since independence in 1971 , there often have been tensions between the military and successive civilian governments .

the military ruled the country — both directly and indirectly — for nearly 17 years , and there have been three coups and several mutinies .

two presidents have been killed in military coups , including sheikh hasina's father , sheikh mujibur rahman , as well as khaleda zia's husband , ziaur rahman .

 ( both men served as president of bangladesh and were key figures in the country's struggle for independence from pakistan in 1971. ) .

bangladesh returned to a parliamentary democracy in 1991 after lieutenant general h. m. ershad resigned .

 ( in 1982 , he seized power in a coup and served as president until 1990. ) .

prior to the 2008 general election , the military backed a caretaker government — which represented , according to some , "a de facto coup" since it stayed in power for two years .

from 2007 to the end of 2008 , the military supported the caretaker government's anticorruption program , which convicted 116 politicians and businessmen .

the government tried to convict and exile sheikh hasina and khaleda zia , but it eventually needed to back down , in order to ensure that both of their parties took part in the december 2008 election .

in 2015 , some observers believed that the military was potentially planning a coup because of the al - bnp political feud and the resulting instability .

however , there was no such coup .

according to the opposition leader , khaleda zia , sheikh hasina has been "buying" the loyalty of the armed forces by approving military procurement deals and promotions .

tensions between security forces and the government over corruption and low wages led members of a paramilitary unit , known as the bangladeshi rifles ( bdr ) , to mutiny in february 2009 , killing 74 people , including 57 officers .

the international crimes tribunal was established in 2009 to try to prosecute those who committed war crimes , such as murder and rape , during bangladesh's 1971 war of independence from pakistan .

the u.s. government has supported bringing bangladeshi war criminals to justice , and it has encouraged the ict to follow a "fair and transparent" judicial process .

previously , pakistan ( then - west pakistan ) and bangladesh ( then - east pakistan ) were one muslim - majority country — which came about after the partition of the indian subcontinent in 1947 .

during the separatist war between the two territories in 1971 , hundreds of thousands to over 1 million people are believed to have died .

perhaps 10 million more were displaced .

at the time , bangladesh's independence forces , along with india , were battling the pakistani army , which largely was composed of troops from then - west pakistan and their local sympathizers in bangladesh .

ji's paramilitary wing , al - badr , collaborated with the west pakistani military , and it reportedly targeted students and politicians , among others , who were sympathetic to bangladesh's independence struggle .

as part of the ict process , a number of leaders from the ji party and the bnp have been arrested and accused of war crimes .

several have been convicted and executed .

the bnp and ji have opposed the ongoing trials and view them as being part of an al effort to further consolidate its political advantage .

according to human rights watch , the trials favor the prosecution , and the defense often does not have a chance to "challenge the credibility of prosecution witnesses. .

according to the state department , the court has carried out five executions from 2010 through 2016 .

four of those individuals were ji members ; the other one was from the bnp .

in may 2016 , the ict executed matiur rahman nizami , the amir ( or president ) of ji .

as mentioned above , in april 2017 , the ict also handed down death sentences to two people who were convicted of committing war crimes during the 1971 war .

while some observers have been critical of the ict's use of the death penalty , others have welcomed the strong stance against islamist extremism .

one commentator has observed that "western governments have been lukewarm to hostile" to the april 2015 execution of senior ji leader muhammad kamaruzzaman for his role in war crimes: [t]hough bangladesh has addressed many concerns about its trials , judicial standards certainly don't match those of denmark or switzerland .

yet the chorus of criticism in western capitals ends up serving a perverse purpose .

it strengthens precisely those groups in bangladesh who most threaten human rights , individual liberty and religious freedom .

[those concerned with human rights] ... ought to applaud bangladesh for showing pluck to take on a thuggish islamist movement... .

following kamaruzzaman's execution , the state department issued a statement , saying that the united states supports "bringing to justice those who committed atrocities in the 1971 bangladesh war of independence. .

however , the statement also emphasized that the ict process "must be fair and transparent. .

many observers view politically motivated violence — perpetrated by both opposition - and government - aligned forces — as one of the key threats to human rights in bangladesh .

the united states has expressed concern over the country's political unrest , as well as its lack of labor - rights protections .

according to the u.s. department of state's 2016 human rights report : the most significant human rights problems [in bangladesh] were extrajudicial killings , arbitrary or unlawful detentions , and forced disappearances by government security forces ; the killing of members of marginalized groups and others by groups espousing extremist views ; early and forced marriage ; gender - based violence , especially against women and children ; and poor working conditions and labor rights abuses .

more than 500 bangladeshis died in "2014 election - related violence" and , as mentioned above , odhikar , the human rights group , reported that 215 people were killed and that 9,050 were injured because of inter - or intra - party clashes in 2016 .

unlawful detentions also have occurred , as have forced disappearances .

in 2016 , mir ahmed bin quasem and hummam quader chowdhury — the sons of prominent figures in the ji and bnp , respectively — were detained and held without charge .

they did not have access to lawyers or their families .

hummam quader chowdhury was later released in march 2017 , but , according to recent reports , mir ahmed bin quasem still has not been seen .

 ( notably , both men's fathers were executed by the ict. ) .

over the course of eight days in 2016 , bangladesh's security forces rounded up nearly 15,000 people , following a series of attacks against liberal activists .

many of the detainees were , according to human rights watch , members of the political opposition , including ji's student wing .

additionally , the al government reportedly has filed 37,000 lawsuits against the bnp .

the rapid action battalion ( rab ) is an elite unit of bangladesh's security forces that has been implicated in a number of human rights violations .

the al government has reportedly used accusations of terrorist activity , seen by many as unfounded , to mobilize the rab against elements within the opposition , including ji members .

 ( the bnp also reportedly used the rab as a "death squad" when it controlled the government. ) .

amnesty international found that , of the 20 disappearance cases it investigated between 2012 and 2014 , several seemed to suggest that the police or rab were involved .

in the first nine months of 2016 , between 118 and 150 individuals were killed in "crossfire" incidents — which are deaths resulting from purported shootouts between suspects and security forces .

the rab , allegedly , was responsible for 34 of those deaths .

observers say that the "crossfire" incidents are likely extrajudicial killings .

in january 2017 , the narayanganj district and sessions court "sentenced 26 people , including 16 rab members , to death for their role" in the killing of a local politician .

however , such convictions are rare .

bangladesh has of late been clamping down on the country's media , according to observers .

in 2016 , two editors — who worked for leading newspapers in the country — were charged with several crimes , including criminal defamation and sedition .

since 2013 , the staff of one of those newspapers , proth o m alo , has faced more than 100 criminal cases .

freedom of expression has come under increasing threat from islamist extremists in bangladesh — as evidenced by the recent killing of dr. avijit roy , a secular blogger who was bangladeshi - american .

he was killed by an islamist extremist group and , in the view of one analyst , roy's murder , and others like it , "have opened a new front between the values of syncretic , secular , humanistic bangladeshi culture against a rigid worldview incapable of allowing difference to coexist. .

although bangladesh was founded as a secular country , some say that islamist extremists have discredited secularism in the eyes of many bangladeshis .

"the politics has been turned into the secular versus the islamists," according to abdur rashid , who is a retired army major general and the executive director of the institute of conflict , law and development studies in dhaka .

bangladesh has struggled with inter - religious tensions and violence , particularly between islamist extremists and hindus .

muslims account for about 89.1% of bangladesh's population .

hindus account for 10.0% .

other religious groups , including buddhists and christians , account for about 0.9% .

 ( when bangladesh gained independence in 1971 , hindus were about 23% of the population. ) .

according to the hindu american foundation , 495 hindu homes , 169 temples , and 585 shops were attacked , damaged , or looted in 2014 election - related violence .

in spring 2016 , three hindu priests were killed .

there also have been attacks on the country's buddhist , christian , and ahmadiyya communities .

according to the advocacy group hindu - buddha - christian - oikya parishad , in the first three months of 2016 , there were three times as many violent incidents involving minorities than in all of 2015 .

human trafficking and unequal rights for women are problems in bangladesh , as well .

while there is a lack of reliable quantitative data , "human trafficking in bangladesh is believed to be extensive both within the country and to india , pakistan and the middle east. .

many , including children , are reportedly trafficked into sexual exploitation or forced labor .

according to the state department's t rafficking in persons report for 2017 , "observers reported police took bribes and sexual favors to ignore potential trafficking crimes at brothels. .

the report places bangladesh on the tier 2 watch list .

in march 2017 , bangladesh's parliament passed a law making it legal for girls under the age of 18 to marry .

already , around 52% of bangladeshi girls are married by the time they are 18 , and 18% are married by age 15 .

the government , observers believe , pushed the bill to increase its popularity among religious groups .

child labor is a problem in bangladesh , as well .

in december 2016 , the overseas development institute ( odi ) , a u.k. - based think tank , conducted a survey , examining the prevalence of child labor in eight slum settlements in dhaka .

the results suggested that child labor was "endemic" in the area , affecting 45% of 14-year - old children .

 ( child labor — as defined by ilo — is work that "deprives children of their childhood , their potential and their dignity , and that is harmful to physical and mental development." ) .

another survey — conducted in 2013 by the government — reported that about 3.5 million children aged 5 to 17 were working , including 1.7 million as child laborers .

in burma , the rohingya , a muslim minority group , have faced persecution at the hands of the majority buddhist population .

burma views the rohingya as illegal immigrants from bangladesh , and tensions between burma's rohingya and buddhist communities remain high , especially in arakan ( rakhine ) state .

since august 2017 , an estimated half a million rohingya have crossed the border into bangladesh , fleeing from the latest outbreak of violence in rakhine .

in september 2017 , the united nations high commissioner for human rights condemned burma , saying that the government was "carrying out 'a textbook example of ethnic cleansing' against the rohingya. .

on september 20 , 2017 , the united states pledged to spend nearly $32 million on an aid package to help displaced rohingya — in addition to the nearly $63 million that the u.s. government already has provided in humanitarian assistance "for vulnerable communities displaced in and from burma" since october 2016 .

workers' rights and safety in bangladesh have been the focus of much international attention , particularly in the apparel - production industry .

in june 2013 , the united states suspended bangladesh's designation as a beneficiary country under the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program over concerns about workers' rights in the country .

as a result , u.s. imports of gsp - eligible products from bangladesh lost their duty - free status .

so far , the united states has not reinstated bangladesh's gsp benefits .

bangladesh is an important part of the global textile - supply chain , and its garment industry employs approximately four million workers .

yet successive factory disasters have led to additional global and u.s. scrutiny of bangladesh's labor rights regime , especially following the rana plaza garment factory collapse which killed over 1,000 workers in april 2013 .

the rana plaza factory provided clothing to several european and american brands , reportedly including children's place , benetton , cato fashions , and mango .

as of april 2017 , many victims' families still had not been compensated , even though a $30 million fund was established to do just that following the disaster .

 ( reportedly , several international brands and retailers paid less than expected into the fund. ) .

in 2015 , bangladesh police charged the owner of the rana plaza factory and 41 others with murder , and in august 2017 , he was sentenced to three years in jail .

many bangladeshi factories reportedly are substandard and unsafe .

following the rana plaza collapse , inspections were conducted as part of the accord for fire and building safety in bangladesh — an initiative involving over 180 brands and retailers , reportedly including h&m .

the inspectors discovered safety hazards in all of the 1,106 garment factories that were examined and requested that bangladeshi authorities immediately evacuate 17 factories .

in 2013 , the international labour organization ( ilo ) started an initiative — the improving fire and general building safety in bangladesh project — to train building inspectors and improve the capabilities of bangladesh's fire service and civil defence ( fscd ) force .

 ( the u.s. department of labor funded the project. ) .

a 2016 fire broke out at a packaging factory in tongi , north of dhaka , killing 23 people .

it is difficult to unionize in bangladesh .

a june 2017 report from the international trade union confederation indicated that there were few to any guarantees of worker rights in bangladesh , and the organization ranked the country among the 10 worst , in terms of worker - rights protections .

some 10% of the country's garment factories are unionized , and registering to create a union is difficult , in part because at least 30% of the workforce — "a relatively high level" — must agree to it .

bangladesh's economy relies heavily on foreign remittances , and the government has tried to protect its citizens working abroad .

a bilateral treaty with saudi arabia , for instance , stipulates that saudi arabian employers must pay for bangladeshi female workers' travel expenses and that domestic workers must be employed by a third party , not by a private household .

however , according to the u.s. state department's 2017 trafficking in persons report , bangladesh's government has allowed the bangladesh association of international recruiting agencies to set high recruitment fees , thereby making many laborers "indebted and vulnerable to trafficking. .

despite labor rights abuses , the garment industry has provided many bangladeshi women with opportunities that have given them some independence .

many women in bangladesh work in the garment sector — which accounted for over 80% of the country's exports in 2016 .

according to an ilo study , about 41% of bangladeshi women are employed — a much higher rate than in india ( 25.8% ) and pakistan ( 22% ) .

it reportedly has become "more culturally acceptable for women to enter the labour force in general" in bangladesh , and currently about 80% of the country's garment employees are women .

that has "served as a repellant against early marriage and in turn reductions in fertility. .

bangladesh is today consistently one of the largest contributors of troops , police , and experts to united nations international peacekeeping efforts .

bangladesh began peacekeeping operations in 1988 .

as of july 2017 , more than 6,900 of the country's troops and police were serving in 13 u.n. peacekeeping operations .

many of bangladesh's troops have served as u.n. peacekeepers in africa , including in the central african republic and in the democratic republic of congo .

in september 2017 , three u.n. soldiers from bangladesh were killed in mali .

through the global peace operations initiative ( gpoi ) , which is united states' primary security assistance program for strengthening international capacity and capability to train , sustain , deploy , and effectively conduct peacekeeping operations around the world , the united states is helping bangladesh to open a new multipurpose training facility at the bangladesh institute for peace support operation training ( bipsot ) .

in his remarks while visiting the bipsot in 2011 , then - u.n. secretary - general ban ki moon observed that approximately 1 in 10 united nations peacekeepers were from bangladesh before noting their sacrifice for the global good .

although it remains one of the world's poorest nations , bangladesh has experienced significant gdp growth over the past decade , expanding at about 6% per year since 1996 .

the economist intelligence unit projects that bangladesh's real gdp will grow by about 6.4% in 2017 / 2018 through 2020 / 21 .

however , more will likely need to be done to accommodate the number of bangladeshis entering the workforce .

about 2.1 million youths enter the job market every year , according to one senior world bank official , and it is seen as vital that the country creates more jobs for them .

nearly half of bangladeshis work in the agriculture sector .

manufacturing — particularly of ready - made garments — is a key component of bangladesh's economy .

bangladesh is the second - largest exporter of ready - made garments in the world after china .

in 2016 , garment exports exceeded $25 billion , accounting for more than 80% of the country's total exports .

bangladesh's economy is one of the world's most dependent on foreign remittances .

about $15 billion in remittances came from bangladeshis working overseas in 2015 constituting the country's largest source of foreign - exchange earnings .

however , during the 2016-2017 fiscal year , remittances fell by 14.5% from the previous fiscal year — a drop from about $15 billion to $12.8 billion .

according to analysts , the reported drop is in part the result of expatriate workers sending their remittances through informal channels , such as mobile banking and the hundi , which is an illicit fund - transferring system .

many of the new migrant workers went to saudi arabia .

estimates of the number of bangladeshis working abroad vary .

by one estimate bangladesh will send an estimated 1 million workers abroad in 2017 .

bangladesh's energy regulatory commission ( berc ) reportedly announced that gas prices would be raised by an average of 22.7% in 2017 .

the decision was met with protests , but it was necessary , according to one berc official , because gas was sold at half its actual cost and the subsidies were unsustainable .

the hike was supposed to take place in two phases , but the second price increase has been held up by the courts .

bangladesh relies on liquefied natural gas ( lng ) to cover 53% of its energy needs , and the country's gas reserves will last for another 10 to 12 years , according to some analysts .

at present , bangladesh "is developing an import terminal" — the moheshkhali floating lng project — with the international finance corporation and excelerate energy , a u.s. - based company .

recently , the imf reported that the banking sector faces "underlying risks," partially because of large loans that were made to borrowers who have few incentives to repay .

in june 2017 , the government set aside $250 million to recapitalize the country's state - owned banks .

however , according to some observers , the country's regulators have not been effective at tackling the sector's underlying problems , such as poor risk management and few penalties being levied on defaulters .

partially as a result , state - owned banks have a "high level" of nonperforming loans — in other words , loans that are in default or are close to being in default — and operating profits at bangladesh's six state - owned commercial banks fell by 37% in 2016 .

according to the world bank's 2017 doing business index , bangladesh ranked 176 th out of 190 countries .

major problems include difficulties for businesses in bangladesh to get access to electricity and to get contracts enforced .

 ( about 60 million people — or about 40% of bangladesh's population — do not have access to electricity. ) .

the country also has a poor infrastructure - transportation network , and according to transparency international's 2016 corruption perceptions index , bangladesh ranked 145 th out of 176 countries .

in may 2017 , the cabinet approved legislation that would make it easier for businesses to get licenses , register land , and link with utilities .

known as the one - stop service act , parliament must approve the legislation before it can take effect .

in 2016 , the u.n. conference on trade and development reported that bangladesh received $2.3 billion in foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in 2016 — a record amount — but some observers say that the country could attract more fdi if it improved its infrastructure , streamlined its bureaucracies , and tackled corruption .

demographic pressures and environmental problems — including those linked to climate change — increasingly are challenges for bangladesh , and they may result in thousands , perhaps millions , of people being displaced in future years .

if that does happen , many of these people likely will move to crowded cities or to neighboring countries , such as india , leading to further strains on social services and , perhaps , regional instability .

the 2015 climate change vulnerability index reported that bangladesh's economy is the most vulnerable in the world to climate change .

about 80% of the country's land mass is on a floodplain and is less than 5 meters ( some 16 feet ) above sea level .

it has been projected that seas near bangladesh could rise by as much as 13 feet by 2100 — which is four times the projected global average .

according to an institute of medicine study released in january 2017 , between 2011 and 2050 , about 9.6 million people in bangladesh may be displaced because of climate change .

some scientists suggest that rising sea levels — along with additional factors , such as land settling because of groundwater extraction — will lead to 17% of bangladesh's land being inundated and will potentially displace up to 18 million people by 2050 .

many of the displaced may move to the country's cities , including dhaka .

in recent years , 50,000 to 200,000 people have been displaced annually due to riverbank erosion .

moreover , some analysts believe cyclones likely will become more intense .

one cyclone — cyclone mora — forced the evacuation of 350,000 people in 2017 .

bangladesh's population is projected to increase from about 160 million people to around 200 million in 2050 .

population increases may lead to further internal displacement , cross - border migration , and potentially rising tensions between the country and its neighbors , including india .

bangladesh is one of the most densely populated countries on earth with around 1,120 people per square kilometer .

bangladesh's government has invested more than $10 billion to address the potential effects of climate change , and much of that funding has gone toward strengthening river embankments , implementing early warning systems , improving government capacities , and building emergency cyclone shelters .

to date , 2,500 such shelters have been built .

bangladesh's government also has discussed the possibility of imposing a carbon tax on fossil fuels .

according to eiu's 2016 global food security index , bangladesh ranks second - to - last in food security among the 23 countries of the asia and pacific region .

 ( laos is the lowest - ranked country ) .

of the 113 countries ranked in the index , bangladesh ranked 95 th .

bangladesh's total score , though , did improve from 2015 .

one usda foreign agriculture service member is reported to have said that "the food safety environment in bangladesh was ... among the worst he has observed globally. .

indeed , bangladesh has the "highest prevalence of underweight children in south asia," and more than half of the population does not have access to clean water and sanitation .

bangladesh is the world's fourth - largest rice producer , but much of the crop is consumed domestically , and according to usaid , bangladesh remains "food deficient .

in april 2017 , flash floods reportedly "damaged over 700,000 tons of rice. .

 ( unofficial estimates suggest that around 2.2 million tons may have been damaged. ) .

overall , rice accounts for "about two - thirds of the population's dietary intake. .

some studies suggest that bangladesh's rice production may decrease by 8% by 2050 due to the effects of climate change , including increased salinity levels along the coast .

in some areas — particularly the north — droughts already seem to be becoming more common , and rising salinity levels in the barisal division in the southwest has made agriculture unprofitable , resulting in internal migration , particularly to dhaka .

the ministry of food monitors the government's rice reserves — which are meant to provide price support to rice farmers , if need be — but the reserves have decreased during the last year , in part because of a government - imposed 25% import duty .

in june 2017 , the government lowered the duty to 10% , following flash floods and an outbreak of rice - blast disease that led to soaring rice prices .

originally , the higher - rate rice duty was imposed to protect farmers from cheap indian rice .

in bangladesh , waterways and rivers are used as transportation networks , and some projects — including one from the world bank — have worked to ensure that these waterways remain resilient to the potential effects of climate change .

recently , because of seasonal changes in water levels , bangladesh's government has resorted to dredging to keep waterways open .

for instance , the gorai river is a major source of freshwater for southwest bangladesh , and it collects water from the ganges .

yet , during the dry months , the gorai becomes disconnected from the ganges , causing a decrease in its freshwater flow .

the government launched the gorai river restoration project in 2009 to dredge and , ultimately , reconnect the two rivers .

however , as of april 2017 , some accounts suggest that the project has not been particularly successful .

positioned at the intersection of india , china , southeast asia , and the bay of bengal , bangladesh occupies a geo - strategically important location — not only to the south asian sub - region , but also to asia as a whole .

when bangladesh gained independence in 1971 , it weakened pakistan's position relative to india and set the stage for india to play a larger role beyond south asia .

some analysts also have pointed to the area's growing importance as a result of china's belt and road initiative — previously known as the one belt , one road initiative — which emphasizes energy investments , trade and transit linkages throughout the region .

india and china , according to some observers , are competing for influence in bangladesh , leading to an uptick in sino - indo tensions .

india , for instance , reportedly is worried that sino - bangladeshi energy cooperation has come to exceed indo - bangladeshi energy cooperation .

bangladesh's foreign policy seeks to promote trade , economic development , and diplomatic linkages .

dhaka is a member of the organization of islamic cooperation and values close ties with muslim states , but it remains a relatively moderate muslim nation .

bangladesh also is a member of the south asia association for regional cooperation and the bay of bengal initiative for multi - sectoral technical and economic cooperation , which aims to foster regional collaboration on trade , poverty reduction , and efforts to counter transnational crime and terrorism .

additionally , bangladesh is a member of the bangladesh - china - india myanmar ( bcim ) group — which has proposed an economic corridor to connect kolkata , india , with kunming , china , to facilitate a more integrated regional economy .

the group has , however , struggled with internal conflicts — especially between china and india — over market access and trade deficits .

increasingly , according to observers , china and india are competing for influence in bangladesh , particularly over trade and energy routes in the region .

in 2015 , indian prime minister narendra modi visited bangladesh , leading to a 65-point joint declaration that addressed several issues , including cooperation on energy , "cross border transport connectivity," and "zero tolerance" for terrorism or extremism .

the joint declaration "recalled with gratitude india's enormous contribution to the glorious liberation war of bangladesh in 1971. .

also , during the 2015 summit , bangladesh and india signed an agreement clarifying their common border , thereby removing a source of tension between the two countries .

historically , india has been more supportive of al governments , given their more secularist outlooks .

india has long been concerned about migrants illicitly crossing into its northeast from bangladesh .

judging from past estimates , since 1971 , about 12 million illegal bangladeshi migrants have arrived in northeast india .

other estimates put the number of illegal bangladeshi migrants in india between 20 and 30 million .

in 2014 , over $4 billion in remittances came to bangladesh from india .

india also has expressed concerns about militant groups using bangladesh as a "springboard for attacks in its territory. .

indian railways , a state - owned company , has been pushing for an "iron silk road" — or a freight corridor connecting the two countries and the wider region .

the initiative is , according to some , aimed at countering china's growing strategic influence in south asia .

yet constructing railways between the two countries has at times proven difficult because there is little available free land .

in april 2017 , prime minister hasina visited india to meet with modi .

their two governments signed 22 agreements — including ones dealing with arms sales — and india extended a $4.5 billion "concessional credit line to bangladesh for priority infrastructure projects. .

however , water rights between the two countries remain a point of contention , particularly regarding the teesta river , which flows through both states .

during bangladesh's war of independence from pakistan , china supported pakistan , but in recent years , bangladesh and china have strengthened their ties .

some commentators in bangladesh favor pursuing closer ties with china to balance bangladesh's relationship with india , while others place greater emphasis on pursuing such ties alongside deeper linkages with india and others .

bangladesh became a full member of the conference on interaction and confidence building measures in asia ( cica ) — which focuses primarily on regional security cooperation — in may 2014 .

china and russia are considered the "dual cores" of the organization ; the united states is an observer , but not an official cica member .

the relatively low cost of labor in bangladesh may make it an increasingly important component of chinese value chains .

in 2014 , china announced plans to contribute $40 billion to establish a "silk road infrastructure fund to boost connectivity" throughout asia , and the china development bank announced plans to invest $890 billion in hundreds of belt and road initiative ( bri ) projects in 60 countries .

bangladesh figures into china's bri , in part through its membership in the bcim group , and the two countries recently agreed to enhance their ties to the strategic partnership level .

in october 2016 , during chinese president xi jinping's visit to bangladesh , the two countries signed several investment deals totaling $13.6 billion — much of it going to infrastructure projects , including railway construction .

already , china is financing and building the padma bridge , bangladesh's largest infrastructure project .

china also is building a network of ports in the indian ocean region .

previously , bangladesh did not pursue negotiations with china about an $8 billion deep water port in sonadia .

instead , dhaka chose a japanese - financed port project .

as part of the project , japan proposed to finance and build a seaport at matarbari — which is located about 16 miles from sonadia — along with 4 power plants .

japan has signed agreements with bangladesh , financing several infrastructure projects , including the jamuna railway bridge and a "mass rapid - transit system in dhaka. .

according to some observers , japan may be trying to "counter the deepening chinese influence in the indian ocean region. .

china is bangladesh's largest trading partner and supplier of military equipment .

from 2009 to 2013 , according to the stockholm international peace research institute ( sipri ) , 82% of bangladesh's arms purchases were from china .

in 2016 , china delivered two ming - class submarines to bangladesh .

a former admiral in india's navy called the submarine deal a "provocation. .

