there is no statutory definition of homeland security that reflects the breadth of the enterprise as currently understood .

although there is a federal department of homeland security , it is neither solely dedicated to homeland security missions , nor is it the only part of the federal government with significant responsibilities in this arena .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) was established by the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) , which was signed into law on november 25 , 2002 .

the new department was assembled from components pulled from 22 different government agencies and began official operations on march 1 , 2003 .

since then , dhs has undergone a series of restructurings and reorganizations to improve its effectiveness and efficiency .

although dhs does include many of the homeland security functions of the federal government , several of these functions or parts of these functions remain at their original executive branch agencies and departments , including the departments of justice , state , defense , and transportation .

not all of the missions of dhs are officially "homeland security" missions .

some components have historical missions that do not directly relate to conventional homeland security definitions , such as the coast guard's environmental and boater safety missions , and congress has in the past debated whether fema and its disaster relief and recovery missions belong in the department .

some criminal justice elements could arguably be included in a broad definition of homeland security .

issues such as the role of the military in law enforcement , monitoring and policing transfers of money , human trafficking , explosives and weapons laws , and aspects of foreign policy , trade , and economics have implications for homeland security policy .

rather than trying to resolve the question of what is and is not homeland security , this report is a survey of issues that have come up in the context of homeland security policy debates .

it is neither exhaustive nor exclusive in its scope , but representative of the broad array of issues likely to be taken up in one way or another by congress in the coming months .

after initial discussion of the definitions of homeland security , the homeland security budget , and the role of homeland security actors in the intelligence community , the report groups the issues into four general themes: counterterrorism and security management ; border security and trade ; disaster preparedness , response , and recovery ; and dhs management issues as each topic under these themes is introduced , the author of the section is listed , along with their contact information .

in many cases , a specific crs report is highlighted as a source of more detailed information .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in emergency management and homeland security policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for more information , see crs report r42644 , department of homeland security: fy2013 appropriations .

title i of the homeland security appropriations bill contains the funding for the primary management functions of dhs .

originally envisioned as a skeleton staff , the headquarters and management functions have grown in response to criticism of the department's ability to effectively oversee its own activities .

in debates over departmental funding , questioning the size and effectiveness of the department's management cadre is a common theme .

in fy2003 , the first year of dhs operations , $195 million was provided for management accounts .

in fy2015 , those accounts were funded at $743 million .

this growth is due to several factors , including increases in staff size required to perform oversight functions , rising personnel costs , technology investments , and increasing real estate expenses for the department's headquarters offices .

in recent years , these accounts have been requested at higher levels than might otherwise be expected due to the inclusion of significant capital initiatives , such as headquarters consolidation and data center migration in these accounts , and personnel initiatives aimed at boosting the department's cadre of acquisition oversight staff and reducing the number of contractors in sensitive positions .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in emergency management and homeland security policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) one of the unresolved debates from the development of dhs was how extensive the involvement would be of departmental management in the functioning of departmental components .

some policy experts supported a strong management function , which would replace the leadership of the components , while others supported a smaller management function that allowed components to function freely in their areas of expertise much as they had before .

once the department was established , it became clear that a small management cadre could not provide adequate coordination of policy or oversight of the department .

the benefits of coordinated action by a large organization , including setting operational and budgetary priorities , were being lost due to the lack of strong leadership .

as its components continued to perform their missions , the department undertook efforts to establish a unified identity and way of doing business .

the term "one dhs" was used to describe these initiatives under tom ridge , the first secretary of the department , and the efforts continued through secretaries michael chertoff and janet napolitano .

on april 22 , 2014 , months into his tenure as the fourth secretary of dhs , jeh johnson issued a memorandum to dhs leadership , entitled "strengthening departmental unity of effort. .

this now - widely circulated memorandum set out an agenda to reform the department of homeland security way of doing business by implementing new analytical and decisionmaking processes to develop strategy , plan , and identify joint requirements .

these would bring component leadership together above the component level to ensure unity of effort across the department .

secretary johnson described it this way in a federal times interview: we've embarked on a unity of effort initiative that promotes greater coordination among department , greater centralized decision - making at headquarters , a more strategic approach to our budget building process , a more strategic departmentwide approach to our acquisition strategy .

it is clearly a balance .

within the department of homeland security there are components that long predated the department of homeland security .

and so what we are not asking components to do is to all act and behave together .

they are distinct cultures... .

but what we are asking and expecting our component leadership to do is participate with us in a more strategic approach to promote greater efficiency in how we operate , how we conduct ourselves , particularly in our budget process and in our acquisitions .

the memorandum laid out four areas of initial focus .

the first was to bring together senior leaders of the department in two groups: a senior leaders council to discuss "overall policy , strategy , operations and departmental guidance," and a deputies management action group ( dmag ) to "advance joint requirements development , program and budget review , acquisition reform , operational planning , and joint operations. .

the second area was to make improvements to the departmental management processes for investments .

specifically , incorporating strategic analysis and joint requirements planning into the annual budget development process , directing the dmag to develop and facilitate a component - driven joint requirements process , and reviewing and updating the dhs acquisition oversight framework .

the third was developing a stronger strategy , planning , and analytic capability within the office of policy .

the fourth was to improve coordination of cross - component operations .

bipartisan support for these reforms was shown in several hearings in the 113 th congress , and the fy2015 homeland security appropriations act included funding requested for this initiative .

both house and senate appropriations committee reports included language supportive of the department's managerial reorganization .

several of the action items included in the memorandum were completed in 2014 , such as the establishment of a cost analysis division in the office of the chief financial officer in may 2014 .

the role of this division is to ensure life - cycle cost estimates are part of major acquisition plans .

dhs also completed development of a southern border and approaches campaign plan — a four - year strategic framework for joint operations securing the southern border of the united states .

the department is continuing to seek legislation to authorize certain aspects of the proposed reforms , and to help make permanent other changes .

congress may wish to consider these requests , potentially debating the appropriate role of departmental level management at dhs , and monitor the progress of management reforms to see how they are proceeding and whether they are having the desired effect .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in emergency management and homeland security policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) from its inception , dhs has faced financial management challenges .

transferring components and their budgets between agencies is a complex process in the best of situations , but doing it in the process of establishing a new department that is performing important national security missions from its first day of operations adds additional complexity .

this was further compounded by inherited financial management problems that existed at several major legacy components , including the coast guard , fema , and elements that formed ice .

the department tried to develop its own financial management system in - house through a project known as "emerge2," but failed .

a second attempt was made to implement a department - wide system through contracting with outside developers under the transformation and systems consolidation initiative , or tasc .

after gao ruled that dhs had improperly awarded the initial $450 million contract — the latest result from a series of protests and legal challenges that had delayed the project — the award was cancelled and the project shelved .

although the department has been on the gao high risk list since it was created , progress has been made on reducing the number of material weaknesses in the department's financial controls .

fy2012 was the first year since its establishment that dhs was able to complete a qualified audit of all its financial statements .

the independent auditor noted five deficiencies in internal controls that were significant enough to be considered material weaknesses: financial reporting ; information technology controls and financial system functionality ; property , plant and equipment ; environmental and other liabilities ; and budgetary accounting .

in fy2013 , dhs was able to complete another qualified audit , and the number of material weaknesses dropped to four with the resolution of "environmental and other liabilities. .

in fy2014 dhs sustained that progress and obtained a clean opinion on all its financial statements for the first time in its history .

the dhs office of inspector general termed it "a significant achievement that built on previous years' successes," but noted the four deficiencies in internal control remained .

the oig noted that: in fy2015 and beyond , dhs' continuing challenge will be to sustain its progress in achieving an unmodified opinion on its financial statements and avoid slipping backward .

to sustain its clean opinion on financial statements and obtain an unqualified ( clean ) opinion on its internal control over financial reporting , the department must continue its remediation efforts and stay focused .

the 114 th congress will likely continue its interest in dhs's efforts to improve its internal financial systems , given the relative size of the department's budget , the interest expressed in this issue by authorizing committee leadership , and the current drive for stricter budgetary oversight .

these issues could be examined at the department , component , or program level .

oversight might include a review of the internal financial and administrative controls in the administration of specific grant programs , and improper payments made under the programs .

consideration of the internal financial and management controls might include the extent to which dhs is complying with existing control standards , penalties for noncompliance , and whether the standards should be adjusted to account for any unique elements in the dhs programs .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in emergency management and homeland security policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for additional information , see crs report r42753 , dhs headquarters consolidation project: issues for congress .

the department of homeland security's headquarters footprint occupies more than 7 million square feet of office space in about 50 separate locations in the greater washington , dc , area .

this is largely a legacy of how the department was assembled in a short period of time from 22 separate federal agencies which were themselves spread across the national capital region .

the fragmentation of headquarters is cited by the department as a major contributor to inefficiencies , including time lost shuttling staff between headquarters elements ; additional security , real estate , and administrative costs ; and reduced cohesion among the components that make up the department .

to unify the department's headquarters functions , the department approved a $3.4 billion master plan to create a new dhs headquarters on the grounds of st. elizabeths in anacostia .

according to gsa , this is the largest federal office construction since the pentagon was built during world war ii .

$1.4 billion of this project was to be funded through the dhs budget , and $2 billion through the gsa .

thus far a total of over $1.75 billion has been appropriated for the project — $543 million for dhs and $1,207 million to gsa through fy2015 .

phase 1a of the project — a new coast guard headquarters facility — has been completed with the funding already provided by congress and is now in use .

in 2013 , a revised construction schedule was developed , projecting lower levels of appropriations and a longer timeline for the project .

under the new projection , the project would be completed in fy2026 at a cost of $4.5 billion .

the project was criticized by gao in september 2014 for not conforming to certain leading practices for capital decisionmaking processes .

dhs and gsa revised its plans as a result of similar observations by gao and other critics , announcing a new plan that would be completed in fy2021 , and cost $3.7 billion .

according to gsa , even with the cost increases from delaying funding , the project would still result in over $430 million in projected savings compared to leasing over the next 30 years .

this estimate does not take into account the costs gsa would have to incur to stabilize and maintain the st. elizabeths campus if the project were halted , or the efficiencies for dhs that a consolidated headquarters would generate .

with the coast guard now operating from st. elizabeths , the discussion in congress becomes less about whether to proceed with consolidation at st. elizabeths , but how .

whether the new headquarters consolidation plan conforms to best practices identified by gao and the realities of the budget situation are topics that the 114 th congress may explore .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

for appropriations information , see the section on "departmental management and operations" in crs report r43796 , department of homeland security: fy2015 appropriations .

an essential consideration underlying the mission and performance of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is human resource management ( hrm ) .

responsibility for hrm is vested in the office of the chief human capital officer ( ochco ) , an entity organizationally and for appropriations purposes located within the under secretary for management .

the ochco plays a critical role in supporting and executing the department's "strategic plan for fiscal years 2012-2016. .

the current chief human capital officer assumed the position on august 4 , 2011 , and with the change in the appointment from political to career status , is the first career member of the senior executive service to hold the office .

during the 114 th congress , the house of representatives and the senate may conduct oversight of personnel issues at dhs .

among the matters that may be considered are those related to succession management ; employee morale ; the loaned executive program ; the use of digital technology to train , and recruit and retain employees ; and veteran employment policies .

each of these issues is briefly discussed below .

hearings conducted by the house of representatives and the senate related to dhs appropriations or management matters could include review of these issues .

each may , during public service recognition week , the value of public service is discussed and the work of public servants , including federal employees , is highlighted and honored .

this observance would provide an occasion for congress to annually review human resources management at the department , either through meetings with dhs officials and the chco or an oversight hearing .

such activities could supplement congressional review and oversight of the ochco and current and developing hrm policies at dhs , throughout the year .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

over the last several years , some attention has focused on the department of homeland security's difficulties in retaining rank and file and senior employees and vacancies in its executive positions .

this discussion , coupled with the circumstance of the upcoming november 2016 presidential election , may prompt dhs to review its policies and procedures for succession planning .

according to the office of personnel management ( opm ) , a strategic succession planning system involves "planning , designing , implementing , and evaluating succession management programs" to strengthen the "current and future organizational leadership capacity" of an agency .

opm defines succession management as a systematic approach for: shaping the leadership culture .

building a leadership pipeline / talent pool to ensure leadership continuity .

developing potential successors whose strengths will best fit with the agency's needs .

identifying the best candidates for categories of positions .

concentrating resources on the talent development process , yielding a greater return on investment .

congress has conducted review and oversight of policies and procedures for succession planning at dhs before , as part of the presidential transition process .

for example , the senate subcommittee on oversight of government management , the federal workforce , and the district of columbia of the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs conducted a hearing on september 18 , 2008 , prior to the 2008 presidential election , related to presidential transition .

dhs under secretary for management elaine duke testified about the department's succession planning activities .

she told the committee that the dhs transition efforts began in spring 2007 , and involved "identifying critical positions that support component priorities and using our own critical position succession planning template to ensure a pipeline of successors to critical positions , which are viewed as corporate assets and monitored on a regular basis. .

she also noted that , "components identified senior career civil servants who will assume responsibility for political positions during the time of transition" and "identified key competencies needed for success in these positions , assessed successor pools , prepared development plans , assessed our ability to recruit externally , and identified critical positions that are vacant or have high succession risk. .

a september 24 , 2008 , hearing conducted by the house subcommittee on government management , organization , and procurement of the committee on oversight and government reform included discussions of transition planning at dhs , aspects of which relate to succession management .

the subcommittee received testimony from doris hausser who represented a panel of the national academy of public administration ( napa ) and highlighted recommendations for a comprehensive transition program that were discussed in the napa report entitled "addressing the 2009 presidential transition at the department of homeland security. .

among those recommendations were actions to occur during the period preceding the national party conventions , including that all critical non - career executive positions be identified ; a transition training plan with objectives , time frames , participants and resources be developed ; and training for career executives to service in new roles during transition be implemented .

however , the department's "strategic plan fiscal years 2012-2016" and the dhs congressional submission that accompanied the fy2016 budget proposal do not specifically mention succession planning .

a search of the dhs website did not reveal a publicly available succession plan or the critical position succession planning template mentioned during the 2008 senate hearing .

congress may be interested in re - examining policies on succession management ( both outside of and during a presidential transition ) within dhs , including the department's plans to review and update its succession plans , transition plans for executive positions , transition training programs for career executives , and the operation of the rotation program .

the house of representatives and the senate could include a provision in the annual dhs appropriations bill directing that certain hrm policy documents , such as those related to succession management , be easily accessible on the ochco webpage .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

concerns about the morale of dhs employees have persisted since the department was created .

the responses provided by department employees to the annual employee viewpoint survey conducted by the office of personnel management are regularly examined as evidence of that dissatisfaction .

in particular , nine questions in the survey solicit employee views on "my satisfaction. .

the 2014 survey results ( the most recent available ) reveal a continuing decline in dhs employee satisfaction .

responses on two of the questions illustrate this .

the question on how satisfied employees were with their jobs solicited these views from some 40,110 employees: "very satisfied" or "satisfied" ( 53.1% ) , "neither satisfied nor dissatisfied" ( 20.9% ) , or "dissatisfied" or "very dissatisfied" ( 26% ) .

the question on how satisfied those employees were with their organization solicited these views from some 40,203 employees: "very satisfied" or "satisfied" ( 41.7% ) , "neither satisfied nor dissatisfied" ( 23.1% ) , or "dissatisfied" or "very dissatisfied" ( 35.1% ) .

for both questions , the "very satisfied" or "satisfied" responses were lower than , and the "dissatisfied" or "very dissatisfied" responses were higher than , the 2012 and 2013 survey results for these questions .

in july 2014 , opm released a new data tool , unlock talent.gov , that will enable dhs to customize the employee viewpoint survey data for its employees and examine the responses in more detail .

over the last several years , dhs has sought to address the morale issue by commissioning studies or undertaking specific initiatives .

the studies were listed in a washington post news report .

on october 9 , 2014 , secretary jeh johnson directed the homeland security advisory council to establish a dhs employee morale task force to "provide recommendations on how to improve employee morale throughout the dhs enterprise. .

task force findings and recommendations are to be submitted to the council by july 2015 , and are to be deliberated and voted on by the council during a public meeting .

the approved report is then to be sent to the secretary .

a december 2012 , report on "federal employee engagement," published by the merit systems protection board ( mspb ) included recommendations related to job characteristics and rewards to increase employee engagement government - wide .

for the job component these included that employees be assigned "work that they find interesting and meaningful , and which allows them to perform a variety of tasks that require a wide range of knowledge , skills , and abilities. .

ensuring that rewards are administered "in a fair and transparent manner" was one of the suggestions for the rewards component .

the house of representatives and senate hearings in the 113 th congress that were mentioned in " succession management ," above , also included discussions of employee morale within the department .

the house committee on homeland security hearing conducted on december 12 , 2013 , received testimony from max stier , president and ceo of the partnership for public service , that included , among other recommendations , that dhs modify the performance plans for its senior leaders to ensure that they are held accountable for improving employee engagement and solicit support and ideas from the labor unions that represent its workers "to improve employee morale in the agency. .

during the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs hearing on his nomination as secretary , jen johnson expressed his views on the issue: when it comes to morale , in my experience , you remind people of the importance of the mission , you remind people that they are serving the nation .

these are things that i think touch a lot of people at their core .

i also recognize from experience that morale is driven in large part by just basic economic issues .

when somebody has not had a pay raise in a long time and they are threatened with sequestration or government shutdown , that [sic] it takes its toll .

so i expect to address morale , but there are limits to what you can do without giving people some basic relief .

congress may follow the activities of the task force and review the council's report when it is submitted to the secretary .

separately , the department's performance plans for senior leaders and policies on job characteristics and rewards could be examined by the house of representatives and the senate to determine whether any administrative or statutory changes may be needed to facilitate dhs employee engagement .

the department's efforts to use the unlocktalent.gov data tool to better understand the views of its employees and its work to partner with labor organizations to improve employee morale could also be considered .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

executives from the private sector may share their expertise with dhs for a limited time period under the department's loaned executive program .

established in 2008 by the private sector office , the program allows the senior officials "to fill special , discrete needs" related to homeland security and "partner with" the department to "solve problems , improve processes," and assist in fulfilling the dhs mission .

according to dhs , a loaned executive will "serve as a subject matter expert and senior advisor to dhs leadership," "evaluate and provide assessments on existing policies , procedures , and training," and "provide guidance on the public - private partnership model and implementation of strategies designed to improve private sector engagement. .

an executive may be appointed to serve for at least three months , but no longer than one year .

the individual may be reappointed , but the total appointment cannot exceed two years .

an executive's private sector employer pays the salary and expenses ; the federal government does not pay any compensation to the executive .

six loaned executives began six - month assignments as senior advisors to the transportation security administration and u.s. customs and border protection on november 14 , 2014 .

their duties include "site visits" at the chicago o'hare , john f. kennedy international , los angeles international , miami international , and newark liberty international airports .

the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) planned to use a loaned executive "to provide individual advice to ... fema region viii on supporting the restoration of lifeline functions immediately following a catastrophic earthquake along the wasatch fault in utah. .

congress may wish to examine the operation of the loaned executive program , including results expected and achieved to date , the working relationships between the loaned executives and senior executives and career employees in the department , and plans for the use of additional loaned executives by dhs components .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

the use of digital technology to facilitate training , and recruitment and retention , and support the management and development of the federal workforce continues to be of interest to federal executives .

for example , in january 2015 , the national academy of public administration and icf international reported on the views of randomly selected senior federal civil servants , referred to as "federal leaders," who were surveyed on issues related to digital technology and the federal government .

the survey defined digital technology as "technology that systemically connects people with each other and with information ( data or content ) .

this includes transactional services ( online forms , benefits applications , e - commerce ) across a variety of devices ( mobile , tablet , desktop ) , and delivery mechanisms ( websites , mobile applications , and social media ) . .

the views of the federal leaders were obtained through an online survey that included approximately 50 questions , some of which solicited "open - ended responses. .

a total of 510 respondents completed the survey for a response rate of 5.7% and an overall margin of error of + / - 4.2 percentage points .

a part of the survey included questions related to workforce training , recruiting , and retention and revealed the following views: 76% of federal leaders responded that "they are adequately trained to take advantage of digital technologies in the workplace" ; 36% believed that "their agency's employees are adequately trained. .

the lack of skilled employees was considered "to be one of the top 5 barriers ... to better implementing digital technology in the workplace. .

43% of federal leaders responded that their agency had created offices or positions to assist in implementing new digital technology ; 58% of respondents who have a role in procuring digital technology reported that such offices or positions had been established .

33% of federal leaders responded that the use of digital technology in their agency "had a positive impact on recruiting and retention" ; less than 25% of respondents viewed the use of digital technology "as a recruiting and retention competitive advantage. .

the report recommended that agencies "invest in , develop , and implement training" both on new technology and "to reinforce the use of existing technologies" ; use a "a blended approach" for the training "that mixes classroom with online courses , mobile - learning , and on - the - job - training" ; and jointly convene interagency groups of the chief human capital officers council and the chief information officers council "to discuss lessons learned and share best practices" as training programs are developed and new positions and offices are established .

a search of the dhs website and the google and proquest databases did not reveal publicly available information on the department's specific use of digital technology for training , and recruitment and retention .

the annual federal employee viewpoint survey conducted by the office of personnel management includes a question on how satisfied federal employees are with the training that they receive for their present jobs .

some 40,136 dhs employees responded to this question on the 2014 survey and expressed the views that they were either "very satisfied" or "satisfied" ( 43.6% ) , "neither satisfied nor dissatisfied" ( 23.6% ) , and "dissatisfied" or "very dissatisfied" ( 32.9% ) with the training provided to them .

congress may examine the use of digital technology for training , and recruitment and retention , at the department , including specific examples of its current use , plans for future applications of technology for these purposes , and human resources information technology implementation and activities at dhs .

[author name scrubbed] , analyst in american national government ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) .

assisting veterans , who are transitioning from military to civilian life , in applying their skills and experiences in the federal workplace is a priority for the obama administration .

on november 9 , 2009 , the president issued executive order 13518 on "employment of veterans in the federal government. .

the executive order established an interagency council on veterans employment to , among other duties , "advise and assist the president and the director of opm in establishing a coordinated government - wide effort to increase the number of veterans employed by the federal government by enhancing recruitment and training" and participate in a veterans employment initiative to promote employment opportunities .

the executive order prescribed specific responsibilities for opm and several departments , including the department of homeland security .

it directed dhs , joined by the departments of defense , labor , and veterans affairs , and in consultation with opm , to "develop and implement counseling and training programs to align veterans' and transitioning service members' skills and career aspirations to federal employment opportunities , targeting federal occupations that are projected to have heavy recruitment needs. .

the department's website has a page on "veterans and homeland security" and states that veterans comprise 25% ( 50,000 employees ) of the civilian workforce at dhs .

the dhs congressional justification that accompanied the fy2016 budget proposal includes the hiring of veterans as a management measure and continues the performance goal of 25% of dhs total new hires being veterans , which has been in place since fy2013 .

the congressional justification states that the target was exceeded in fy2014 , when 27.6% of the department's new hires were veterans .

congress may be interested in examining the department's existing policies and planned initiatives on the hiring of veterans , including the types of positions for which veterans are being recruited , the targets for hiring of veterans by dhs components , and the results , realized and expected , by the department in carrying out the responsibilities assigned to it by the executive order .

[author name scrubbed] , specialist in science and technology policy ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for more information , see crs report r43064 , the dhs s&t directorate: selected issues for congress .

many stakeholders have identified advances in research and development ( r&d ) as key to creating new or improved technologies that defend against homeland security threats .

r&d is generally a multi - year endeavor with significant risk of failure .

additionally , it may take years to realize any benefits from r&d investments .

some congressional and stakeholder expectations regarding the effectiveness and efficiency of agency performance have not been met .

the 114 th congress may continue to focus attention on whether investments in homeland security research and development net appropriate rewards , how the distribution of investments among homeland security topics and between r&d activities leads to a balanced portfolio , and what the appropriate funding level for dhs r&d is during a time of fiscal constraint .

the dhs homeland security r&d activities have substantial scope , as these activities must attempt to meet the needs both of dhs component agencies and of other customers outside the agency , such as first responders .

many stakeholders continue to debate the optimal approach to maximizing dhs r&d effectiveness .

some advocates call for substantial increases in particular areas of research and development , asserting that a dedicated research effort with significant investments is more likely to yield technology breakthroughs .

some stakeholders call for a rebalancing of the investment portfolio with an increased focus on technology development , arguing that many prototypes under development in the private sector need only a small boost to convert them to procurable technologies .

still other stakeholders call for a rebalancing of the investment portfolio towards long - term research activities , warning that dhs will lack research outcomes to develop into prototypes if long - term research languishes .

finally , portions of the stakeholder community suggest using a high - risk , high - reward investment strategy similar to that undertaken by the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) so as to make "leap - ahead" advances relative to terrorist capabilities .

dhs is not the sole provider of federal funds for homeland security r&d , but the dhs under secretary for science and technology ( s&t ) is responsible for coordinating homeland security r&d activities within dhs and across the federal government .

the under secretary for s&t has experienced challenges in attempting to coordinate these activities and has not issued a federal homeland security r&d strategy .

a key barrier to coordination of r&d investment within dhs and across the broader federal effort is difficulty in identifying r&d activities across dhs .

congress has historically been interested in identifying and overcoming the barriers to such coordination .

the 114 th congress may conduct oversight of how any new strategic approaches taken by dhs address these long - standing concerns , set milestones for future performance , and meet the needs of dhs components and the first - responder community .

both the administration and congress have previously contemplated reorganizing dhs r&d activities .

r&d reprioritization efforts and consolidation might change the productivity of dhs r&d activities , which have been criticized by some stakeholders as having little to show for the federal investment .

other stakeholders , including some representatives of dhs operational components , indicate that r&d efforts undertaken by the s&t directorate have yielded value .

congressional appropriations for the s&t directorate have fluctuated in recent years .

this may indicate that some congressional policymakers find the slow rate of return shown by s&t directorate r&d investments unacceptable .

