a full list of the damaging biological and economic effects of invasive plants and animals risks sounding like hyperbole .

it includes loss of western rangelands to invasive plants , blockage of power plant intakes to invasive mussels , and major declines of birds and mammals to invasive snakes in the everglades .

so vast is this "bioinvasion" ( as some have termed it ) that only rough estimates can be made of the numbers of non - native species now in north america or in the rest of the world .

moreover , despite a few rare successes , eradication of these species , once they become established , is extremely improbable .

but because of the number and variety of non - native species , it is unclear how best to manage or prevent these effects or what legislation would be needed to address these problems .

laws concerning wild plants and animals do not form a comprehensive body at the federal level .

under the u.s. system , inherited from english legal tradition , the government regulates the taking of native wild animals generally while landowners control the native ( and other ) plants growing on their lands .

thus , colonial governments regulated native wild animals ( to the extent there was regulation of the take of wild animals at all ) and , after the u.s. constitution was ratified , states retained the rights they had as colonies to control the wildlife within their boundaries .

with states retaining the regulation of wildlife , the majority of wild plant and animal species are not federal responsibilities under current law .

moreover , because the problem of invasive species presents itself as a series of seemingly disconnected crises , legislation has become a patchwork , enacted as each crisis was addressed .

the absence of a general federal responsibility for wildlife affects the federal role in addressing invasive species .

a local or state government , faced with the recent arrival of a new invasive species—whether terrestrial , freshwater , or marine ; plant or animal ; agricultural pest or recreational nuisance—has no single source to query to begin its response or guide it through a maze of options .

moreover , federal help , especially any timely help in the weeks or months after initial discovery , is rare to nonexistent and , if forthcoming , focuses more on information and less on practical assistance .

the national invasive species council ( nisc ) was created by executive order 13112 in 1999 , and has addressed some aspects of the invasive species problem .

it has taken steps toward sharing more information across governments and with the public .

nisc asks specific agencies to take the lead in developing policies within their existing legislative mandates .

in its 2008-2012 report , nisc outlined a set of actions to address the bulk of existing problems .

these actions include developing legislative proposals to fill gaps in current law .

however , legislative efforts to date have tended to focus on well - established problems: the invasion of a single species , a specific pathway of introduction , or damage or risks to agriculture .

federal laws have tended to focus on black lists ( anything not on the list is allowed ) in contrast to white lists ( anything not on the list is excluded ) .

each requires some , or even considerable , knowledge of the species to be listed to predict the likelihood of invasion .

a black list can be prepared in various ways , but usually it is made up of species already shown to cause serious damage to fisheries , endangered species , or ( especially ) agriculture .

this evidence may be based on experience with the species domestically or in other countries .

preventing the spread of the species after it enters the united states may rely on public education , penalties for shippers , monitoring , and other means .

in general , black lists require time to gather information on the damage created by the species and then proceed through a regulatory response .

this approach allows more flexibility for industries that depend on the importation of new species of plants or animals .

black lists do not readily address introductions by persons who are unaware that they are bringing in non - native organisms .

with the white list approach , there is an attempt to predict potential harm before a species' arrival .

the prediction would be based on known characteristics of a species , such as how it reproduces , the number of seeds or offspring , etc .

any species not on the list would be excluded .

the mongoose , for example , has a history of becoming a pest on islands where it has been introduced .

it seems unlikely that the mongoose would ever be placed on a ( white ) list of allowable species .

in contrast , new varieties of orchids , sheep , tulips , or any other species with a long track record in this country likely would gain admission .

the existence of a list , whether white or black , implies that importers actually know they are importing living organisms .

an effort to prevent unintentional introductions would be compatible with any shade of list or no list at all .

potential pathways for unintentional introductions continue to be discovered , and there are likely other pathways yet to be determined .

federal laws concerning invasive species form a patchwork , stronger in some areas , such as agriculture and ballast water , and weaker or absent in other areas .

current laws do not clearly address prevention of biological invasion across foreseeable pathways ( with the exception of ship ballast water ) ; or early detection and rapid response ( edrr ) before the establishment of the new species , when the focus of effort shifts from less expensive prevention to more expensive and less efficient control .

coordination of current efforts alone means that gaps will remain if they are due to lack of coverage by existing laws or agency jurisdiction .

congress could choose to address these gaps either by explicitly delegating such authority to the president or by crafting legislation .

nisc has become the focus for federal efforts to control and prevent invasive species affecting a broad range of industries or ecosystems .

however , gaps in authorities or shortages of personnel that have hampered efforts to limit the entrance of and damage from invasive species continue .

four agencies have had major roles in addressing invasive species for many years: animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) , u.s. army corps of engineers , fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and national marine fisheries service .

yet even for these four agencies , important gaps in their authorities remain .

legislation to address invasive species could take a species - by - species approach , a pathway approach , or a combination of the two .

the species approach implicitly assumes knowledge about a species' risk ( black list ) or safety ( white list ) .

a central dilemma , however , is the difficulty in making this prediction .

moreover , it assumes knowledge that a particular species actually is being imported .

a pathway approach does not assume knowledge about any particular species , only that a particular set of circumstances favors the arrival of unwanted organisms .

some agencies , including aphis and fws , analyze the risk presented by particular species that may become invasive .

however , addressing the multitude of agricultural pests relies on scarce agency resources at aphis .

in addition , fws has been criticized for its slow response to the blacklisting of species under the lacey act .

both agencies would benefit from faster assessments of either species or pathways so they could direct resources to the most critical areas .

regulation by pathway is an approach suited to unintentional or unknowing introductions , as no list needs to be created .

among the most comprehensive pathway approaches to date has been the non - indigenous aquatic nuisance prevention and control act .

its goals put prevention on an equal or higher footing compared with control of species that are already established .

it requires the participation of several federal agencies , promotes research , and implements regulations on the mid - ocean exchange of ballast water and other measures to exclude invasives from u.s. ports .

a review of writings by various specialists in this field suggests a number of areas that might be explored by policymakers .

the list below is compiled from many sources .

not all would require new legislation ; some might benefit from congressional oversight .

research to identify pathways .

research goals in this area might overlap with research designed to prevent certain kinds of security threats and might benefit from cooperation with agencies involved in antiterrorism programs .

expert review of planned releases .

panels of experts might be created to analyze risks and make recommendations on planned releases by governmental or nongovernmental sources into any environment in which species are not native .

according to nisc , steps along these lines are planned .

for instance , experts could provide a public warning on planned releases of exotic grasses by federal agencies or of non - native game fish .

in addition , various exotic plants are proposed as feedstocks for biofuels , and such a release might benefit from expert review .

education al campaign .

an educational campaign to prevent inadvertent acts by the public might help prevent some invasive species introductions .

this type of approach might be particularly effective at preventing releases of exotic pets and aquarium species after the point of sale .

warning list .

an informational warning list ( or gray list ) of species might be created by the collaboration of federal and state agencies .

the warning list might include species currently restricted under state laws , species thought to be newly arrived from other countries , and other species felt to merit special attention by regulators .

although a gray list would lack regulatory force at the federal level , it could be designed to provide information on species whose eradication or control is in its early phases .

review of industries dependent on importing and transferring non - native species .

such a review could include a focus on cooperative methods to reduce releases after the point of sale .

the focus of past efforts has tended to be on the entry of these species into the united states .

to protect their businesses , import - dependent industries naturally have tried to reduce current obstacles and to prevent imposition of new ones .

yet there are other avenues to reduce risk besides prohibition .

these avenues might include incentives for the sale of sterile animals or plants only or efforts to create point - of - sale educational programs about the risk of , or penalties for , releasing pets or plants into the wild .

measures to reduce the risk of exporting invasive species .

the united states might take further internal steps to avoid exporting potentially invasive species to other countries .

these measures could be as simple as preventing their accidental export in bilateral aid programs or certifying that identified u.s. products ( eg , used tires ) are free of pests .

such certification is done for agricultural shipments .

a review might examine disaster aid and emergency relief , for example ; in the rush to provide humanitarian relief , shipments of supplies , equipment , and personnel may inadvertently introduce diseases or pests unknown in the receiving country .

because such supplies sometimes are prepared for shipment in advance , they could be examined to reduce the risk of such transfers .

multi - agency federal or cooperative center for first - strike prevention and control .

since the creation of nisc , agencies have begun to respond across a broad front in the days , weeks , or months after an invasion is discovered .

nisc is beginning to model its efforts on interagency fire management , a federal program that has long faced similar issues .

it seems possible that a similar center devoted to first - strike prevention and control of invasive species , regardless of affected industry , ecosystem , or lead agency , could provide critical support at a time when eradication of a new animal or plant invader still might be possible .

these options are not mutually exclusive .

they likely would be under the jurisdiction of multiple committees in both the house and senate .

they may offer opportunities for savings both to the economy and to ecosystems .

