during its development , the u.s. navy's unmanned carrier launched airborne surveillance and strike ( uclass ) aircraft and its predecessors have been proposed to fill a number of roles and operate in a variety of air defense environments .

the effort to choose among those roles and determine final requirements for the system has led to controversy and delay in executing the program .

members of congress have proposed actions to resolve the requirements issue and allow the program to move ahead .

prepared in response to a specific congressional request , this report details the history of uclass requirements development through the program's evolution to its current stage .

it is based on available open - domain information , which may not agree in all particulars with department of defense ( dod ) acquisition documents not available in the public domain .

 table 1 summarizes changes in uclass and predecessor program requirements over time .

in 1999 , the navy and the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) began research into an unmanned combat air vehicle ( ucav ) .

at the same time , the air force and darpa jointly undertook a separate ucav project .

the navy's ucav ( referred to variously as n - ucav and ucav - n ) was designed to fit a relatively small niche .

the navy planned to continue using manned aircraft to suppress enemy air defenses ( sead ) and perform electronic attack .

n - ucav was thus intended "for reconnaissance missions , penetrating protected airspace to identify targets for the attack waves" consisting of manned aircraft .

although the program focused mostly on system studies , northrop grumman independently built a single x - 47a air vehicle , which was tested under the n - ucav program .

first flight took place in february 2003 .

on december 31 , 2002 , the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) issued a program decision memorandum adjusting future funding for both navy and air force ucav development and mandating the services merge their efforts into a joint program .

the defense department recognized the potential for significant synergy by combining the programs , and in 2003 "directed that the programs be consolidated into a joint demonstration program supporting both navy and air force needs. .

the resulting joint unmanned combat air systems ( j - ucas ) program was a darpa - air force - navy effort to demonstrate the technical feasibility , military utility , and operational value of a networked system of high - performance , weaponized unmanned air vehicles .

missions included sead , electronic attack , precision strike , penetrating surveillance / reconnaissance , and persistent global attack .

"the operational focus of this system is on those combat situations and environments that involve deep , denied enemy territory and the requirement for a survivable , persisting combat presence ... operating and surviving in denied airspace. .

three years later , the 2006 quadrennial defense review called for the j - ucas to be terminated .

instead , the air force was to begin developing a new bomber , while the navy was mandated to develop an unmanned longer - range carrier - based aircraft capable of being air - refueled to provide greater standoff capability , to expand payload and launch options , and to increase naval reach and persistence .

that follow - on effort became the navy unmanned combat air system ( n - ucas ) .

given the baseline of being able to operate from aircraft carriers , n - ucas's other requirements looked much like j - ucas , with the desired ability to provide "persistent , penetrating surveillance , and penetrating strike capability in high threat areas" "or suppress enemy air defenses. .

n - ucas had been a development program to determine how to make an unmanned vehicle take on many of the aspects of a manned fighter .

uclass , the unmanned carrier - launched airborne surveillance and strike program , was the navy's way of turning what it had learned from n - ucas into an operational platform "to address a capability gap in sea - based surveillance and to enhance the navy's ability to operate in highly contested environments defended by measures such as integrated air defenses or anti - ship missiles. .

on june 9 , 2011 , the joint requirements oversight council ( jroc ) issued jrocm 087-11 , a memorandum approving the uclass initial capabilities document .

that document stated uclass was to be "a persistent , survivable carrier - based intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance and precision strike asset. .

in preparing for the fy2014 budget submission , the jroc revisited the uclass requirement .

on december 19 , 2012 , the jroc published memoranda 086-12 and 196-12 , which significantly altered "the requirements for uclass , heavily favoring permissive airspace intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance ( isr ) capabilities. .

the change in requirements appeared to be budget - driven .

"the reduction in strike capability of the navy's next generation carrier - based unmanned aerial vehicle was born of fiscal realities , said dyke weatherington , the pentagon's director of unmanned warfare and intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) . .

the navy stated: in support of affordability and adaptability directives , jrocms 086-12 and 196-12 redefined the scope of jrocm 087-11 and affirmed the urgency for a platform that supports missions ranging from permissive counter - terrorism operations , to missions in low - end contested environments , to providing enabling capabilities for high - end denied operations , as well as supporting organic naval missions .

the office of the secretary of defense stated: in a december 2012 memorandum , the jroc emphasized affordability as the number one priority for the program .

the cdd ( capability development document ) established an affordability kpp ( key performance parameter ) in which the recurring fly - away cost of the air vehicles to conduct one 600 nautical mile orbit shall not exceed $150 million .

available funding to complete system development is also limited , pressuring industry to provide mature systems and emphasize cost during development .

on april 17 , 2014 , the navy issued a draft request for proposals ( rfp ) for the uclass system .

the rfp reportedly held to the requirements that , in the government accountability office ( gao ) 's words , "emphasized affordability , timely fielding , and endurance , while deemphasizing the need to operate in highly contested environments. .

the uclass draft rfp is classified .

however , "according to ( chief of naval research radm mathias ) winter , the broad overarching goals of the uclass program are to provide two intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance orbits at 'tactically significant ranges' 24 hours a day , seven days a week over uncontested airspace. .

the uclass would also have a light strike capability to eliminate targets of opportunity .

a press report stated: "the plan here is to provide an early operational capability that will be verified and validated for a light strike permissive environment," ( radm mathias ) winter said .

"what we will ensure is that the design of the system does not preclude what we call capability growth to be able to operate in contested environments. .

uclass is still expected to grow into the missions required before the 2012 jroc memo .

according to the secretary of the navy , " ( t ) he end state is an autonomous aircraft capable of precision strike in a contested environment , and it is expected to grow and expand its missions so that it is capable of extended range intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance , electronic warfare , tanking , and maritime domain awareness. .

the timeline for procurement of uclass is unclear , and the gao has noted that in part due to changes in requirements , uclass has experienced ongoing delays: since our last review in september 2013 , the system's intended mission and required capabilities have come into question , delaying the navy's uclass schedule .

dod has decided to conduct a review of its airborne surveillance systems and the future of the carrier air wing , and has as a result adjusted the program's schedule .

the navy's fiscal year 2016 budget documents reflect these changes , with award of the air system contract now expected to occur in fiscal year 2017 , a delay of around 3 years .

in addition the navy now expects to achieve early operational capability — a uclass system on at least one aircraft carrier — no earlier than fiscal year 2022 , a delay of around 2 years.. .

the schedule in the navy's budget documents show that a milestone a review — the decision to begin technology maturation and risk reduction efforts — is expected to occur in fiscal year 2017 , a delay of around 3 years since our last review .

as the uclass program continues to stretch out across multiple budget years , possibly including further jroc reviews , quadrennial defense reviews , and other changes in dod priorities , it is possible that requirements will evolve further .

