t he economic development administration ( eda ) was created pursuant to the enactment of the public works and economic development act of 1965 , with the objective of fostering growth in economically distressed areas characterized by high levels of unemployment and low per - capita income levels .

federally designated disaster areas and areas affected by military base realignment or closure ( brac ) are also eligible for eda assistance .

eda provides grants for public works , economic adjustment in case of natural disasters or mass layoffs , technical assistance , planning , and research .

the consolidated appropriations act for fy2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) appropriated $250 million in total funding for eda , including $213 million in support of eda programs and activities , and $37 million for salaries and expenses .

on december 18 , 2015 , the president signed the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 , p.l .

114-113 , which appropriated $261 million in total funding for eda , including $222 million for eda programs and activities and $39 million for salaries and expenses .

total funding for fy2016 was 4.4% ( $1.1 million ) higher than the amount appropriated for fy2015 .

fy2016 appropriations included a significant increase ( $5 million ) in the amount of funds targeted to assist coal mining communities and a modest increase ( $2 million ) in funding for planning assistance .

the increased funding for coal - impacted communities and planning assistance was offset by a reduction ( $10 million ) in the amount appropriated for economic adjustment assistance and the zeroing out of funding for activities supporting innovative manufacturing .

the program received an appropriation of $4 million in fy2015 .

the obama administration's fy2016 budget request , which was released on february 2 , 2015 , proposed an increase in total eda funding from $250 million in fy2015 to $273 million in fy2016 , a 9.2% increase .

in addition , the administration's request called for shifts in funding priorities .

specifically , the administration's budget request proposed the following: reduced funding for what is eda's most highly funded program , public works grants .

the administration recommended $14 million less for these grants than the $99 million that was appropriated in fy2015 .

greater emphasis on projects intended to support job creation through regional innovation clusters by requesting an appropriation of $25 million for such activities , which was $15 million more than was appropriated for these activities in fy2015 .

significant increases in funding for the economic adjustment assistance , research and evaluation , and planning grants programs , including proposed increases of 17.8% , 100% , and 31.7% respectively for the three programs .

a significant increase , 23% , in funding for salaries and expenses .

the administration's budget request for each eda program is listed in table 1 along with the recommended amounts proposed by the house and senate , and the enacted amount included in the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 , p.l .

114-113 .

the administration's eda budget justification document for fy2016 sought to recast eda assistance in the context of global economic competition and the promotion of sustainable economic development .

the administration's emphases on promoting interagency coordination of resources and on the implementation of regional innovation strategies were among the primary reasons the administration requested an $8 million increase in funding for its most flexible program , economic adjustment assistance grants .

the $9.5 million increase in requested funding for planning grants was another example of the administration's attempt to coordinate and promote sustainable economic development .

the increase in appropriations for planning grants would have been used to fund 16 previously unfunded economic development districts ( edd ) and to "conduct a one - time refresh" of each edd's comprehensive economic development strategy ( ceds ) ,which is a required element for establishing eligibility for eda's public works and economic adjustment assistance grants .

additional funding for planning grants would have been used to help edds incorporate new components of the ceds that focus on economic resiliency and coordination with other federal , state , and local resources .

according to the obama administration , one manifestation of eda's effort to promote interagency coordination is the central role it plays in the administration's partnerships for workforce and economic revitalization plus ( power+ ) initiative , an interagency effort intended to coordinate competitively awarded federal grant assistance to communities experiencing economic disruption as a result of changes in the power sector and coal industry .

the effort was intended to assist affected communities diversify their economic base , create sustainable high - paying jobs , attract new economic investments , and provide job training and reemployment services to dislocated workers in affected areas .

on may 27 , 2015 , the house appropriations committee reported an original measure , h.r .

2578 , the departments of commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations bill for fy2016 ( cjs ) .

on june 3 , 2015 , the house passed h.r .

2578 by a vote of 242-183 .

the bill , as passed by the house , would have frozen eda appropriations at their fy2015 levels , rejecting the administration's request for an increase in overall funding and a shift in funding priorities .

the bill would have appropriated $250 million for eda , including $213 million for eda activities and programs , and $37 million for salaries and expenses .

the bill reflected slightly different funding priorities from those of the previous year .

the bill proposed increasing funding for assistance to coal communities by $5 million and would have established assistance to these communities as a stand - alone program rather than a set - aside under the economic adjustment assistance program while eliminating $4 million in funding for innovative manufacturing grants .

 ( see table 1 for a complete breakdown by program. ) .

the report ( h.rept .

114-130 ) accompanying the bill directed eda to allocate at least $15 million to assist communities affected by job losses in the coal mining industry as part of the administration's power+ initiative .

the report included language directing eda to give priority to coal mining communities that had not yet developed a ceds when awarding power+ funding .

the funds would have been used to begin the ceds planning process .

the report directed eda , within 90 days of enactment of h.r .

2578 , to submit to the house committee on appropriations a report on the government - wide effort to assist coal mining communities as part of the power+ initiative , including descriptions of eda's and other federal agencies' past efforts and future plans to assist coal communities .

in addition , the house appropriations committee report accompanying the bill included language admonishing eda on its slow implementation of the innovative manufacturing loan guarantee program .

the report noted that although the program had received funding as far back as fy2012 , eda had not yet issued loan guarantees , but noted that the agency expected to issue its first loan guarantee during the second quarter of fy2016 .

the report directed eda to provide the committee with periodic updates on the status of the program , including a written report within 60 days following enactment of the act .

the report also included language directing eda to use its regional innovation program ( rip ) funds to support university - and state - sponsored incubator programs .

on june 16 , 2015 , the senate appropriations committee reported its version of h.r .

2578 , the departments of commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations bill for fy2016 .

the senate appropriations committee rejected the administration's proposed increase in funding for eda programs and recommended freezing total funding at the fy2015 total of $250 million , including $213 million for eda programs and $37 million for salaries and expenses .

the senate bill did not include funding for coal mining communities and innovative manufacturing .

instead , the bill recommended a $3 million increase in funding for economic adjustment assistance grants .

the report ( s.rept .

114-66 ) accompanying the bill directed eda to set aside , within the economic adjustment assistance account , up to $10 million for regional innovation grants , $2 million for innovative energy efficiency grants , $3 million for economic adjustment assistance grants awarded to communities within the appalachian regional commission , and $3 million in grant assistance for communities within the boundaries of the delta regional authority .

the report accompanying the senate bill directed eda to continue to ensure that rip grants were awarded to multiple grantees across a diverse geographic area .

like its house counterpart , the senate report encouraged eda to fund university - based incubators with priority going to incubator projects where states had made a significant investment in establishing an incubator program .

the report also would have set aside $2 million in rip funding for "cluster grants to support nonprofit , job - creating , revolving , equity - based seed capital funds. .

in addition to identifying funding priorities and set - asides within various eda programs , the report accompanying the senate appropriations committee reported version of the cjs bill included two additional directives for eda: the committee encouraged eda to assist communities potentially affected by nuclear power plant closures identify best practices that may be implemented to mitigate the impact of such closures .

the committee also admonished the agency for the delay in delivering a plan , mandated in fy2015 , that identify how better to use existing programs to assist various types of distressed communities and encourage manufacturing investments .

congress did not pass the departments of commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations bill for fy2016 , before the beginning of 2016 fiscal year on october 1 , 2015 .

on september 30 , 2015 , congress passed and the president signed p.l .

114-53 , an act providing for continuing appropriations from october 1 , 2015 , to december 11 , 2015 .

the act included provisions allowing departments and agencies , including eda , to expend federal funds during this period at a rate as outlined in the department or agency's fy2015 appropriations act .

the continuing appropriations act also prohibited the use of funds for activities that were not funded in fy2015 .

congress passed two additional continuing resolutions that extended the period covered by a continuing resolution: p.l .

114-96 , to cover the period through december 16 , 2015 , and p.l .

114-100 , to extend the period covered to december 22 , 2015 .

on december 18 , 2015 , congress approved , and the president signed into law p.l .

114-113 , the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 , providing appropriations for a number of federal agencies and departments , including the programs and activities of the economic development administration , for the remainder of fy2016 .

the act included $261 million for eda , including $222 million for programs and activities and $39 million for salaries and expenses .

eda's fy2016 appropriations included a 50% increase ( from $10 million to $15 million ) in the amount of funds targeted to assist coal mining communities as part of the administration power+ initiative .

the act also included a $2 million increase in funding for planning assistance to eda - designated economic development districts charged with developing comprehensive economic development strategies ( ceds ) .

the increased funding for coal - impacted communities and planning assistance was offset by a $10 million reduction in the amount appropriated for economic adjustment assistance and the zeroing out of appropriations for activities supporting innovative manufacturing .

that program received an appropriation of $4 million in fy2015 .

in addition , p.l .

114-113 included a provision rescinding $10 million in eaa unobligated balances from prior year appropriations .

