"ideas can come from anywhere," a scholar of american politics once wrote .

to be sure , ideas and recommendations for legislation come from a wide variety of sources , such as individual senators ; committees and other senate working groups ; legislative staff ; party and chamber leaders ; executive branch agencies and the white house ; states and localities ; members of the media ; citizens ; and interest groups .

any or all of these individuals or entities may participate in drafting legislation , but only a senator may formally introduce legislation in the senate .

some common considerations taken into account when drafting a bill include the following: what problem does the bill seek to address ? .

understanding the source of a problem is necessary in order to properly address it .

an abundance of information is available to senators in the form of reports , studies , and presentations offered by a wide range of individuals , groups , and organizations , including crs .

soliciting expert testimony in the context of a committee hearing is another common method by which the senate gathers relevant information for use in policymaking .

to what committee is it likely to be referred ? .

committee referral can matter because one committee might be especially receptive to the proposed legislation in comparison to another committee .

senators may also prefer that their bill be referred to a committee on which they serve in order to ensure continued involvement at the committee stage of proceedings .

will the bill attract cosponsors ? .

cosponsorship conveys a senator's support for a measure , so bills that attract many cosponsors could be seen as enjoying broad support within the chamber .

a measure with many cosponsors , especially if they include committee and party leaders , could encourage the relevant committee chair to take some action on the legislation , such as hold hearings on it .

does it have bipartisan appeal ? .

senate rules tend to favor deliberation over decision , so building a coalition of support for a proposal can take time .

with few limits on senate debate , reaching a final vote on legislation often requires a supermajority of 60 senators to bring debate to a close , so some amount of bipartisan cooperation usually is needed to secure final passage .

measures that are limited in scope but have broad bipartisan appeal may be passed ( or "cleared" ) by unanimous consent with minimal floor time expended .

the senate's clearance system ( or "hotline" ) can facilitate swift action on noncontroversial proposals , but this pathway can be blocked by even a single objection .

what are the budgetary implications ? .

the senate places a number of restrictions on legislation with budgetary consequences .

for instance , if a proposal adds to the federal deficit , it may be subject to a point of order on the chamber floor for violating congressional budget rules ( many of which are codified in the congressional budget act of 1974 ) .

support for a measure may also hinge on how its costs are paid for .

senators may agree about the merits of a bill but disagree with how its provisions are funded .

should companion legislation be introduced in the house ? .

to become law , a bill or joint resolution must pass both houses of congress in identical form ( including the same text and bill number ) and be signed by the president .

for this reason , senate sponsors sometimes encourage their allies in the house to introduce identical or similarly worded legislation into that body to encourage bicameral consideration .

companion bills might also attract wider public and member attention to the issues addressed in the legislation .

is the measure best introduced at the beginning , in the middle , or toward the end of a congress ? .

timing the introduction of a measure can be important .

comprehensive legislation is likely to require a great deal of time to work through , both in committee and on the floor .

an early introduction will give the senate more time to examine the measure's provisions .

advantage might also be gained by being the first to address an issue .

those who move first tend to attract media attention and may be seen by their colleagues as exercising leadership in that particular policy area .

strategic delay is another option .

this approach might provide more time for an individual or committee to study the issue and build support for a preferred solution .

to be sure , many bills do not follow a linear ( or "regular order" ) legislative process — introduction , consideration in committee , and arrival on the floor for further debate and amendment .

for example , a legislative proposal that had languished in committee might suddenly be taken up in the senate because it deals with an unfolding crisis or emergency .

there is no senate rule that introduced bills and resolutions must be prepared by the office of the legislative counsel .

senators can receive drafts of bills from executive officials , interest groups , and others .

still , the office plays an important role by providing senators and staff , at their request , with drafts of legislation .

use of the office by senators and staff is nearly universal .

its staff attorneys are experts in legislative drafting , and they focus almost exclusively on policy issues within their areas of expertise .

legislative attorneys are often assigned to serve a specific committee as a kind of nonpartisan , shared staff .

they work closely with committee members and staff to ensure that a bill's language and form match the intent of its sponsor and adhere to drafting rules and linguistic traditions of the senate .

several drafts may be required before a measure is ready for formal introduction .

those drafting legislation may seek assistance from the office of legislative counsel at any stage .

all communications with the office are treated as confidential .

the office is located in room 668 of the dirksen senate office building and can be reached at extension 4-6461 or by sending an email request to receptionist@slc.senate.gov .

the number of requests to draft bills and amendments has nearly doubled over the past 10 years , from roughly 20,000 requests handled by the office during the 109 th congress ( 2005-2006 ) to more than 40,000 in more recent congresses .

to guide the management of its workload , the senate committee on rules and administration has established a system for prioritizing requests received by the office .

measures currently in conference committee receive the highest priority , followed by amendments to measures pending on the senate floor .

measures being considered in committee are prioritized next , followed by proposals drafted at the request of individual senators .

it is this latter category into which many introduced bills will fall .

within each of these categories , priority is given to requests in the order they are received .

given the volume of its work , it is advisable to give the office as much advance notice as possible when making a drafting request .

depending on the nature of the policy area , the workload of the office , and other factors , it can take substantial time to draft legislation , especially if it addresses complex issues or involves multiple subject areas .

when senators introduce a measure , they commonly attach a form listing the names of cosponsors .

cosponsorship signifies a senator's support for the proposal .

prior to its introduction , senators may cosponsor a measure by contacting the office of the legislative sponsor and requesting that their names be added to the bill or resolution .

initial ( or "original" ) cosponsors can be added until the measure is presented to the bill clerk in the senate chamber .

thereafter , unanimous consent is required to include additional cosponsors on the measure .

there is no limit on the number of cosponsors a measure may attract .

cosponsors do not sign the bill , but the sponsor is required to .

a "dear colleague" letter sent to most or all senators is a common technique for informing senators of the pending introduction of a bill or resolution , and for soliciting support .

typically , these letters briefly state the issue the measure addresses , the measure's significant features , and an appeal to become a cosponsor .

these letters almost always include the name and telephone number of a staff aide to contact about cosponsoring the bill .

at the beginning of each new congress , the senate traditionally adopts a standing order allowing senators to introduce measures at any time the chamber is in session by presenting them to the bill clerk seated at the desk on the senate floor .

a measure must be signed by the sponsoring senator in the top right hand corner before it can be introduced .

printing should be one - sided , and staff contact information should be written on the back of the last page of the bill .

there is no limit on the number of measures a senator may introduce , and senators may propose legislation for any reason .

between 1973 and 2016 , senators introduced an average of about 40 bills and resolutions per congress .

statistics on introduced bills and resolutions are provided in table 1 .

senators who wish to make a statement on the measure may deliver their remarks during morning business ( which is common ) or at another point during the day , or they may ask unanimous consent to insert their statement in the congressional record .

these statements appear in the "statements on introduced bills and joint resolutions" section .

by unanimous consent , the text of the measure is also typically printed in the record .

senators and staff may also consider devising an attention - grabbing title for their legislation , such as the usa - patriot act ( "uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism" ) .

such titles might attract media attention and notice by other lawmakers .

although rare , a senator may object to the introduction of a bill or joint resolution .

if objection is heard , the bill may be introduced on the following legislative day ( or anytime thereafter ) as a matter of right under paragraph 1 of rule xiv .

referral decisions are made by the senate parliamentarian acting on behalf of the presiding officer .

referral occurs primarily on the basis of committee jurisdictions set forth in senate rule xxv .

under the provisions of senate rule xvii , a measure is referred to the committee with "jurisdiction over the subject matter which predominates in such proposed legislation. .

the word "predominates" in rule xvii implies a majority standard by which subject matter is determined , which at times can arouse inter - committee disagreements as only a single subject can be considered predominant .

multiple referral occurs only occasionally in the senate on account of rule xvii , and in almost all cases is made by unanimous consent or standing order .

when referring a measure to committee , the parliamentarian might begin by asking two related questions: "what is this measure mainly about ? .

and "what committee has subject matter jurisdiction that corresponds most closely to the measure's main subject ? .

senate rule xiv requires that all bills and resolutions be read twice before they are referred to committee , but rarely is this requirement strictly adhered to .

measures are typically referred immediately if there is no objection , and this is what occurs in the large majority of cases .

 ( house bills and resolutions messaged to the senate are often referred immediately as well. ) .

a procedure in rule xiv allows an introduced ( or house - received ) bill or joint resolution to be placed directly on the calendar of business without first being referred to a standing committee .

the number of bills and resolutions introduced in the senate fluctuates over time as table 1 shows .

there is little reason to expect that the demand for legislation would stay constant over this period ; new issues arise , those that exist are dealt with , and old issues fade away .

the 109 th congress ( 2005-2006 ) reached a high point with 4,869 introductions , while the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) falls at the lower end of recent congresses with 2,628 introduced bills and resolutions .

most introduced measures are bills , as shown in the second column of table 1 .

only bills and joint resolutions can make or change law ; concurrent and simple resolutions are used primarily to address internal matters of one or both chambers .

for instance , a concurrent resolution is used to organize a joint session of congress to receive the president's state of the union address .

a simple resolution would be appropriate to address senate - related matters , such as proposals to amend the standing rules of the chamber .

legislation to honor or celebrate an individual , group , or event may also be drafted as a simple or concurrent resolution .

most measures are introduced by individual senators , but senate committees may also report an "original" bill for chamber consideration .

as senate rule xxv states , standing committees have "leave to report by bill or otherwise on matters within their respective jurisdictions. .

this means that committees do not have to wait for measures to be referred to them in order to act .

the relevant committee chair is generally considered the sponsor in these instances , although the measure is perhaps best understood as a product that incorporates views and input from other committee members as well .

original bills may not have cosponsors .

