various bills in the 114 th congress address issues related to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting on federal and state lands .

hunting and conservation have been linked in federal wildlife legislation since the passage the lacey act of 1900 ( the first federal wildlife law , making it a federal crime to ship game killed in violation of one state's laws to another state ) and then the migratory bird treaty act of 1918 ( regulating the killing , hunting , buying , or selling of migratory birds ) .

currently , hunting and fishing are allowed on the majority of federal lands ( as measured in acres ) .

some believe that federal lands are unnecessarily restricted by protective designations , barriers to physical access , or burdensome agency planning processes .

others question whether opening more lands to hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting is fully consistent with good game management , public safety , other recreational uses , resource management , and the statutory purposes of the lands .

two recent bills , s. 556 and s. 659 , address giving hunting and fishing activities a higher priority in land management .

although both bills address hunting , fishing , and other forms of outdoor recreation , s. 556 is focused on federal lands while s. 659 covers diverse topics such as the regulation of lead shot , imports of polar bear trophies , the funding of land acquisition for recreation , and the reauthorization of certain international wildlife conservation laws .

under current law , federal land managers balance hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting with good game management , public safety , resource management , and the statutory purposes of the lands .

the resulting balance point will vary among agencies based on the statutory requirements of the agency , land classification , location , and other factors .

the four traditional land management agencies — the bureau of land management ( blm ) , fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and national park service ( nps ) , all in the department of the interior ( doi ) , and the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture — do not maintain data on how many acres of land are currently open to hunting , fishing , and / or recreational shooting .

however , blm "estimates that over 99 percent of blm - managed public lands are open to hunting , and 99 percent of blm - managed public lands are open to recreational target shooting. .

fs estimates that more than 95% of its lands are currently open to these activities .

among the fws's 594 wildlife refuges and waterfowl production areas , more than 360 are open to some form of hunting , and more than 300 units offer fishing opportunities .

as of february 2014 , hunting was permitted in 61 of the 401 nps units , and fishing was permitted in 200 units .

other federal agencies have various policies on the activities covered in these two bills .

the bureau of reclamation ( bor ) , for example , allows recreational shooting but actively discourages "repeated recreational target shooting. .

at the same time , bor allows hunting , fishing , and trapping on its lands , subject to regulation .

roughly half of the army corps of engineers' ( corps' ) land is open to hunting .

in addition , many military bases offer access to hunters and fishers , including camp pendleton , california ( hunting and fishing ) ; camp lejeune , california ( hunting , fishing , and trapping ) ; and camp bullis , texas ( hunting , fishing , and target shooting ) .

various rules may limit participation at these bases to members of the military , veterans , and their families .

lands under the jurisdiction of other federal agencies may be managed for purposes that include the conservation of natural resources , including wildlife , even if conservation is not the primary purpose of these lands .

moreover , multiple executive orders direct all agencies with land to preserve the environment , and these orders apply whether the agency currently offers hunting , fishing , trapping , or even public access .

 ( see " definition of federal public land ," below. ) .

examples of agencies that limit access to their lands include the department of energy and the national aeronautics and space administration .

this report focuses on two bills that have received considerable attention in the 114 th congress: s. 556 and s. 659 .

both are titled "the bipartisan sportsmen's act of 2015. .

s. 556 was referred to the senate committee on energy and natural resources , and s. 659 was referred to the senate committee on environment and public works .

in addition to its provisions affecting federal lands , s. 556 contains a provision amending the equal access to justice act ( eaja ; 5 u.s.c .

§504 ) and affecting the judgment fund in the department of justice from which claims against the united states are paid ( 31 u.s.c .

§1304 ) .

the two bills contain a number of provisions found in bills in previous congresses .

both bills use definitions of federal land or similar terms in various sections in a manner that leaves some doubt as to the land under consideration .

table 1 shows the terms used and the land classifications that appear to be included , possibly are included , and explicitly are excluded under the definitions .

s. 556 is titled the "bipartisan sportsmen's act of 2015. .

it was referred to the senate committee on energy and natural resources , which held hearings on the bill on march 12 , 2015 .

the witnesses were steve ellis , deputy director for operations , blm ; leslie weldon , deputy chief , national forest system , fs ; jeffrey s. crane , president , congressional sportsmen's foundation ; and whit fosburgh , president and ceo , theodore roosevelt conservation partnership .

issues raised during the hearing included the availability of hunting , fishing , and shooting opportunities on federal lands , particularly those of blm and fs ; the use of the land and water conservation fund ( lwcf ) to purchase lands to support access for recreation ; the appropriate use of funds derived from the sale of federal land ; and the effect of the bill on wilderness management , among other matters .

each of these issues is discussed below .

this bill is also titled "the bipartisan sportsmen's act of 2015. .

its provisions concern regulating lead shot and sinkers , funding shooting ranges , importing polar bear trophies , hunting over baited fields , carrying loaded arms at army corps of engineers water resource project areas open to the public , and reauthorizing seven wildlife statutes .

it was introduced on march 5 , 2015 , and referred to the senate committee on environment and public works ; the subcommittee on fisheries , water , and wildlife held hearings on march 17 , 2015 .

the three witnesses represented ducks unlimited , supporting provisions relating to the north american wetlands conservation act ( 16 u.s.c .

§4406 ( c ) ( 5 ) ) ; humane society of the united states , opposing provisions related to lead shot and sinkers , imports of polar bear trophies , and hunting over baited fields ; and congressional sportsmen's caucus , supporting provisions regarding lead shot and sinkers , additional funds for shooting ranges , imports of polar bear trophies , carrying of firearms at corps projects , and international conservation grants .

each of these provisions is discussed below .

section 2 of s. 659 would expand the existing statutory exclusion of shells and cartridges ( and preserve its exclusion of pistols , revolvers , other firearms ) from potential regulation as chemical substances under the toxic substances control act ( tsca ; p.l .

94-469 ) .

the exclusion would be expanded to encompass specific components of these items including shot , bullets and other projectiles , propellants , and primers .

additionally , the exclusion would be expanded to encompass "sport fishing equipment" ( primarily lead sinkers ) as referenced in the internal revenue code and sport fishing equipment components .

over the past 20 years , several citizens' organizations have submitted multiple petitions to the environmental protection agency ( epa ) requesting that the agency evaluate the risks of lead in ammunition and in fishing sinkers for regulation under tsca .

most recently , in 2011 and 2012 , petitions were submitted again to epa .

one petition addressed lead ammunition .

epa denied that petition because of the existing statutory exclusion under tsca .

epa's denial of that petition was later upheld in litigation .

the other petition addressed lead fishing tackle .

epa denied that petition because the threshold of risk for warranting federal regulation was not demonstrated by the petitioners .

adoption of section 2 would prevent federal regulation through tsca but not through other statutory authorities .

lead shot has been banned in the united states for the hunting of migratory waterfowl since 1991 under authority of the migratory bird treaty act and the endangered species act ( esa ; p.l .

93-205 ) .

although these two statutes address the use of lead shot in hunting migratory waterfowl , tsca more broadly applies to the lifecycle of a chemical substance , excluding lead in ammunition or fishing equipment from the definition of a chemical substance .

consequently , the provision would protect continued use of lead shot in hunting of upland game birds ( such as turkeys or grouse ) or fishing practices that use lead sinkers , but it would not affect the use of lead shot in waterfowl hunting , where it is already banned .

section 3 of s. 659 would allow territories and states to use more of the funds allocated to them under the pittman - robertson wildlife restoration act ( 16 u.s.c .

§669 ) for projects involving land acquisition , construction , and expansion of public target ranges for firearms or archery .

a state's allocation of federal funds currently may be used to support a maximum of 75% of any project , with the remainder coming from nonfederal sources .

section 3 would amend 16 u.s.c .

§669h - 1 ( a ) , with the effect of increasing the maximum federal share from the pittman - robertson ( p - r ) program from 75% to 90% for projects acquiring land for , expanding , or constructing target ranges .

however , the bill also contains a provision stating that "a state may pay up to 90 percent of the cost of acquiring land for , expanding , or constructing a public target range. .

no other grant program administered by fws places an upper limit on the fraction of funding that may be provided by the grant recipient .

instead , other fws grant programs place upper limits only on the federal share of the grant .

section 3 would define a public target range , for the purposes of p - r , as a location identified by a government agency that is open to the public ; may be supervised ; and can accommodate archery or rifle , pistol , or shotgun shooting .

before may 15 , 2008 , when the listing of polar bears as a threatened species under the esa took effect , it was permissible under u.s. law to import polar bear trophies legally taken in canada .

after that date , import was not allowed .

once the proposed rule to list polar bears as a threatened species was published in january 2007 , fws conducted an extensive campaign to alert hunters to the potential impact of an eventual esa listing on their ability to import polar bear trophies .

however , fws continued to authorize the import of polar bear trophies under existing law until the esa listing became final .

the permitting process was truncated by court order , making the listing effective immediately rather than after 30 days .

section 4 would amend the marine mammal protection act ( mmpa ; p.l .

92-522 ) to allow hunters with polar bear trophies legally hunted in canada to import these trophies to the united states .

it would direct fws to issue permits for importing these sport - hunted trophies if a permit was sought before may 15 , 2008 .

it would further amend the mmpa to provide that the permits may be issued regardless of the polar bear's status as a depleted species under mmpa , which is the basis on which the permits were denied .

in 2011 , fws testified that it did not oppose similar legislation allowing importation of polar bear trophies by hunters who both applied for an import permit and completed their legal hunt prior to the esa listing .

others oppose allowing these permits , believing it would encourage hunting of a species when a listing is imminent .

the humane society of the united states testified in the 112 th congress that allowing polar bear imports would "would roll back polar bear conservation efforts and set a dangerous precedent for gutting the protections provided under the marine mammal protection act and the endangered species act. .

a federal court has upheld the current permit ban , finding that there was no procedural flaw in blocking permits as of the day the bear was listed as threatened .

hunting migratory game birds over baited fields is forbidden by the migratory bird treaty act and its implementing regulations .

there is little controversy over whether such hunting is an unsportsmanlike practice that should be prohibited .

there is , however , controversy over precisely what constitutes baiting , how long hunters should wait after an agricultural field has been harvested to avoid the baiting prohibition , and whether the effects of natural disasters might affect whether a field is considered baited .

section 105 addresses these issues by allowing hunting over crops under certain circumstances .

section 5 defines a baited area as an area where there has been the placement of salt grain or feed to attract game birds and an area where there has been manipulation of unharvested cropland ( eg , through mowing or discing ) , unless the manipulation is a normal agricultural practice .

it would explicitly exclude from the definition any areas with ( 1 ) a treatment that is a normal agricultural practice , ( 2 ) unmanipulated standing crops , or ( 3 ) standing crops that are or were flooded .

the last provision appears to exclude flooded cropland , whether naturally or artificially flooded .

the section defines normal agricultural practice .

some features of this long definition are particularly noteworthy .

first , the practice would be considered normal if recommended by the state office of the cooperative extension system of the department of agriculture .

second , the section would require that the applicable state game department be consulted and , if requested , be asked to concur .

it does not specify who may do the requesting and what the effect would be if the applicable state game department did not concur .

a normal agricultural practice is defined to include the destruction of crops as required by the federal crop insurance corporation to obtain a crop insurance payment after a natural disaster .

section 5 also would require an annual report from the secretary of agriculture to the secretary of the interior on any changes to normal agricultural practices .

there has been controversy regarding limits on hunting over baited fields and what constitutes a normal agricultural practice .

an amendment similar to this provision was offered in the house during the 113 th congress .

at issue in particular was a practice among rice farmers in arkansas of managing a drought - damaged rice crop .

when rains caused a rare second rice crop to spring up later , that second crop was considered bait , and hunting over it was considered illegal .

with this change , farmers could hunt legally or charge other hunters for access to hunt over any fields if local officials deemed a particular agricultural practice to be normal .

neither the farmer nor other hunters would be held to the migratory bird treaty act's strict liability standards because the bill would prevent such practices from being considered baiting .

for areas open to the public at corps water resource projects , section 6 would ban the secretary of the army from promulgating or enforcing regulations that prohibit individuals from possessing loaded firearms ; loaded firearms currently are restricted for use in hunting or shooting in areas designated for such activities .

the proposed language would require that possession comply with state law and that the individual not be otherwise prohibited from possessing firearms .

this language would allow private individuals to carry loaded and / or concealed firearms consistent with state law at all corps water resource project areas that are open to the public .

however , individuals still would be prohibited from possessing a firearm at a federal facility ( as identified under 18 u.s.c .

§930 ) or areas not open to the public .

individuals would be responsible for knowing and complying with all applicable concealed carry laws of the state or states in which the water resources development project is located .

the legislation does not distinguish between handguns and other firearms , such as long guns ( rifles and shotguns ) .

supporters of the proposed legislation see enactment as part of a larger , ongoing effort to improve the consistency of laws and regulations concerning firearms on federally managed lands .

they also see the proposed legislation as providing for consistent treatment of open and concealed firearms possession within a state , providing for recreational shooting and self - defense , and protecting the right to bear arms under the second amendment of the constitution .

other stakeholders have raised concerns that the proposed legislation ignores implementation challenges that are not generally faced on other federal lands and by other federal land management agencies ( eg , presence of critical facilities or hydropower structures and limited corps law enforcement authority ) and that enactment could produce unintended public safety and infrastructure security issues .

section 7 would reauthorize the north american wetlands conservation act through fy2020 .

section 8 would reauthorize the five current laws that together form the multinational species conservation fund: african elephant conservation act ( 16 u.s.c .

§4245 ( a ) ) ; rhinoceros and tiger conservation act of 1994 ( 16 u.s.c .

§5306 ( a ) ) ; asian elephant conservation act of 1997 ( 16 u.s.c .

§4266 ( a ) ) ; great ape conservation act of 2000 ( 16 u.s.c .

§6305 ) ; and marine turtle conservation act of 2004 ( 16 u.s.c .

§6606 ) all five laws would be reauthorized through fy2020 .

in addition , the great ape conservation act ( gaca ) would be modified to allow both annual and multiyear grants and to clarify the duties of the panel of experts created under gaca .

among other things , to the extent practicable such panels are to include experts from range states .

the panels are directed to identify conservation priorities , taking into account conservation plans and scientific research .

the marine turtle conservation act would be amended to make not only foreign countries but also territories of the united states eligible for grants .

the pittman - robertson wildlife restoration fund provides grants to states for projects to conserve wildlife , as well as to support hunter education .

funding is derived from excise taxes on firearms and ammunition , and it is mandatory spending ( that is , available without further appropriation ) .

under title 16 , section 669b of the united states code , those funds not required for spending in the current year must be invested in interest - bearing u.s. obligations .

further , that interest is then made available for use under the north american wetlands conservation act ( nawca ; p.l .

101-233 ) .

authority to transfer the interest to nawca expires at the beginning of fy2016 .

section 9 would extend the authority for this transfer to the beginning of fy2026 .

