on june 26 , 2015 , the supreme court issued its decision in obergefell v. hodges legalizing same - sex marriage throughout the country by requiring states to issue marriage licenses to same - sex couples and to recognize same - sex marriages that were legally formed in other states .

in doing so , the court resolved a circuit split regarding the constitutionality of state same - sex marriage bans .

this report provides background on , and analysis of , significant legal issues raised by the supreme court's decision in obergefell .

it first offers background on the constitutional principles on which the court relied in obergefell to invalidate state same - sex marriage bans as unconstitutional .

then , it walks through the court's opinion and rationale .

finally , it discusses potential implications of the court's decision .

the supreme court resolved a circuit split on the constitutionality of state same - sex marriage bans , finding them unconstitutional in obergefell v. hodges .

in doing so , the court relied on the constitution's due process and equal protection principles to hold that states must issue marriage licenses to same - sex couples and recognize same - sex marriages that were legally formed in other states .

the majority in obergefell rested its decision upon the fundamental right to marry .

the court observed that it has long found the right to marry to be constitutionally protected , though it acknowledged that its precedent describing the right presumed an opposite - sex relationship .

even so , according to the court , these cases have identified reasons why the right to marry is fundamental , which apply equally to same - sex couples .

these reasons included ( 1 ) personal choice in whom to marry is inherent in the concept of individual autonomy ; ( 2 ) marriage's unique support and recognition of a two - person , committed union ; ( 3 ) the safeguarding of children within a marriage , as both same - sex couples and opposite - sex couples have children ; and ( 4 ) marriage as a keystone of the nation's social order , with no distinction between same - sex couples and opposite - sex couples in states conferring benefits and responsibilities upon marriages .

accordingly , the court extended the fundamental right to marry to same - sex couples .

in holding that the fundamental right to marry includes same - sex couples' right to marry , the court appeared to acknowledge its departure from precedent for determining whether a right is fundamental — mentioned earlier in this report — which considers whether it is "deeply rooted in this nation's history and tradition and implicit in the concept of ordered liberty. .

the court observed that if rights were defined by who could historically use them , old practices could continuously prevent new groups from exercising fundamental rights .

as such , the court found that "rights come not from ancient sources alone .

they rise , too , from a better informed understanding of how constitutional imperatives define a liberty that remains urgent in our own era. .

after determining that the fundamental right to marry includes the right of same - sex couples to marry , the court also seemed to depart from precedent — and the approaches of courts of appeals that relied on the fundamental right to marry to strike down state same - sex marriage bans — by not applying strict scrutiny to such bans .

as previously noted , courts generally subject governmental action that infringes upon a fundamental right to strict scrutiny , requiring that the action be narrowly tailored to a compelling government interest to be constitutional .

the states had argued two primary interests for their bans on same - marriage: ( 1 ) the desire to wait and see how the same - sex marriage debate progresses before changing long - existing marriage norms ; and ( 2 ) incentivizing procreating couples to stay together during child rearing .

however , the court made no mention of whether the state same - sex marriage bans at issue were narrowly tailored to these justifications .

rather , the court noted why these justifications were invalid without appearing to apply any of the typical levels of judicial review ( i.e. , rational basis review , intermediate scrutiny , or strict scrutiny ) .

the court held that both equal protection and due process guarantees protect the fundamental right to marry , and that states can no longer deny this right to same - sex couples .

importantly , in doing so , the court did not hold that classifications based on sexual orientation warrant any form of heightened scrutiny .

in fact , the court made no mention of the proper level of scrutiny applicable to such classifications .

some of the dissenting justices in obergefell thought that the majority exceeded the court's proper role by removing the question of whether same - sex couples have the right to marry from the democratic process , where , they stated , it is properly resolved .

according to these justices , the five - person majority should not have resolved the hotly contested issue of same - sex marriage for the entire country ; such resolution should have come from the people .

the dissenting justices also voiced concern with the majority looking beyond history and tradition to establish a fundamental right contrary to supreme court precedent .

according to the dissenting justices , the requirement that fundamental rights be rooted in tradition and history exists to prevent the court from imparting its policy decisions regarding which rights have constitutional protection .

although the supreme court answered questions surrounding the constitutionality of state same - sex marriage bans in obergefell , its decision raised a number of other questions .

these include questions regarding , among other things , obergefell 's broader impact on the rights of gay individuals ; the proper level of judicial scrutiny applicable to classifications based on sexual orientation ; what the decision might mean for laws prohibiting plural marriages ; the court's approach to recognizing fundamental rights moving forward ; and the proper level of judicial scrutiny applicable to governmental action interfering with fundamental rights .

this section briefly explores these questions .

obergefell raised questions about the decision's broader impact on the rights of gay individuals — that is , whether its rationale extends rights to gay individuals outside of the marriage context .

however , the decision appears limited to the marriage context .

although the majority opinion did make reference to same - sex marriage bans implicating equal protection guarantees , its holding rested entirely on such bans infringing upon the fundamental right to marry in violation of both equal protection and due process guarantees .

the court did not mention whether classifications based on sexual orientation are suspect or quasi - suspect , and thus warrant any form of heightened scrutiny .

if the court had rendered such a holding , its decision would have arguably had broader implications for the rights of gay individuals , as it would have potentially subjected all governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation to a heightened form of judicial scrutiny .

prior to obergefell , federal appeals courts were split regarding the proper level of judicial scrutiny applicable to governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation .

the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit ( ninth circuit ) has held that classifications based on sexual orientation warrant heightened scrutiny , though it did not clarify whether this heightened scrutiny was intermediate or strict scrutiny .

the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit ( second circuit ) has similarly found that classifications based on sexual orientation are quasi - suspect , and thus any governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation is subject to intermediate scrutiny .

conversely , however , the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit ( sixth circuit ) has held that governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation is neither suspect nor quasi - suspect , and thus subject only to rational basis review .

because the court's decision in obergefell rested on the fundamental right to marry — and therefore seems limited to the marriage context — nothing in the opinion appears to resolve the circuit split between the second , sixth , and ninth circuits regarding the correct level of scrutiny applicable to classifications based on sexual orientation .

other lower courts will be left to grapple with this issue in the future .

this ambiguity leaves open the possibility that , moving forward , circuit courts could either , like the second and ninth circuits , apply heightened scrutiny to laws that classify based on sexual orientation ( eg , laws that provide exemptions from anti - discrimination legislation for religious entities based on their objections to certain sexual orientations ) , or could apply rational basis review to such laws like the sixth circuit .

the fact that some lower courts may apply heightened scrutiny to government action that classifies based on sexual orientation where other courts may not is significant because , as discussed earlier in this report , laws subject to higher levels of scrutiny are more likely to be found unconstitutional .

as such , this could create a situation wherein similar laws that classify based on sexual orientation receive dissimilar outcomes when facing constitutional challenge , depending on the evaluating court .

the supreme court's decision in obergefell also raised questions regarding whether the court's rationale could potentially extend the fundamental right to marry to polygamy .

in fact , chief justice john roberts , in his dissent in obergefell , seems to suggest that the majority's opinion could lead to the legalization of plural marriages .

however , the majority's opinion seems crafted so as to try to limit its reach to the same - sex marriage context , in a possible attempt to prevent its rationale from extending the fundamental right to marry to plural marriages .

as previously discussed , the majority in obergefell found that the four reasons why the right to marry is fundamental apply equally to same - sex couples , and thus extended the fundamental right to marry to same - sex couples .

some commentators have observed that there are distinctions between plural marriages and same - sex marriages sufficient to prevent obergefell 's rationale from being extended to legalize plural marriage .

conversely , other commentators have observed that parts of the court's opinion discussing why the fundamental right to marry includes same - sex marriage ( eg , the majority's consideration of individual autonomy and family ) could potentially provide basis for extending constitutional protections to plural marriages .

additionally , the majority in obergefell seemingly departed from precedent for determining whether a right is fundamental by looking beyond historical and traditional recognition .

this deviation from prior cases raises the possibility that , when determining whether a right is fundamental in the future , the court will consider how the right is viewed at the time , in addition to its historical and traditional recognition .

this could have the effect of expanding the number of rights that are deemed fundamental for purposes of substantive due process protections .

finally , the court did not clarify which , if any , of the typical levels of judicial review ( i.e. , rational basis review , intermediate scrutiny , or strict scrutiny ) it applied to state same - sex marriage bans after finding that such bans interfere with same - sex couples' fundamental right to marry .

moving forward , this raises questions regarding the proper level of judicial scrutiny applicable to governmental action that infringes upon fundamental rights .

given that increased scrutiny decreases the likelihood that a court will find government action constitutional , this could create ambiguity regarding the degree to which the government can permissibly take action that interferes with fundamental rights .

