the home equity conversion mortgage ( hecm ) program , administered by the department of housing and urban development's ( hud's ) federal housing administration ( fha ) , is a reverse mortgage insurance program whereby older homeowners — those age 62 and older — borrow against the equity in their homes and fha insures lenders against potential losses associated with the loans .

unlike conventional mortgages , hecm borrowers receive payments , either periodically or in a lump sum , and the mortgages are paid off when the home is sold .

if a home is sold for less than the balance of the reverse mortgage , fha will reimburse the lender up to a maximum claim amount .

borrowers pay an up - front fee , or premium , when they enter into hecms , and pay annual premiums based on a loan's principal balance .

the hecm program came about as a demonstration in 1988 .

the impetus for creating a program to help older homeowners obtain reverse mortgages was to make home equity available for aging in place — particularly for homeowners with lower incomes who may otherwise have difficulty with maintenance and other expenses .

another idea was that reverse mortgage proceeds could be used to pay for long - term care expenses .

offering government insurance was also a means to encourage private lenders to enter into the reverse mortgage market .

the hecm program became permanent in 1998 and has insured nearly 1 million reverse mortgages since its creation .

the hecm program has faced financial difficulties in recent years , particularly since the economic downturn in 2008 and resulting declines in home values .

changes in the way hecms are used , including increases in borrowers taking up - front lump - sum payments , also contributed to financial difficulties .

a number of borrowers , having maximized their loans , faced loan default due to failure to pay property taxes and homeowner's insurance .

the financial status of the program resulted in hud making changes , including imposition of credit requirements for borrowers .

in addition , hud faced legal challenges in its regulatory interpretation of how non - borrowing spouses should be treated after the death of a borrower .

as the result of a court decision , hud has attempted to ensure that non - borrowing spouses are protected from foreclosure .

this report discusses the basics of how the hecm program works , including borrower eligibility , the amount that can be borrowed , and procedures for lender claims ( " basics of the home equity conversion mortgage ( hecm ) " ) ; facts about hecms and borrowers ( " what do we know about hecms and borrowers ? .

" ) ; current issues facing the hecm program ( " what are current issues surrounding hecms ? .

" ) ; and the legislative history of the hecm program ( " how did the hecm program come about ? .

" ) .

hecm program loans are a very small portion of the mortgage market ; at the program's peak in fy2009 , about 115,000 new loans were insured out of 1.8 million fha single family loans insured in the same year .

by comparison , the total number of mortgages originated in calendar year 2009 was nearly 9.4 million .

by fy2015 , the number of hecms in the year was about 58,000 .

the program has insured nearly 1 million loans since its inception .

while the hecm statute technically limits the total number of hecms that hud can insure to an aggregate of 275,000 , congress has waived the limitation in appropriations acts .

the average maximum claim amount , representing the ceiling on hud's insurance obligation for a loan ( and generally the appraised value of a home ) , was less than $100,000 in the early years of the hecm program , and was just over $275,000 in fy2015 .

 ( see figure 1 for the number of new loans endorsed in each year and average maximum claim amounts. ) .

since the inception of the hecm program , borrowers have gotten younger , the way in which borrowers choose to take disbursements has changed , and more borrowers appear to use hecms to pay off existing mortgages and other debt .

the average age of hecm borrowers has declined since the program's inception .

in 1990 , shortly after the hecm program was enacted as a demonstration , the average borrower age was about 77 .

since then it has gradually declined , and was age 73 in fy2016 .

the gender of hecm borrowers has also changed over the years .

females made up more than 50% of hecm borrowers ( compared to men and multiple borrowers / couples ) through fy2002 , but their percentages declined as the percentages of both male borrowers and couples increased .

fy2013 was the first year in which couple borrowers exceeded female borrowers .

by fy2016 , couples made up 41% of borrowers compared to 37% for females .

male borrowers also increased from the early years of the program , hovering around 15% in the beginning and rising to nearly 22% in fy2016 .

the growing trend in couples borrowing could be due to the fact that borrowers are getting younger .

in addition , increases in both male and couple borrowing could be related to treatment of non - borrowing spouses .

until recently , it was not uncommon for the younger spouse ( generally women ) to be removed from the deed and mortgage to increase the amount that could be borrowed ( by increasing the principal limit factor ) .

this may have accounted for some of the growth in male borrowers .

then , hud's inclusion of the age of non - borrowing spouses in calculating the amount of the loan ( starting in 2014 ) may account for the most recent uptick in couple borrowing .

 ( see figure 2 for hecm borrower gender distribution for select years from fy1990 to fy2016. ) .

there is evidence that the credit situations of hecm borrowers may be less secure now than in earlier years of the program .

in general , consumer debt , including mortgage debt , increased for homeowners age 65 and older during the 2000s .

in 2001 , 22% of older homeowners had mortgage debt with a median amount of $43,400 .

by 2011 the percentage had grown to 30% with a median mortgage amount of $79,000 .

according to a 2011 survey of hecm counselors , a growing number of potential hecm borrowers gave their reason for pursuing a reverse mortgage as paying off debt — 67% compared to 51% in a similar survey taken in 2006 .

of those counseled , 79% had existing debt , 40% of which was mortgage debt .

hud has also acknowledged the increase in borrowers with existing property debt .

growing debt may be a reason behind the way in which borrowers take hecm disbursements .

until changes in 2014 that limited the initial draws for fixed - rate lump - sum or line - of - credit hecms , borrowers took out large percentages of their hecm loans up front .

for example , in each year from fy2010-fy2013 , more than 70% of hecm borrowers withdrew between 80% and 100% of their principal limit during the first month of the loan .

in the early years of hecm loans , most borrowers either chose to take distributions as a line - of - credit , or combined term and tenure payments with lines of credit .

the changed disbursement preference can be traced to the advent of fixed interest rate hecms .

fixed interest rate hecms structured as closed - end loans began to become common in 2008 , largely due to the ease of securitizing fixed - rate products , with hud releasing guidance clarifying that lenders could offer fixed interest rate loans .

in fixed interest rate transactions , lenders require that borrowers take the entire amount of the loan up front as a lump sum ( if fixed - rate products allowed future draws , lenders would have to absorb the cost of interest rate increases ) .

prior to 2009 , lump sum payments made up less than 10% of hecms ; by the end of 2009 they made up nearly 70% .

today , nearly all hecm borrowers choose to use either the closed - end lump - sum option or , using a line of credit , effectively withdraw most of the balance up front .

for more information about limits on initial disbursements , see " how are disbursements made ? .

while reverse mortgages were made privately on a small scale starting in the 1970s , the initial federal government involvement occurred as a one - time grant through the administration on aging ( aoa ) , within the department of health and human services , called the home equity conversion project .

aoa awarded a grant to researchers in the state of wisconsin to conduct a feasibility study for reverse mortgages .

the wisconsin department of aging had already begun a "reverse mortgage study project" in 1978 .

it used the aoa funding to conduct consumer research and provide technical assistance on six pilot projects across the country that experimented with lending against home equity for seniors .

about the same time that the home equity conversion project was underway , as part of the 1980 white house conference on aging , the conference's mini - conference on housing for the elderly released a report with recommendations for providing housing assistance as individuals age .

one of the recommendations was to develop a way in which seniors could use home equity to supplement their income ; the reverse mortgage was one of the options proposed .

in 1982 , partially in response to the mini - conference recommendations , the senate special committee on aging held a hearing on the issue of home equity conversion , and later released an informational report about options for converting home equity into income .

legislation to enact a home equity conversion mortgage program was introduced in the 98 th and 99 th congresses , but no laws were enacted .

in the subsequent congress , in 1988 , the hecm program was enacted as a demonstration , the home equity conversion mortgage insurance demonstration ( p.l .

100-242 ) .

the program was based on a combination of provisions from both a senate - passed bill ( s. 825 ) and a house - passed bill ( h.r .

4 ) that were brought together in conference .

based on hearings and congressional committee reports leading up to the program's enactment , the rationale for creating a reverse mortgage insurance program was to help seniors with lower incomes , and who had available home equity , remain in their homes and pay for expenses that they might not otherwise be able to afford .

in addition , both of the relevant house and senate committees discussed in their respective reports regarding hecms the need for government insurance as a means to encourage private lenders to enter into reverse mortgages .

for example , the house committee on banking , finance , and urban affairs , in its report accompanying h.r .

4 , explained its inclusion of the hecm demonstration: this demonstration program is designed to encourage private lenders to provide home equity conversion mortgages because many financial institutions have been hesitant to enter the field due to laws that do not recognize these types of mortgage instruments as well as the fact that the concept itself is relatively new .

the committee report went on to cite with approval the fact that the bill contained protections for borrowers such as required counseling and the prohibition on involuntary displacement .

the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs report accompanying s. 825 contained similar language .

p.l .

100-242 provided that hud could insure up to 2,500 hecms from the date of the demonstration program's enactment through september 30 , 1991 .

the program had the following characteristics: only those owning single - unit homes qualified ( i.e. , properties with two or more units did not qualify ) .

borrowers were allowed to prepay the mortgage without penalty .

the law allowed for a fixed or variable interest rate .

homeowners were not liable for any balance outstanding on the mortgage after sale .

the law included the requirement that borrowers receive counseling from a third party ( not the lender ) regarding other financial options besides a reverse mortgage , financial implications of a reverse mortgage , and "a disclosure that a home equity conversion mortgage may have tax consequences , affect eligibility for assistance under federal and state programs , and have an impact on the estate and heirs of the homeowner. .

the law also required that the mortgage contract contain a provision that borrowers need not repay the balance of the loan until death or sale of the home .

the hecm program continued as a demonstration for about 10 years .

during that period , the program was extended three times , through september 30 , 2000 , and the maximum number of mortgages that hud could insure was increased to 25,000 in 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) , to 30,000 in 1996 ( p.l .

104-99 ) , and shortly thereafter to 50,000 ( p.l .

104-120 ) .

hud also released three reports during this time evaluating the hecm demonstration program , as required by the statute .

the only substantive change to the hecm program during the demonstration period was made as part of the housing opportunity program extension act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-120 ) .

the law expanded the program to allow fha insurance to cover 1-4 family residences .

the fy1999 departments of veterans affairs and housing and urban development , and independent agencies appropriations act ( p.l .

105-276 ) removed the demonstration status from the hecm program and increased the number of mortgages that could be insured to 150,000 .

the law also directed the hud secretary to consult with consumer groups , industry representatives , and representatives from counseling organizations to "identify alternative approaches to providing consumer information" to potential hecm borrowers ; authorized ( from fy2000-fy2003 ) up to $1 million of the amount appropriated for hud's housing counseling program to be used for hecm counseling and consumer education ; expanded disclosure requirements , requiring that borrowers know all charges involved in the mortgage , including those for estate planning and financial advice , and which charges are required for obtaining the mortgage and which are not ; and gave the hud secretary the authority to put in place restrictions to ensure that a borrower "does not fund any unnecessary or excessive costs for obtaining the mortgage , including any costs of estate planning , financial advice , or other related services. .

the american homeownership and economic opportunity act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-569 ) : the law provided that borrowers could refinance existing hecms .

as part of the refinancing , they could receive credit for the up - front premium paid on the previous hecm , as well as waive counseling if the previous hecm had been made within the last five years .

the law also gave the hud secretary the authority to set limits on the origination fee for the subsequent hecm .

owners of units in housing cooperatives were made eligible for hecms .

the law allowed the up - front mortgage insurance premium to be waived in instances where borrowers used the amount borrowed from the reverse mortgage to purchase long - term care insurance .

fy2007 department of defense appropriations act ( p.l .

109-289 ) : the law expanded the aggregate number of mortgages that can be insured to 275,000 , and as of the date of this report , the limit remains at that number .

note that this limitation is waived in appropriations acts .

the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) : the law strengthened the counseling requirement for hecm borrowers .

third party housing counselors cannot be associated ( directly or indirectly ) with the loan originator or servicer , or with an entity involved in selling annuities , long - term care insurance , or other financial or insurance products .

the hud secretary was given authority to use a portion of mortgage insurance premiums to fund housing counseling .

mortgage originators were prevented from participating in the sale of insurance or financial products , or to establish firewalls within the company to ensure that there is no incentive to sell insurance or financial products to borrowers .

lenders were prohibited from requiring borrowers to purchase insurance and financial products as part of the reverse mortgage transaction .

the provision that allowed the up - front mortgage insurance premium to be waived when borrowers purchased long - term care insurance ( added as part of p.l .

106-569 ) was removed .

the law limited the amount of origination fees that can be charged .

hecms were allowed to be used to purchase a one - to four - family home .

the reverse mortgage stabilization act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-29 ) : the law gave hud the authority to establish requirements via notice or mortgagee letter ( rather than regulation ) regarding the fiscal safety and soundness of the hecm program .

