the airline deregulation act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-504 ) granted u.s. passenger airlines almost total freedom to determine which domestic markets to serve and what airfares to charge .

with the advent of deregulation , there were concerns that small communities would lose air service because airlines would shift their operations to serve larger and often more profitable markets .

to address these concerns , congress established the essential air service ( eas ) program in the airline deregulation act to ensure continuous air service to small communities .

initially , approximately 746 communities were eligible .

however , not all eligible communities required eas subsidies .

some communities have been receiving unsubsidized service because air carriers have been willing to offer service without subsidy ; some have been receiving subsidized service under eas from the very beginning ; others initially supported unsubsidized service , but later sought subsidies , or vice versa ; some were subsidized but later lost their eligible status and are no longer in the program .

over time , congress has tightened the conditions under which communities can receive subsidized air service .

nonetheless , program expenditures have increased , more than doubling in inflation - adjusted terms between 2008 and 2018 .

at the end of fy2018 , a total of 174 communities received subsidized eas service .

section 419 of the federal aviation act , as amended by the airline deregulation act in 1978 , established a program to continue airline service to small communities .

the program was initially seen as transitional and was set to expire after 10 years .

this program was originally administered by the civil aeronautics board ( cab ) , whose duties were later transferred to the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) .

the airline deregulation act authorized cab to require carriers to continue providing scheduled service at eligible communities after deregulation , with subsidies if necessary .

the airline deregulation act made communities receiving scheduled air service from a certificated carrier on october 24 , 1978 , eligible for eas benefits .

at that time , there were 746 eligible communities , including 237 in alaska and 9 in hawaii .

according to a dot estimate , nearly 300 of these 746 communities received subsidized service under eas at some point between 1979 and 2016 .

as the original 10-year expiration date approached in 1988 , congress extended eas for another 10 years .

in the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-264 ) , congress removed the 10-year time limit , extending the program indefinitely .

for the first 12 years of the program , the sole criterion for eas eligibility was whether the community was receiving scheduled air service on october 24 , 1978 , the date that the airline deregulation act was signed into law .

over the following years , congress has worked to limit the scope of the program , mostly by eliminating subsidy support for communities within a specified driving distance of a major hub airport .

the department of transportation and related agencies appropriations act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-69 , §332 ) enacted two eas eligibility requirements , prohibiting subsidies to carriers for service provided to ( 1 ) communities in the 48 contiguous states that are located fewer than 70 highway miles from the nearest large or medium hub airport ; or ( 2 ) communities that require a per - passenger subsidy rate in excess of $200 unless such point is greater than 210 miles from the nearest large or medium hub airport .

in 2003 , vision 100 — century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l .

108-176 , §405 ) directed dot to establish community and regional choice programs as alternatives to the traditional eas service .

in the following year , dot established two pilot programs designed to allow communities to explore options that better suit their transportation needs while keeping costs under control .

eas eligibility requirements were not changed .

for more on these two pilot programs , see the section " measures to shrink the program . .

in 2011 , the airport and airway extension act ( p.l .

112-27 , part iv ) prohibited dot from providing eas to communities with annual per - passenger subsidies of over $1,000 , regardless of their distance from the nearest hub airport .

also in 2011 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-55 ) waived the requirement that carriers provide eas flights using aircraft with 15 or more seats , allowing the use of smaller planes where passenger counts are low .

the federal aviation administration modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-95 ) adopted additional eas reform measures , including section 421 , which amended the definition of an "eas eligible place" to require a minimum number of daily enplanements .

the 2012 act also provided that for locations outside of alaska and hawaii to remain eas - eligible , they must have participated in the eas program at some time between september 30 , 2010 , and september 30 , 2011 .

this officially overrode the original list of eligible communities ( except for those in alaska and hawaii ) and capped the number of communities that are eligible for eas .

the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-190 ) reauthorized the program through fy2017 without program modification .

the faa reauthorization act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-254 ) reauthorized the program through fy2023 and introduced several legislative measures , including section 453 , which amends 49 u.s.c .

§41736 to sunset the air transportation to noneligible places ( atnep ) program in 2020 .

the law also requires the secretary of transportation to waive application of the subsidy - per - passenger cap under certain conditions .

see the section " measures to shrink the program " for details .

except in alaska and hawaii , an eas - eligible place is now defined as a community that , between september 30 , 2010 , and september 30 , 2011 , either received eas for which compensation was paid or received from the incumbent carrier a 90-day notice of intent to terminate eas following which dot required the carrier to continue providing service to the community ( known as "holding in" the carrier ) .

starting october 1 , 2012 , no new communities can enter the program should they lose their unsubsidized service , except in alaska and hawaii .

airports that were formerly eligible but did not receive subsidized service during the specified year are no longer eligible for subsidized service and may not reenter the program .

a community receiving subsidy during fy2011 remains eligible for eas subsidy if it is located more than 70 miles from the nearest large or medium hub airport ; it requires a rate of subsidy per passenger of $200 or less , unless the community is more than 210 miles from the nearest large or medium hub airport ; the average rate of subsidy per passenger was less than $1,000 during the most recent fiscal year at the end of each eas contract , regardless of the distance from a hub airport ; and it had an average of 10 or more enplanements per service day during the most recent fiscal year , unless it is more than 175 driving miles from the nearest medium or large hub airport or unless dot is satisfied that any decline below 10 enplanements is temporary .

the eas program is administered by the office of the secretary of transportation , which determines the minimum level of service required at each eligible community by specifying a hub through which the community is linked to the national passenger airline network ; a minimum number of round trips and available seats that must be provided to that hub ; certain characteristics of the aircraft to be used ; and the maximum permissible number of intermediate stops to the hub .

in general , dot subsidizes two to four round trips a day with small aircraft from an eas community to a large or medium hub airport , but in some cases it subsidizes flights to more than one hub .

the eas program is funded from overflight fees paid to the federal aviation administration by foreign aircraft that transit u.s. airspace without landing in or taking off from the united states .

since fy2002 , congress has supplemented the overflight fees with discretionary annual appropriations of varying size .

figure 1 shows that total eas program expenditures have increased sharply over time .

in constant 2018 dollars , spending has increased 600% since 1996 and 132% since 2008 .

spending has spiked sharply on two occasions , one after the 2001 terrorist attacks that temporarily disrupted the aviation market and led to an economic downturn and the other in 2008 and 2009 , when oil prices rose sharply during a deep recession .

the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 sought to reduce discretionary spending on eas through fy2015 .

section 428 authorized appropriations for the discretionary portion of eas funding of $143 million for fy2012 , declining to $93 million for fy2015 .

however , the law also authorized all overflight fee revenues , rather than just the $50 million provided historically , to be made immediately available to the eas program .

this has had the effect of increasing total outlays for eas subsidies , contrary to the expressed intent of at least some members of congress .

the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act of 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) provided $263 million in total eas funding for fy2015 , including $108 million in funding from overflight fees and $155 million in discretionary appropriation .

the faa extension , safety , and security act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-190 ) reauthorized the program at the existing level through fy2017 .

the faa reauthorization act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-254 ) authorized appropriations for the discretionary portion of eas funding of $155 million for fy2018 ; $158 million for fy2019 ; $161 million for fy2020 ; $165 million for fy2021 ; $168 million for fy2022 ; and $172 million for fy2023 .

the program's total funding , including both appropriations and overflight revenues , was $288 million in fy2018 .

annual eas funding from fy2012 to fy2018 is shown in table 1 .

between fy2012 and fy2018 , annual eas expenditures rose more than 49% in nominal dollars .

these increases have occurred despite the numerous measures congress has adopted over the years to contain program spending .

certain features of the program may have contributed to the challenge of controlling costs: few carriers may bid for any particular eas contract .

although in some instances two or three carriers may offer proposals in response to an rfp , in some cases there is only one proposal with no competing bid , providing little incentive for the carrier to minimize its subsidy request .

subsidy cost is not among the four major factors dot is required by statute to consider when evaluating bids .

dot is required by statute to consider the views of the community when selecting a carrier to provide subsidized service .

if more than one carrier is proposing to offer service , local officials are under no obligation to favor the proposal that entails the lowest cost to the federal government .

the law does not limit a community's subsidized flights to a single route .

more than 30 of the 174 eas communities had subsidized flights to more than one hub airport in fy2018 .

although eligibility for eas service , except in alaska and hawaii , depends in part on an airport's distance from the nearest large or medium hub airport , the law does not specify that the eas - subsidized flights must serve that hub .

in an unknown number of cases , subsidized flights link eas communities with more distant airports rather than with the nearest hub , perhaps at greater cost to the government .

for technical reasons or because of its own operational needs , a carrier may utilize a plane for an eas flight that is larger than necessary for the traffic on the route , in curring high per - passenger costs .

dot estimates that 20% to 25% of eas communities are served by aircraft that are larger than passenger numbers might require .

according to 2014 testimony by the government accountability office ( gao ) , eas flights , on average , had 49% of their seats filled with paying passengers in 2013 , versus an average of 83% for all domestic flights .

costs per passenger may be high because air carriers may lack an incentive to maximize the number of passengers on a flight .

once a carrier and dot have agreed on the subsidy amount for a flight , the carrier is free to set fares as it desires .

the carrier may find it more profitable to charge high fares to relatively few passengers than to maximize the passenger load with lower fares .

in fy2017 , eas subsidies in the contiguous 48 states plus puerto rico ranged from $9 to more than $778 per passenger .

dot does not have readily available data allowing calculation of changes in individual communities' per - passenger subsidy rates over time .

two tables at the end of this report provide information about subsidies to individual eas communities as of september 2018 .

appendix a provides a list of the subsidized communities in the contiguous 48 states , hawaii , and puerto rico .

appendix b lists the subsidized eas communities in alaska .

over the years , congress has sought to limit the scope of the eas program , mostly by eliminating subsidy support for communities within a reasonable driving distance of a major hub airport and by imposing a cap on the per - passenger subsidy .

although numerous communities have been removed from the program , these efforts have generally failed to contain overall spending on eas .

some provisions in effect since the passage of the 2012 faa reauthorization ( p.l .

112-95 ) could delay , if not negate , the law's attempt to shrink the program .

for example , section 426 ( c ) authorizes the secretary of transportation , subject to the availability of funds , to grant waivers to communities exceeding the $200 subsidy - per - passenger cap on a case - by - case basis ; section 421 ( e ) authorizes an unlimited number of waivers that may be granted , on an annual basis , to communities not meeting the minimum daily enplanement requirement ; and section 425 permits restoration of eas eligibility to a community determined ineligible for subsidized eas once these conditions are met .

the faa reauthorization act of 2018 included some provision requiring the secretary of transportation to waive application of the $200 subsidy - per - passenger cap under certain conditions ( see section titled " $200 subsidy cap " for details ) .

the rate of increase in eas spending remains a central issue of concern to congress .

however , program spending should be examined in conjunction with the number of communities served .

according to a gao report , 95 communities received subsidized eas service in 1995 and 150 in 2008 .

in 2018 , this number was 174 ( see appendix a ) .

nevertheless , the growth rate of average subsidy per eas community over the years has been significant .

the average annual eas subsidy in non - alaska communities rose from $1 million per community in fy2002 to $2.6 million in fy2018 .

in addition to multiple contributing factors previously discussed , government regulations may affect the provision of air service to small communities .

for example , a 2013 faa pilot qualification rule increased the qualification requirements for airline pilots .

many pilots working for regional airlines did not meet the new minimum qualifications .

the rules appear to have forced small carriers to raise salaries in order to attract qualified pilots , potentially raising eas subsidy costs as well .

in a 2009 report , gao offered a number of options for modifying the eas program: limiting program eligibility to communities participating as of a specified date ; allowing carriers more flexibility on type of aircraft and / or service frequency ; awarding long - term eas agreements and incorporating financial incentives ; allowing renegotiation of eas agreements ; consolidating eas flights at regional airports ; and focusing eas service on the most remote communities .

the first three options were adopted and included in federal laws .

gao also suggested that a multimodal approach to provide financial assistance could potentially be more responsive to communities' needs .

it reiterated this recommendation in its 2014 report , suggesting that multimodal solutions , such as bus service to large airports or air taxi service to connect communities , could be more cost - effective than the current eas program .

despite the changes that have been made to limit communities' eligibility for eas and to permit the use of smaller aircraft , it appears that eligible communities , air carriers , and dot may lack incentives to minimize program expenditures .

the changes adopted in recent years , including in the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 , have not proven effective in controlling program costs , in part because communities that fail to meet certain eligibility requirements almost always are granted waivers upon request .

the faa reauthorization act of 2018 provides that certain eligibility requirements will not apply to a number of these communities as long as they meet certain criteria .

appendix a .

subsidized eas outside of alaska appendix b .

subsidized eas in alask .

