the land and water conservation fund ( lwcf ) act of 1965 was enacted to "assist in preserving , developing , and assuring accessibility to ... outdoor recreation resources. .

two main goals of the law were to facilitate participation in recreation and "to strengthen the health and vitality" of u.s. citizens .

to accomplish these goals , purposes of the law included "providing funds" for federal land acquisition and for federal assistance to states generally related to outdoor recreation .

the fund is authorized to receive $900 million in revenues annually under the lwcf act .

each year the fund accrues revenues at this level .

the fund accumulates the majority of its revenues from oil and gas leases on the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) .

it also accumulates revenues from the federal motorboat fuel tax and surplus property sales .

however , revenues that accrue under the lwcf act are available only if appropriated by congress through the discretionary appropriations process .

the lwcf receives additional revenue ( beyond the $900 million ) from ocs leasing under the gulf of mexico energy security act of 2006 ( gomesa ) .

unlike revenues under the lwcf act , gomesa revenues are mandatory appropriations ( and thus are not subject to annual appropriation by congress ) .

they can be used only for grants to states for outdoor recreation purposes .

the overall level of annual appropriations ( discretionary and mandatory combined ) has varied widely since the fund's origin in fy1965 .

of the total revenues that have accrued throughout the program's history ( $40.9 billion ) , less than half have been appropriated ( $18.9 billion ) through fy2019 .

thus , the unappropriated balance in the fund is estimated at $22.0 billion through fy2019 .

the lwcf act outlines uses of the fund for federal and state purposes .

it states that of the total made available to the fund , not less than 40% is to be used for "federal purposes" and not less than 40% is to be used to provide "financial assistance to states. .

the act lists the federal purposes for which the president is to allot lwcf funds "unless otherwise allotted in the appropriation act making them available. .

these purposes primarily relate to the acquisition of lands and waters ( and interests therein ) by the federal government .

with regard to state purposes , the act authorizes a matching grant program to states for outdoor recreation purposes .

in practice , over the history of the lwcf , appropriations acts have provided funding for three general purposes .

first , for each year since fy1965 , appropriations for land acquisition have been provided to some or all of the major federal land management agencies — the bureau of land management ( blm ) , fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , national park service ( nps ) , and forest service ( fs ) .

second , for nearly every year since fy1965 , appropriations have funded the outdoor recreation matching grant program , to assist states in recreational planning , acquiring recreational lands and waters , and developing outdoor recreational facilities .

third , beginning in fy1998 , appropriations from the lwcf have been provided each year , except fy1999 , to fund other federal programs with related natural resource purposes .

hereinafter , the third type of appropriations is referred to as funding other purposes .

the $18.9 billion appropriated from the fund through fy2019 has been allocated in different proportions among federal land acquisition , the state grant program , and other purposes .

the largest portion of the total — $11.4 billion — has been appropriated for federal land acquisition .

the state grant program has received the second - largest portion , $4.8 billion .

other purposes have received the remaining $2.7 billion .

appendix a shows the total lwcf appropriation for other purposes .

congress continues to consider the extent to which the lwcf should fund purposes other than federal land acquisition and outdoor recreation grants to states .

some traditional lwcf advocates and beneficiaries have expressed concern about expanding the use of the funds , particularly if such expansion results in lower appropriations for land acquisition and outdoor recreation grants to states .

some members of congress , presidents , and stakeholders have supported funding other purposes in order to draw on the balance in the fund for policy priorities , to shift the focus of the fund from land acquisition , or to achieve other goals .

a number of measures introduced in recent congresses sought to authorize funding from the lwcf for various other purposes .

these measures were not enacted .

they included proposals to specify an amount or percentage of funding for two programs that are currently funded by the lwcf — the forest legacy program and cooperative endangered species conservation grants — although the lwcf act does not specifically authorize this funding .

other proposals sought to authorize programs or activities that have not been funded by lwcf in the past , or that have been rarely funded by lwcf in the past .

for instance , one 115 th congress bill would have authorized lwcf funding for certain programs and activities of the major land management agencies , including deferred maintenance , critical infrastructure , visitor services , and clean - up efforts ; the payments in lieu of taxes program ; and certain offshore energy exploration , innovation , and education activities .

as another example , one 115 th congress bill proposed to authorize lwcf funding for financial assistance from the secretary of housing and urban development for park and recreation infrastructure projects .

the balance of this report discusses the other purposes for which lwcf appropriations have been provided throughout the fund's history .

it identifies the amount of funding contained in annual appropriations laws for other purposes and the types of purposes for which funds have been appropriated .

a total of $72.0 million was appropriated from the lwcf for other purposes in fy1998 , the first year in which lwcf was used to fund other purposes .

the total included $60.0 million for maintenance needs of the four land management agencies and $12.0 million for rehabilitation and maintenance of the beartooth highway ( in wyoming and montana ) .

in fy1998 , total lwcf appropriations had spiked to approximately $969 million from the fy1997 level of about $159 million .

both the dollar amounts and the percentages of annual lwcf appropriations for other purposes have varied widely since fy1998 .

 ( see appendix b . ) .

over the most recent 10 years , lwcf appropriations for other purposes fluctuated , declining overall from $132.5 million in fy2010 to $93.3 million in fy2019 ( in current dollars ) .

however , the fy2019 level was the highest appropriation since fy2010 .

beginning in fy2011 , appropriations for other purposes in each year have been less than $100 million , as was the case for fy1998-fy2000 .

appropriations for other purposes were at their lowest dollar amount in fy1999 , when no funds for other purposes were appropriated .

the next - lowest dollar value was provided for fy2000 , when a total of $20.0 million was appropriated for three purposes: elwha river ecosystem restoration ( in washington ) , deferred maintenance of the nps , and the fs forest legacy program .

by contrast , from fy2001 to fy2010 , appropriations for other purposes exceeded $100 million in each year .

in fact , during four of these years ( fy2004-fy2007 ) , the annual appropriation was between $200 million and $225 million .

the appropriation surpassed $400 million in another year during the period .

specifically , the $456.0 million appropriation in fy2001 was more than double the amount provided for other purposes in any other year .

these appropriations were used to fund more than a dozen programs in the clinton administration's lands legacy initiative .

in that year , total lwcf appropriations exceeded the annual authorization level , totaling nearly $1 billion .

this record level of funding was provided partly in response to president clinton's lands legacy initiative , which sought $1.4 billion for about two dozen resource - protection programs , including the lwcf .

it also was provided partly in response to some congressional interest in securing increased and more certain funding for the lwcf .

the highest percentage of annual funds provided for other purposes occurred in fy2006 and fy2007 ( 59% in both years ) , in response to president george w. bush's request for funding for an array of programs .

for instance , in fy2007 the bush administration sought funding from the lwcf for 15 programs in addition to land acquisition and state grants .

for that year , the appropriation for five other purposes was $216.1 million , out of a total lwcf appropriation of $366.1 million .

in some years , the appropriation for other purposes was significantly less than the administration requested .

for example , for fy2008 the bush administration sought $313.1 million for other purposes , or 83% of the total request of $378.7 million .

the fy2008 appropriation for other purposes was $101.3 million , or 40% of the lwcf total of $255.1 million .

the $2.7 billion appropriated from the lwcf from fy1998 to fy2019 for other purposes represents 27% of the $10.0 billion total appropriations from lwcf during the period .

fws and fs have received the largest shares of the appropriations for other purposes , about $1.4 billion ( 53% ) and $1.0 billion ( 38% ) , respectively .

blm , nps , the u.s. geological survey , and the bureau of indian affairs have shared the remaining $0.2 billion ( 9% ) of the appropriations for other purposes .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

because there is no set of other purposes specified in the lwcf act to be funded from the lwcf , presidents have sought funds for a variety of purposes .

congress has chosen which of these requests to fund from the lwcf , and whether to fund any additional programs from the lwcf not suggested by the president .

appropriations for other purposes have been provided for more than a dozen diverse natural resource - related programs , including facility maintenance of the land management agencies , ecosystem restoration , the historic preservation fund , the payments in lieu of taxes program , the fs forest legacy program , fws state and tribal wildlife grants , the fws cooperative endangered species conservation fund , u.s. geological survey science and cooperative programs , and bureau of indian affairs indian land and water claim settlements .

 ( see appendix a . ) .

although in earlier years several other purposes typically were funded from lwcf , since fy2008 , funds have been appropriated annually only for grants under two programs: forest legacy and cooperative endangered species conservation fund .

 ( see appendix b and figure 2 . ) .

the total appropriation from lwcf for these two programs ( since fy1998 ) is $1.7 billion , or 63% of all appropriations for other purposes ( $2.7 billion ) .

these two programs and a third grant program funded prior to fy2008 from lwcf — fws state and tribal wildlife grants — have received more than three - quarters ( $2.1 billion , 79% ) of the total appropriations for other purposes .

the appropriations through fy2019 are $944.4 million for forest legacy ( 35% of the other purposes total ) , $753.3 million for cooperative endangered species conservation fund ( 28% of total ) , and $448.5 million for state and tribal wildlife grants ( 17% of total ) .

grants under the forest legacy program are used to acquire lands or conservation easements to preserve private forests threatened by conversion to non - forest uses , such as agriculture or residences .

fs provides matching grants to states through a competitive process that requires state approval and then national approval and ranking .

the ranking is based on the importance of the project ( potential public benefits from protection ) , the likelihood of the forest's conversion to non - forest uses , and the strategic relevance of the project , among other factors .

the program is implemented primarily through state partners , usually state forestry agencies .

state partners generally acquire , hold , and administer the easements or land purchases , although the federal government also may do so .

the cooperative endangered species conservation fund provides grants "for species and habitat conservation actions on non - federal lands , including habitat acquisition , conservation planning , habitat restoration , status surveys , captive propagation and reintroduction , research , and education. .

in addition to appropriations from lwcf , the cooperative endangered species conservation fund typically receives additional appropriations .

in recent years , the appropriations from lwcf generally have been used for two types of land acquisition grants provided to state and territories on a matching basis .

recovery land acquisition grants have been made for acquisition of habitats in support of species recovery goals and objectives .

habitat conservation plan land acquisition grants have been made for acquisition of lands that are associated with habitat conservation plans .

state and tribal wildlife grants are provided to states , territories , and tribes to develop and implement programs for the benefit of fish and wildlife and their habitats , including nongame species .

state and tribal wildlife grants received funding from the lwcf for fy2001-fy2007 ; subsequently , funding has been provided from the general fund of the u.s. treasury .

currently , the largest portion of the program is for formula grants to states and territories on a matching basis .

funds from the formula grants may be used to develop state conservation plans and to implement specific conservation projects .

smaller amounts of funding have been appropriated for competitive grants to states and territories , and to tribal governments .

the competitive grant programs do not have matching requirements .

appendix a shows the total lwcf appropriations for other purposes summed from fy1998 to fy2019 .

appendix b shows the other purposes that received lwcf appropriations each year , the amount of lwcf appropriations for each purpose , and the total annual appropriations for other purposes .

appendix a .

total lwcf appropriations for other purposes appendix b .

annual lwcf appropriations for other purpose .

