since 1865 , the u.s. secret service ( usss ) has investigated counterfeiting , and since 1901 , at the request of congressional leadership , the service has provided full - time presidential protection .

congress has increased its oversight of the usss due to concern about terrorism threats , several security breaches , and misconduct of usss personnel .

recent incidents include abuse of alcohol , and security breaches of the white house grounds and presidential protection .

this series of incidents has tarnished the image many have of the usss and may have potentially affected its operations .

for example , on september 19 , 2014 , a person gained unauthorized entrance into the white house after climbing the fence .

on september 30 , 2014 , following a house oversight and government reform committee hearing on the usss , which addressed this breach and previous incidents it became public that on september 16 , 2014 , a private security contractor at a federal facility , while armed , was allowed to share an elevator with the president during a site visit , in violation of usss security protocols .

finally , on march 4 , 2015 , it was reported that two senior usss special agents , including one who was responsible for all aspects of white house security , disrupted the scene of an investigation of a suspicious package during an elevated security condition at the white house complex .

it was further alleged that these two agents were under the influence of alcohol .

the usss is not the only federal law enforcement entity that has been identified with having personnel violating ethics or participating in professional and personal misconduct .

for example , in april 2015 , the house judiciary committee conducted a hearing on "analyzing misconduct in federal law enforcement," and focused on misconduct by federal drug enforcement agency personnel .

it should be noted , however , that usss security breaches and ethical violations may have greater consequences , particularly concerning presidential protection .

this report provides a brief overview of the usss's missions and structure , as currently constituted , and explores enacted and proposed changes and reforms stemming from the recent series of incidents embarrassing to the usss and affecting its mission .

to put the issues surrounding the usss in context , one needs to first understand the two concurrent usss missions .

there are numerous ways in which congress , dhs , and the usss might address recent security breaches and ethical violations within usss .

for example , congress could continue to engage in deliberate oversight of the usss , with an emphasis on identifying potential reforms to usss's management practices , operations , and training programs that go beyond simply reacting to recent security breaches and ethical violations and , instead , focusing on the underlying causes of these program failures .

agreement concerning the nature of these fundamental issues and how to address them has not yet been achieved , but focusing solely on individual incidents may potentially obscure or confuse the underlying issues that have adversely affected the usss as a whole and its ability to fully meet its missions .

appendix a. u.s. secret service components the office of the director is the lead office within the usss and the director is assisted by the office of the chief counsel and the office of equal employment opportunity and diversity .

a chief operating officer manages the following offices: office of the chief financial officer , which is responsible for administrative operations , budget , financial systems , and procurement .

office of human resources ( hr ) , which is responsible for benefits and payroll ; hr information technology ; hr research and assessment ; employee performance and relations ; safety , health , and environmental programs ; security clearances ; talent and employee acquisition management ; and workforce planning .

office of strategic planning and policy , which is responsible for conducting usss policy planning and long - term strategy development .

a deputy director manages the following offices: office of government and public affairs , which is responsible for conducting liaison with the public , other federal entities ( including congress ) , and state and local governments .

office of investigations , which is responsible for criminal investigations including cyber , financial , and counterfeiting crimes .

this office also manages the international programs and domestic field and resident offices .

office of professional responsibility monitors and investigates the professional conduct of usss agents and uniform division officers .

office of protective operations , which is responsible for protecting the president , the vice president , and their families .

this office has entities that protect dignitaries , former presidents george h. w. bush , jimmy carter , bill clinton , and george w. bush .

additionally , this office manages the protection of former first lady nancy reagan .

supporting this protection mission , the office of protective operations has special operations and services offices .

this office also includes the uniformed division .

office of strategic intelligence and information works with the office of protective operations and provides counter surveillance , and threat intelligence and assessment activities .

office of technical development and mission support , which is responsible for providing it support to the usss's protective mission .

office of training is responsible for planning , managing , and executing all usss training primarily conducted at the james j. rowley training center .

finally , an independent office of integrity works with both the chief operating officer and the deputy director .

one may assume this office was established to address the recent ethical issues the usss has experienced .

each of these usss components are staffed by a number of usss personnel .

appendix b .

criminal investigations field office .

