the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) provides supplemental nutrition - rich foods and nutrition education ( including breastfeeding promotion and support ) , as well as referrals to health care and social services , to low - income , nutritionally at - risk women , infants , and children up to five years old .

eligible women are specifically limited to those pregnant and postpartum ( if breastfeeding , women are eligible for more benefits for a longer period of time ) .

the wic program seeks to improve the health status of its participants and prevent the occurrence of health problems during critical times of growth and development .

wic is a federally funded program administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( usda - fns ) .

in fy2016 , approximately 7.7 million people participated in wic each month in programs run by 90 state agencies ( 50 states , district of columbia , 5 u.s. territories , and 34 indian tribal organizations ) .

usda has said roughly half of all infants in the united states participate in the wic program .

this report provides an overview of the wic program , including administration , funding , eligibility , benefits , benefits redemption , and cost containment policies .

while this report is meant to be a primer and is not focused on tracking major policy issues , it may be useful for the reader to note that this report does discuss features of the wic program that are often the topic of policy debate: funding , eligible foods , and the redemption of benefits .

mothers and children seeking wic assistance must apply to their local wic agencies and be screened for eligibility .

wic has a number of federal and state eligibility requirements including categorical , financial , and nutritional risk tests .

the wic program provides grants to states to provide benefits redeemable for specified supplemental foods ( i.e. , the wic food package ) and specified services .

in addition to foods , wic participants receive nutrition education , breastfeeding promotion and support , and referrals to healthcare and social services .

recent wic grants to states for food costs as well as nutrition services and administration ( nsa ) are displayed in table 2 , with historical funding in table a - 1 .

state agencies , under federal guidelines , design and oversee the delivery of food benefits to participants .

as stated earlier , almost all state agencies currently provide benefits using a voucher or ebt card for redemption at an authorized vendor .

this section provides an overview of benefit redemption , states' transitions to ebt , authorization and management of vendors , and related cost containment policies .

several aspects of the wic program discussed in this primer — funding , eligible foods , and retail transactions — have been of interest to policymakers in the past and may continue to be in the future .

although the program has been reauthorized roughly every five years , interest in or debate over the program also arises in the context of annual appropriations deliberations .

in light of budget laws' discretionary spending limits , congressional appropriators consider forecasted wic need against other priorities .

in addition to funding matters , moving forward , policymakers may be interested in overseeing the next update to the wic food package regulations and states' transitions to ebt .

along with the sources cited throughout the report , please see the text box below for a listing of additional resources which provide finer detail than was included in this overview .

appendix a .

additional wic data appendix b .

revisions of wic food packages , 2003-present 2009 changes to the wic food packages effective october 1 , 2009 , usda significantly revised the wic food packages .

these changes were made to reflect updates and revisions in nutrition science , public health concerns , and cultural eating patterns .

the revised packages provide participants with a wider variety of foods , including whole grains , fruits , and vegetables ; increase incentives for breastfeeding ; and allow states greater flexibility in accommodating cultural preferences of participants .

before usda embarked on this process to update the food packages , there had not been a major revision since the 1970s .

in 2003 , usda - fns contracted with the institute of medicine ( iom ) to independently review the wic food packages , in order to align them more closely with updated nutrition science .

iom released its final report in 2005 , recommending significant , though cost - neutral , changes to the food packages .

iom's major recommendations included the addition of whole - wheat bread and infant foods including fruits , vegetables , and meats ; revised food quantities and food package categories ; additional foods for breastfeeding women and breastfed infants ; providing new optional food - substitutions ( such as soy milk and tofu ) ; and the introduction of a cash - value voucher ( cvv ) redeemable for a specified dollar amount of fruits and vegetables .

in december 2007 , usda - fns published an interim final rule to update the wic food packages .

this interim rule largely included the iom's recommendations , and state agencies were required to implement the changes in their state lists by october 1 , 2009 .

while the interim final rule was in effect , usda - fns collected comments on its implementation , receiving over 7,500 letters .

the agency published a final rule in march 2014 .

about the white potato policy changes the description of the wic food packages in the " supplemental food package " section of this report largely reflects the march 2014 final rule .

both the interim and final rules restricted the purchase of white potatoes , but a 2015 legislative change now allows their purchase .

one of the changes in the updated food packages was the inclusion of the cvv .

based on the 2005 iom recommendations , these interim and final regulations did not allow participants to purchase white potatoes with the cvv .

iom cited the 2005 dietary guidelines for americans for starchy vegetable consumption as well as food intake data showing that white potatoes , unlike many other vegetables , were already widely consumed .

this policy proved to be controversial in congress and related proposals were included in the 112 th and 113 th congress .

in december 2014 , congress enacted a fy2015 appropriations law that included a policy rider ( section 753 of p.l .

113-235 ) to change wic's exclusion of white potatoes .

the law barred usda from excluding any vegetable ( without added sugar , salt , or fat ) from the wic food packages , therefore allowing white potatoes .

the provision also required usda to conduct another review of the wic food packages , and , based on the results of that review , white potatoes ( or other vegetables ) would either continue to be included or would return to being excluded .

in response to the appropriations law , on december 30 , 2014 , fns issued policy guidance to states for implementing the inclusion of white potatoes .

states were required to submit implementation plans to fns by january 30 , 2015 .

fns's memo states that "state agencies are expected to complete all implementation actions as soon as possible , but no later than july 1 , 2015. .

iom / hmd's wic food package review: 2015-present note: in 2016 , the iom was renamed the health and medicine division ( hmd ) of the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ( nasem ) .

since the 2014 final rule , usda - fns engaged hmd for further review and assessment of the wic food package studies .

hmd convened an expert committee and has since produced three reports , the third and final of which is expected to form the basis for fns's next revision of the wic food packages .

the first , published in february 2015 , was a "letter report" regarding the inclusion of the white potatoes issue ( this was the review required by p.l .

113-235 ) .

the committee evaluated the 2009 regulation and , along with recommendations on data collection and study topics , recommended that usda allow white potatoes as a wic - eligible vegetable for purchase with the cash value voucher so long as this was consistent with the ( forthcoming at that time ) 2015 dietary guidelines for americans .

the second , published in november 2015 , established a framework by which the hmd committee would subsequently evaluate the current wic food packages and make findings in the final report .

the third and final report of the series was published in january 2017 ; it is the hmd committee's final analysis of the current wic food packages and includes recommendations for changes .

in general , the committee recommends increasing the amounts of the cash value voucher , servings of whole grains , and seafood , while decreasing juice , milk , legumes , peanut butter , infant vegetables , fruits , and meats .

for all food packages for women and children , the committee recommends increasing the dollar amount of cash value vouchers ; adding fish ; increasing the amount of whole grains from 16 ounces to 24 ounces ; and reducing the amounts of juice , dairy , legumes , and peanut butter .

hmd also recommended policy changes to encourage partial breastfeeding over the exclusively formula - feeding package .

additional recommendations and the committee's rationale for its recommendations are included in the final report .

as of the date of this crs report , usda has not published any rules to amend the wic food package regulations .

as discussed earlier , usda - fns regulations based upon scientific recommendations , not the scientific recommendations themselves , govern the program's eligible foods and related issuance policies .

appendix c. wic farmers' market nutrition program ( wic fmnp ) the wic farmers' market nutrition program ( wic - fmnp ) was first established in 1992 .

wic - fmnp provides grants to participating states to offer vouchers / coupons / ebt to wic participants that may be used in farmers' markets , roadside stands , and other approved venues to purchase fresh produce .

not all states participate in wic - fmnp ; in fy2015 , 38 states , the district of columbia , 3 u.s. territories , and 6 indian tribal organizations received wic - fmnp grants .

federal funds primarily cover the program's food costs and 70% of the administrative costs for each participating state .

participating state agencies must provide program income or state , local , or private funds for the program in an amount that is equal to at least 30% of its administrative cost , with some exceptions for tribal agencies .

in fy2015 , the program covered an estimated 1.7 million recipients , and about 17,900 farmers , 3,400 farmers' markets , and 2,900 roadside stands .

participants received an average benefit of $23 .

in fy2015 , total wic - fmnp grant funding was approximately $20 million .

fy2016 appropriations ( p.l .

114-113 ) provided $18.5 million for wic fmnp .

these are discretionary funds , but while wic funding is appropriated to the wic account , wic - fnmp funds are included in the commodity assistance program account .

