as part of their normal activities , vessels may discharge a wide range of wastes and contaminants into u.s. and international waters , including nutrients , pathogens , oil and grease , metals such as copper , toxic chemical compounds , and non - native aquatic nuisance , or invasive , species ( ais ) .

the discharges can include shower and laundry facility water , deck washdown and runoff , bilgewater , motor fuel , machinery wastewater , and ballast water , among others .

contaminants in these discharges can have a broad array of effects on aquatic species and human health , many of which can be harmful .

similarly , the universe of vessels that may release these discharges is diverse and includes commercial fishing vessels , cruise ships , ferries , barges , mobile offshore drilling units , tankers , cargo ships , container ships , research vessels , and emergency response vessels , such as firefighting and police vessels .

including recreational vessels , the universe of vessels is in the millions .

ballast water discharges from vessels have been a particular concern , because invasive species entering u.s. waters cause social , recreational , and ecological disturbances and result in significant economic losses .

national attention was drawn to the invasive species problem with the arrival of zebra mussels in the great lakes in the late 1980s .

since then , virtually all coastal and great lakes states have experienced ecological change and loss from ais .

for example , zebra mussels attach to hard surfaces such as water intake pipes that are used for cooling water and municipal water supply .

when this occurs , the infestation can cause significant reduction in pumping capacity and occasionally has caused plant shutdowns .

ballast water has been identified as a major pathway for introduction of ais .

ships use large amounts of ballast water to stabilize the vessel during transport .

ballast water is often taken on in the coastal waters in one region after ships discharge wastewater or unload cargo .

it is then discharged at the next port of call , wherever more cargo is loaded .

the practice of taking on and discharging ballast water is essential to the proper functioning of ships , because the water that is taken in or discharged compensates for changes in the vessel's weight as cargo is loaded or unloaded , and as fuel and supplies are consumed .

however , ballast water discharge typically contains a variety of biological materials , including non - native , nuisance , exotic species .

if these species are released into lakes or rivers as part of ballast water discharge , they can alter aquatic ecosystems .

today stakeholders broadly agree on the need for strong measures to control vessel discharges , especially ballast water discharges , but there are differing views on how to do that .

vessel discharge requirements in the united states are a result of u.s. coast guard regulations ; a u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) permit ; and individual state rules , limitations , and requirements .

vessels also are subject to a number of international agreements , in particular to conventions adopted by the international maritime organization ( imo ) , which apply to vessels operating under flags of countries that are parties to the conventions .

this report discusses the combination of regulations and standards , which is at issue today and is addressed in legislation in the 114 th congress , the vessel incidental discharge act ( s. 373 , h.r .

980 , and titles included in s. 1611 , s. 2829 , and h.r .

4909 , which the house passed on may 18 ) .

the combination of multiple federal requirements , plus state requirements , presents several closely related issues .

some of these issues have been addressed in legislation for more than a decade , including house and senate versions of the vessel incidental discharge act in the 114 th congress ( discussed below ) .

on february 4 , 2015 , the senate commerce subcommittee on oceans , atmosphere , fisheries , and coast guard held a hearing on issues concerning regulation and management of discharges incidental to the normal operation of vessels .

in february 2015 , the full committee approved s. 373 , the vessel incidental discharge act .

in addition , in june 2015 , the full committee approved and ordered reported s. 1611 , coast guard authorization act of 2015 .

as reported , s. 1611 includes the text of s. 373 as title viii .

the senate commerce committee also attached the text of s. 373 to s. 2829 , the maritime administration authorization and enhancement act for fiscal year 2017 , which it ordered reported on april 27 , 2016 .

the full senate has not acted on any of these bills .

legislation similar to s. 373 has been introduced in the house in the 114 th congress ( h.r .

980 ) .

on may 18 , 2016 , the house passed h.r .

4909 , the national defense authorization act for fy2017 .

title xxxvi of this bill , as passed , is identical to the text of h.r .

980 .

in the statement of administration policy on h.r .

4909 , the administration indicated that it objects to title xxxvi .

the current legislation would establish a single federal ballast water management standard , specifying the coast guard's 2012 numeric standards as the baseline .

under the legislation , these standards would supersede existing state standards or permits and also would supersede epa's ballast water management requirements under the cwa .

the coast guard would be directed to adopt more stringent ballast water standards within eight years , unless a feasibility review determines that the specified more stringent standards are not attainable .

the coast guard could establish lower or higher revised performance standards with respect to classes of vessels , if appropriate .

upon enactment of the bill , manufacturers of ballast water treatment technology could only sell , deliver , or import technology that has been certified by the coast guard as meeting criteria in the legislation .

finally , a state could adopt or enforce a more stringent ballast water performance standard if the coast guard determines that compliance with the state standard is achievable and is consistent with obligations under relevant international treaties or agreements .

the following discussion describes the provisions of the senate legislation ( s. 373 ; the senate commerce committee also included the text of this bill as provisions of s. 1611 and s. 2829 ) .

section 1 is the short title and table of contents .

section 2 provides several findings and states that the purpose of the act "is to provide for the establishment of nationally uniform and environmentally sound standards and requirements for the management of discharges incidental to the normal operation of a vessel. .

section 3 defines key terms , including ballast water , ballast water performance standard , and discharges incidental to the normal operation of a vessel .

the latter term is defined to include a lengthy specific list of discharges ( eg , ballast water , graywater , bilge water , cooling water , boat engine wet exhaust , weather deck runoff , fish hold , or fish hold cleaning effluent ) ; any other pollutant associated with operation of a marine propulsion system ; or a pollutant discharge to water in connection with engine or equipment testing , maintenance , or repair .

the term "discharges incidental to the normal operation of a vessel" excludes certain vessel discharges that are regulated under other laws such as the cwa or the act to prevent pollution from ships ( eg , rubbish , trash , or garbage ; oil or hazardous substances ; sewage ; graywater ; air pollutant emissions ) .

vessels subject to the bill's requirements are defined as "watercraft or other artificial contrivance used ... as a means of transportation on water. .

section 7 of the legislation excludes coast guard vessels and department of defense vessels .

section 4 directs the secretary of the department in which the coast guard is operating , in consultation with epa , to establish and implement uniform national standards and requirements to regulate vessel discharges .

the standards and requirements shall be based on the best available technology economically achievable and shall supersede any permitting requirement or prohibition under any other provision of law .

the latter provision would effectively supersede the epa vgp .

the coast guard shall enforce the standards and requirements under the act , and each state may enforce the standards and requirements .

note that the bill does not include a mechanism for enforcement authority to be delegated to states ( as is generally allowed under many federal environmental laws such as the cwa ) .

section 5 details the specific uniform national standards and requirements .

it specifies that the ballast water standards in the existing coast guard rule shall apply to vessel discharges of ballast water .

it further directs the coast guard to conduct a review by january 2020 to determine the feasibility of achieving revised ballast water performance standards that would be 100 times more stringent than the initial standards for allowable concentrations of living organisms in the bill ( i.e. , existing coast guard rules ) .

the bill details criteria to be followed in conducting the feasibility review .

subject to the findings of the feasibility review , the coast guard is directed to revise the ballast water performance standards — by adopting the revised standards specified in the vessel incidental discharge act , by adopting lower performance standards if the coast guard determines that no ballast water treatment technology can meet the revised standards in the bill , or by adopting higher performance standards if treatment technology exists that exceeds the revised standards .

procedures are detailed for the coast guard to establish compliance schedules and a process for the coast guard to grant extensions to a vessel owner or operator .

related to these provisions , section 8 of the bill authorizes the coast guard to establish one or more compliance programs as alternatives to the regulations under section 5 .

such an alternative program could apply to small vessels with maximum ballast water capacity of less than 8 cubic meters ( or 2,113 gallons ) , vessels with less than three years of remaining useful life , or vessels that discharge ballast water into an on - shore facility .

section 8 directs epa to promulgate standards for on - shore facilities that receive ballast water .

section 5 also directs the coast guard to review ballast water performance standards every 10 years and initiate a rulemaking if it is determined that further revision would "result in a scientifically demonstrable and substantial reduction in the risk of the introduction or establishment of aquatic nuisance species. .

this section and , indeed , most of the bill , focuses on standards and requirements applicable to discharges of ballast water .

other non - ballast water vessel discharges are addressed in two provisions .

first , section 5 ( a ) ( 2 ) directs the coast guard , in consultation with epa , to issue a rule to establish best management practices ( bmps ) — not standards of performance — for vessel discharges other than ballast water .

in contrast to standards of performance that typically specify numeric limits on discharges , bmps generally identify practices , maintenance procedures , or operating procedures to reduce or prevent pollutant discharges .

many epa regulations and the vgp contain both numeric standards of performance and bmps .

second , section 5 ( c ) ( 2 ) provides that the coast guard , in consultation with epa , may review the bmps for non - ballast water vessel discharges during a decennial review ( like the decennial review of ballast water standards ) and may initiate a rulemaking to revise bmps , if doing so would "substantially reduce" impacts of these vessel discharges to navigable waters .

finally , section 5 requires vessels to conduct saltwater flushing of ballast water tanks prior to entering the great lakes ( as they already are required to do under coast guard rules ) .

section 6 requires epa in consultation with the coast guard to develop protocols for certifying ballast water treatment technologies within six months of enactment and then establishes a process for the coast guard to certify ballast water treatment technology based on those protocols .

beginning one year after issuance of the testing protocols , the bill prohibits a manufacturer from selling , offering for sale , delivering , or importing into the united states for sale any ballast water technology unless the technology has been certified .

as described previously , the coast guard's existing rules similarly require technology certification .

since no technological system has yet received approval , the coast guard has granted two - year exemptions , as allowed under their rules .

section 6 does not include a provision like the one in the coast guard rules that would allow granting of temporary exemptions in the event that no technology has been approved .

section 6 prohibits vessel owners / operators from using ballast water treatment technology that has not been approved by the coast guard , unless the technology is being evaluated under the coast guard shipboard technology evaluation program ( step ) for ballast water management system technologies , or the technology has been certified by a foreign entity to meet equivalent requirements to those of the vessel incidental discharge act .

section 7 makes permanent the current permit moratorium for small vessels that is due to expire in december 2017 .

section 7 also codifies elements of the existing coast guard rules that provide exemptions from ballast water performance standards for vessels that do not discharge ballast water ( i.e. , vessels that carry permanent ballast water in sealed tanks , vessels that use continuous ballast flow - through systems that do not discharge ais , or vessels with ballast water discharges consisting entirely of water suitable for human consumption ) .

the provision also exempts vessels that operate in the great lakes or other geographically limited area or that take up and discharge ballast water exclusively within one captain of the port ( copt ) zone established by the coast guard .

section 9 provides rules for judicial review , stating that review of final regulations under the vessel incidental discharge act shall be in the d.c .

circuit court of appeals .

the bill does not authorize citizen suits to enforce any of its provisions .

although the coast guard has general law enforcement authority pursuant to 14 u.s.c .

§89 , there is no express authority in the bill , which is a free - standing measure ( i.e. , it would not amend nanpca / nisa ) , for the coast guard to enforce its provisions .

section 10 addresses the effect of the bill on state authority .

section 10 would generally prohibit a state or political subdivision from adopting or enforcing any law or rule concerning vessel discharges after enactment of the bill .

however , it modifies this general prohibition by authorizing a state or political subdivision to adopt or enforce a ballast water law or rule that is more stringent than the standards under the vessel incidental discharge act if the coast guard makes a determination that compliance with the standard can be achieved and detected ; that technology is commercially available ; and determines that the law or rule is consistent with international treaties or agreements to which the united states is a party .

a state or political subdivision seeking to adopt or enforce its own more stringent law or rule is authorized in section 10 to petition the coast guard , and the coast guard is required to make a determination on a petition within 90 days of receipt .

finally , section 11 states that upon enactment , the legislation shall be the exclusive statutory authority for federal regulation of vessel discharges .

further , any existing regulation relating to a permitting requirement or prohibition on vessel discharges shall be deemed to be a regulation under this act that remains in effect unless or until superseded by new rules under the vessel incidental discharge act .

legislation intended to strengthen regulation and management of ballast water discharges that can be a source of non - native aquatic invasive species in u.s. waters has been introduced in congress for more than a decade , including proposals to require vessels to achieve specific ballast water treatment performance standards .

in recent years — especially since epa's issuance of the first vessel general permit in 2008 — some of the proposals have evolved and been expanded to address administrative aspects of ballast water regulation , that is , clarifying what some term a "jumble" of federal and state requirements .

while many in the maritime industry strongly support the legislation discussed in this report , others , including some states and environmental advocacy groups , continue to oppose aspects of the proposals .

the administration's position on the current legislation is unknown .

