 table 1 summarizes congressional action on selected navy fy2020 research and development account line items ( known as program elements , or pes ) that related to shipboard lasers , emrg , and glgp .

these pes do not necessarily capture all navy research and development work related to these efforts — additional funding for these efforts may occur in other pes that do not explicitly indicate that they include funding for these efforts .

this appendix presents additional information on potential advantages and limitations of shipboard lasers .

potential advantages in addition to a low marginal cost per shot and deep magazine , potential advantages of shipboard lasers include the following: f ast engagement times .

light from a laser beam can reach a target almost instantly ( eliminating the need to calculate an intercept course , as there is with interceptor missiles ) and , by remaining focused on a particular spot on the target , cause disabling damage to the target within seconds .

after disabling one target , a laser can be redirected in several seconds to another target .

a bility to counter radically maneuvering missiles .

lasers can follow and maintain their beam on radically maneuvering missiles that might stress the maneuvering capabilities of navy sams .

p recision engagements .

lasers are precision - engagement weapons — the light spot from a laser , which might be several inches in diameter , affects what it hits , while generally not affecting ( at least not directly ) separate nearby objects .

g raduated responses .

lasers can perform functions other than destroying targets , including detecting and monitoring targets and producing nonlethal effects , including reversible jamming of electro - optic ( eo ) sensors .

lasers offer the potential for graduated responses that range from warning targets to reversibly jamming their systems , to causing limited but not disabling damage ( as a further warning ) , and then finally causing disabling damage .

potential limitations potential limitations of shipboard lasers include the following: l ine of sight .

since laser light tends to fly through the atmosphere on an essentially straight path , shipboard lasers would be limited to line - of - sight engagements , and consequently could not counter over - the - horizon targets or targets that are obscured by intervening objects .

this limits in particular potential engagement ranges against small boats , which can be obscured by higher waves , or low - flying targets .

even so , lasers can rapidly reacquire boats obscured by periodic swells .

a tmospheric absorption , scattering , and turbulence .

substances in the atmosphere — particularly water vapor , but also things such as sand , dust , salt particles , smoke , and other air pollution — absorb and scatter light from a shipboard laser , and atmospheric turbulence can defocus a laser beam .

these effects can reduce the effective range of a laser .

absorption by water vapor is a particular consideration for shipboard lasers because marine environments feature substantial amounts of water vapor in the air .

there are certain wavelengths of light ( i.e. , "sweet spots" in the electromagnetic spectrum ) where atmospheric absorption by water vapor is markedly reduced .

lasers can be designed to emit light at or near those sweet spots , so as to maximize their potential effectiveness .

absorption generally grows with distance to target , making it in general less of a potential problem for short - range operations than for longer - range operations .

adaptive optics , which make rapid , fine adjustments to a laser beam on a continuous basis in response to observed turbulence , can counteract the effects of atmospheric turbulence .

even so , lasers might not work well , or at all , in rain or fog , preventing lasers from being an all - weather solution .

t hermal blooming .

a laser that continues firing in the same exact direction for a certain amount of time can heat up the air it is passing through , which in turn can defocus the laser beam , reducing its ability to disable the intended target .

this effect , called thermal blooming , can make lasers less effective for countering targets that are coming straight at the ship , on a constant bearing ( i.e. , "down - the - throat" shots ) .

other ship self - defense systems , such as interceptor missiles or a ciws , might be more suitable for countering such targets .

most tests of laser systems have been against crossing targets rather than "down - the - throat" shots .

in general , thermal blooming becomes more of a concern as the power of the laser beam increases .

s aturation attacks .

since a laser can attack only one target at a time , requires several seconds to disable it , and several more seconds to be redirected to the next target , a laser can disable only so many targets within a given period of time .

this places an upper limit on the ability of an individual laser to deal with saturation attacks — attacks by multiple weapons that approach the ship simultaneously or within a few seconds of one another .

this limitation can be mitigated by installing more than one laser on the ship , similar to how the navy installs multiple ciws systems on certain ships .

h ardened targets and countermeasures .

less - powerful lasers — that is , lasers with beam powers measured in kilowatts ( kw ) rather than megawatts ( mw ) — can have less effectiveness against targets that incorporate shielding , ablative material , or highly reflective surfaces , or that rotate rapidly ( so that the laser spot does not remain continuously on a single location on the target's surface ) or tumble .

small boats ( or other units ) could employ smoke or other obscurants to reduce their susceptibility to laser attack .

measures such as these , however , can increase the cost and / or weight of a weapon , and obscurants could make it more difficult for small boat operators to see what is around them , reducing their ability to use their boats effectively .

r isk of collateral damage to aircraft , satellites , and human eyesight .

since light from an upward - pointing laser that does not hit the target would continue flying upward in a straight line , it could pose a risk of causing unwanted collateral damage to aircraft and satellites .

the light emitted by ssls being developed by the navy is of a frequency that can cause permanent damage to human eyesight , including blinding .

blinding can occur at ranges much greater than ranges for damaging targeted objects .

scattering of laser light off the target or off fog or particulates in the air can pose a risk to exposed eyes .

for additional background information on potential navy shipboard ssls , see crs report r41526 , navy shipboard lasers for surface , air , and missile defense: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke .

