the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill includes funding for the department of the treasury ( title i ) , the executive office of the president ( eop , title ii ) , the judiciary ( title iii ) , the d istrict of columbia ( title iv ) , and more than two dozen independent agencies ( title v ) .

the bill typically funds mandatory retirement accounts in title vi , which also contains additional general provisions applying to the funding provided agencies funds through the fsgg bill .

title vii contains general provisions applying government - wide .

the house and senate fsgg bills fund the same agencies , with one exception .

the commodities and futures trading commission ( cftc ) is funded through the agriculture appropriations bill in the house and the fsgg bill in the senate .

this structure has existed in its current form since the 2007 reorganization of the house and senate committees on appropriations .

although financial services are a major focus of the bills , fsgg appropriations bills do not include many financial regulatory agencies , which are instead funded outside of the appropriations process .

on february 2 , 2015 , president obama submitted his fy2016 budget request , which sought a total of $46.8 billion for agencies funded through the fsgg appropriations bill , including $322 million for the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) .

on july 9 , 2015 , the house committee on appropriations ( hereinafter "the house committee" ) reported the financial services and general government appropriations act , 2016 ( h.r .

2995 , h.rept .

114-194 ) .

h.r .

2995 as reported would have provided $41.6 billion for agencies funded through the house fsgg appropriations subcommittee bill .

the house fy2016 agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r .

3049 , h.rept .

114-205 ) would have provided $245 million for the cftc .

total fy2016 funding in the two house bills would have been $41.8 billion , about $4.9 billion below the president's fy2016 request .

on july 30 , 2015 , the senate committee on appropriations reported the financial services and general government act , 2016 ( s. 1910 , s.rept .

114-97 ) .

s. 1910 would have appropriated $42.1 billion for fy2016 , about $4.7 billion below the president's request .

neither fsgg appropriations bill was considered on the floor prior to the end of fy2015 .

although financial services are a focus of the fsgg bill , the bill does not actually include funding for the regulation of much of the financial services industry .

financial services as an industry is often subdivided into banking , insurance , and securities .

federal regulation of the banking industry is divided among the federal reserve , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , the office of comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , and the bureau of consumer financial protection ( generally known as the consumer financial protection bureau , or cfpb ) .

in addition , credit unions , which operate similarly to many banks , are regulated by the national credit union administration ( ncua ) .

none of these agencies receives its primary funding through the appropriations process , with only the fdic inspector general and a small program operated by the ncua currently funded in the fsgg bill .

insurance generally is regulated at the state level with some oversight at the holding company level by the federal reserve .

there is a relatively small federal insurance office ( fio ) inside of the treasury , which is funded through the departmental offices account , but fio has no regulatory authority .

federal securities regulation is divided between the sec and the cftc , both of which are funded through appropriations .

the cftc funding is a relatively straightforward appropriation from the general fund , whereas the sec funding is provided by the fsgg bill , but then offset through fees collected by the sec .

although funding for many financial regulatory agencies may not be provided by the fsgg bill , legislative provisions that would affect some of these agencies have often been included .

both house and senate bills would have changed the funding procedure for the cfpb , with future funding to be provided by congressional appropriations rather than the current situation in which primary cfpb funding is provided through unappropriated funds transferred from the federal reserve .

the senate bill also included the full text of s. 1484 , a broad financial regulatory reform bill that was previously reported by the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs .

many provisions of s. 1484 amend the dodd - frank act and some have proven controversial in the past .

p.l .

114-113 did not include the provisions relating to cfpb funding from the committee bills and included a relatively small number of the provisions relating to financial regulation from s. 1484 / s. 1910 .

the house and senate committees on appropriations reorganized their subcommittee structures in early 2007 .

each chamber created a new financial services and general government subcommittee .

in the house , the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee comprised primarily agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies , commonly referred to as "tthud. .

in addition , the house fsgg subcommittee was assigned four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies subcommittee: the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) .

in the senate , the jurisdiction of the new fsgg subcommittee was a combination of agencies from the jurisdiction of three previously existing subcommittees .

the district of columbia , which had its own subcommittee in the 109 th congress , was placed under the purview of the fsgg subcommittee , as were four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies subcommittee: the fcc , ftc , sec , and sba .

in addition , most of the agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the tthud subcommittee were assigned to the fsgg subcommittee .

as a result of this reorganization , the house and senate fsgg subcommittees have nearly identical jurisdictions , except that the cftc is under the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee in the senate and the agriculture subcommittee in the house .

 table 3 below lists various departments and agencies funded through fsgg appropriations and the names and contact information for the crs expert ( s ) on these departments and agencies .

