the financial crisis that began in 2007 and deepened in 2008 was the worst since the great depression .

the federal policy response was swift , large , creative , and controversial , creating unprecedented tools to grapple with financial instability .

particularly notable were the actions taken by the federal reserve ( fed ) under its broad emergency lending authority , section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act ( 12 u.s.c .

344 ) .

this obscure section of the act was described in a 2002 review as follows: "to some this lending legacy is likely a harmless anachronism , to others it's still a useful insurance policy , and to others it's a ticking time bomb of political chicanery. .

under normal authority , the fed faces statutory limitations on whom it may lend to , what it may accept as collateral , and for how long it may lend .

because many of the actions it took during the crisis did not meet these limitations , section 13 ( 3 ) was used to authorize most of the fed's emergency facilities created during the crisis to provide credit to nonbank financial firms .

more controversially , the fed also invoked section 13 ( 3 ) to prevent the failure of bear stearns and american international group ( aig ) , two financial firms that it deemed "too big to fail. .

the federal reserve ( fed ) also lent extensively to banks through the discount window and newly created facilities and undertook "quantitative easing" ( large scale purchases of treasury and mortgage - backed securities ) during the crisis .

because these actions were taken under its normal authority , they are beyond the scope of this report , as are other actions taken by the federal government during the crisis .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( hereinafter , the dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) limited the fed's discretion under section 13 ( 3 ) , but some members of congress believe that these changes were insufficient .

this report provides a review of the history of section 13 ( 3 ) , including its use in 2008 .

it discusses the fed's authority under section 13 ( 3 ) before and after the dodd - frank act .

it then discusses policy issues and legislation to amend section 13 ( 3 ) , including h.r .

3189 , which passed the house on november 19 , 2015 .

one of the main reasons the fed was created was to act as a "lender of last resort," by providing liquidity in the form of short - term loans to banks through the discount window .

the fed still provides that service today , but the amount of liquidity extended is insignificant typically .

over time , it became expected that banks would meet their short - term borrowing needs through private markets under normal conditions .

discount window lending to banks occurs under the fed's normal statutory authority .

nonbank financial firms also face liquidity needs , but the history of fed lending to nonbanks is much more limited .

section 13 ( 3 ) has been invoked rarely since it was enacted in 1932 .

the fed used it to make 123 loans to nonfinancial firms totaling $1.5 million from 1932 to 1936 , until that authority was superseded by new authority ( section 13b , which was subsequently repealed ) .

section 13 ( 3 ) can also be used to authorize lending to banks .

after 1936 , the fed invoked section 13 ( 3 ) occasionally to make nonmember banks and credit unions eligible to borrow at the discount window before 1980 , when nonmember banks were permitted to access the discount window .

section 13 ( 3 ) authority was not used to extend credit to nonbanks from 1936 to 2008 .

this authority was then used extensively beginning in 2008 in response to the financial crisis — in very different ways than it had been used previously .

section 13 ( 3 ) was used to authorize multiple actions taken by the fed when financial conditions worsened at two points in 2008 — around the time the investment bank bear stearns experienced difficulties in march and following the failure of the investment bank lehman brothers in september .

credit extended under section 13 ( 3 ) in 2008 can be divided into two broad categories: 1. broadly based facilities to address liquidity problems in specific markets and 2. exclusive , tailored assistance to prevent the disorderly failure of individual firms deemed too big to fail .

credit outstanding ( in the form of cash or securities ) under section 13 ( 3 ) peaked at $710 billion in november 2008 .

currently , all credit extended under section 13 ( 3 ) has been repaid with interest and all 13 ( 3 ) facilities have expired .

contrary to popular belief , the fed did not suffer any losses on transactions taken under section 13 ( 3 ) and earned profits of more than $30 billion ( more than half of which is aig related ) .

nevertheless , some of these transactions exposed the taxpayer to greater ex ante risks than the discount window because the terms of the programs had fewer safeguards — in some cases involving non - recourse loans and troubled asset purchases , for example .

the next two sections summarize this experience , with more detail provided in the appendix .

under normal authority , the fed faces statutory limitations on whom it may lend to , what it may accept as collateral , and for how long it may lend .

if the fed wishes to extend credit that does not meet these criteria , it can initiate assistance under section 13 ( 3 ) .

the fed oversight reform and modernization act ( h.r .

3189 ) was ordered to be reported by the house financial services committee on july 29 , 2015 .

on november 19 , 2015 , it was passed by the house .

section 11 of the bill as passed amends section 13 ( 3 ) to limit the fed's discretion to make emergency loans .

it would limit 13 ( 3 ) to "unusual and exigent circumstances that pose a threat to the financial stability of the united states" and would require "the affirmative vote of not less than nine presidents of federal reserve banks" in addition to the current requirement of the affirmative vote of five fed governors .

it would forbid the fed from accepting as collateral equity securities issued by a borrower .

it would require the fed to issue a rule establishing how it would determine sufficiency of collateral ; acceptable classes of collateral ; any discount that would be applied to determine the sufficiency of collateral ; and how it would obtain independent appraisals for valuing collateral .

it would eliminate the current language permitting the fed to establish the solvency of a borrower based on the borrower's certification and would specify that before a borrower may be eligible for assistance , the fed's board and any other federal banking regulator with jurisdiction over the borrower must certify that the borrower is not insolvent .

it would limit assistance to institutions "predominantly engaged in financial activities" and preclude assistance to federal , state , and local government agencies and government - controlled or sponsored entities .

it would require the fed to issue a rule establishing a minimum interest rate on emergency loans based on the sum of the average secondary discount rate charged by the federal reserve banks over the most recent 90-day period and the average of the difference between a distressed corporate bond index ( as defined by a rule issued by the fed ) and the treasury yield over the most recent 90-day period .

the bailout prevention act ( s. 1320 ) would amend section 13 ( 3 ) to limit the fed's discretion to make emergency loans .

it eliminates the current language permitting the fed to establish the solvency of a borrower based on the borrower's certification and specifies that a borrower may not be eligible for assistance unless the fed and all federal banking regulators with jurisdiction over the borrower certify that the borrower is not insolvent and issue a detailed public explanation of the certification decision .

the certification must be based on an assessment of "relevant financial data" for the most recent four months and determine that the fair value of the borrower's assets exceeds the fair value of liabilities — adjusting for temporary market illiquidity .

it forbids the fed from lending to a bridge company set up under title ii of the dodd - frank act .

it defines broad - based eligibility to comprise at least five companies .

its sets the minimum interest rate on a loan to be at least five percentage points above the yield on a treasury security with a comparable duration .

it provides the fed with authority to create a program that does not meet the bill's definition of broad - based eligibility or minimum lending rate , provided it notifies congress within three days .

if a joint resolution authorizing the program to continue is not enacted within 30 days of receipt of that notice , the program terminates .

section 4 of the bill is unrelated to fed emergency lending .

the bailout prevention act ( h.r .

2625 ) would amend section 13 ( 3 ) to limit the fed's discretion to make emergency loans .

it eliminates the current language permitting the fed to establish the solvency of a borrower based on the borrower's certification and specifies that a borrower may not be eligible for assistance unless the fed and all federal banking regulators with jurisdiction over the borrower certify that the borrower is not insolvent and issue a detailed public explanation of the certification decision .

the certification must be based on an assessment of "relevant financial data" for the most recent four months and determine that the fair value of the borrower's assets exceeds the fair value of liabilities — adjusting for temporary market illiquidity .

it forbids the fed from lending to a bridge company set up under title ii of the dodd - frank act .

it defines broad - based eligibility to comprise at least five companies .

its sets the minimum interest rate on a loan to be at least five percentage points above the yield on a treasury security with a comparable duration .

it provides the fed with authority to create a program that does not meet the bill's definition of broad - based eligibility or minimum lending rate , provided it notifies congress within three days .

if a joint resolution authorizing the program to continue is not enacted within 30 days of receipt of that notice , the program terminates .

it would reduce the delayed release of unredacted gao reports and lending records pertaining to section 13 ( 3 ) from one or two years to 60 days .

term securities lending facility shortly before b ear stearns suffered its liquidity crisis , the fed created the term securities lending facility ( tslf ) on march 11 , 2008 , to expand its existing securities lending program for primary dealers .

primary dealers are financial firms that are the fed's counterparties for open market operations , including investment banks that were ineligible to access the fed's lending facilities for banks .

at the end of 2007 , there were 20 primary dealers , including bear stearns .

the proximate cause of bear stearns' crisis was its inability to roll over its short - term debt , and the fed created the tslf and the primary dealer credit facility ( discussed below ) to offer an alternative source of short - term liquidity for primary dealers .

primary dealers were already allowed to borrow securities from the fed on an overnight basis before the crisis .

the tslf extended the length of the loans and acceptable collateral , and signaled that the fed was willing to lend on a larger scale .

under the tslf at its peak , each week primary dealers could borrow up to $200 billion of treasury securities for 28 days , as opposed to overnight .

primary dealers need access to treasury securities because of their use in repurchase agreements ( repos ) , which are an important source of short - term financing .

figure a - 1 shows the decline in primary dealer repos outstanding in 2008 .

at various points , loans could be collateralized with some of the following: private - label mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) with an aaa / aaa rating , agency commercial mbs , agency collateralized mortgage obligations , and all investment - grade debt securities .

on july 30 , 2008 , the fed created the tslf options program within the tslf that allowed primary dealers to pre - negotiate options to borrow securities .

no securities were borrowed through the tslf after august 2009 , and the facility expired february 1 , 2010 .

the tslf experienced no losses and earned income of $781 million over the life of the program .

primary dealer credit facility shortly after bear stearns' liquidity crisis , the fed created the primary dealer credit facility ( pdcf ) on march 16 , 2008 .

the pdcf can be thought of as analogous to a discount window for primary dealers .

loans were made at the fed's discount rate , which was set slightly higher than the federal funds rate during the crisis .

loans were made on an overnight basis , with recourse , and they were fully collateralized , limiting their riskiness .

acceptable collateral at times included treasuries ; government agency debt ; investment grade corporate , mortgage - backed , asset - backed , and municipal securities ; and certain classes of equities .

the pdcf expired on february 1 , 2010 .

borrowing from the facility was sporadic , with average daily borrowing outstanding above $10 billion in the first three months and falling to zero in august 2008 .

much of this initial borrowing was done by bear stearns , before its merger with jpmorgan chase was complete .

borrowing picked up again in september 2008 and peaked at $148 billion on october 1 , 2008 .

no loans were outstanding after may 2009 .

the pdcf experienced no losses and earned interest income of $0.5 billion over the life of the program .

commercial paper funding facility and asset - backed commercial paper money market mutual fund liquidity facility to meet liquidity needs , many large firms routinely issue commercial paper , which is short - term debt purchased directly by investors that matures in less than 270 days , with an average maturity of 30 days .

the three broad categories of commercial paper issuers are financial firms , nonfinancial firms , and pass - through entities that issue commercial paper backed by assets .

the commercial paper issued directly by firms tends not to be backed by collateral , because these firms are viewed as large and creditworthy , and the paper matures quickly .

individual investors are major purchasers of highly rated commercial paper through money market mutual funds ( mmmfs ) and money market accounts .

on september 16 , 2008 , a mmmf called the reserve fund "broke the buck," meaning that the value of its shares had fallen below par value of $1 .

this occurred because of losses it had taken on short - term debt issued by lehman brothers , which filed for bankruptcy on september 15 , 2008 .

money market investors had perceived breaking the buck to be highly unlikely , and its occurrence set off a generalized run on mmmfs , as investors simultaneously attempted to withdraw an estimated $250 billion of their investments — even from funds without exposure to lehman .

the decline in commercial paper outstanding after september 2008 is illustrated in figure a - 2 .

fearing that disruption in the commercial paper markets could make overall problems in financial markets more severe , the fed announced on september 19 , 2008 , that it would create the asset - backed commercial paper money market mutual fund liquidity facility ( amlf ) .

this facility made nonrecourse loans to banks to purchase asset - backed commercial paper .

as the commercial paper matured , the loans were repaid .

because the loans were nonrecourse , the banks had no further liability to repay any losses on the commercial paper collateralizing the loan .

at its peak in early october 2008 , the amlf had loans of $152 billion outstanding .

however , the amlf would soon be superseded in importance by the creation of the commercial paper funding facility ( cpff ) , and lending fell to zero in october 2009 .

the amlf experienced no losses and earned income of $0.5 billion over the life of the program .

the facility expired on february 1 , 2010 .

on october 7 , 2008 , the fed announced the creation of the cpff to purchase all types of three - month , highly rated u.s. commercial paper , secured and unsecured , from issuers .

the cpff charged an interest rate equal to the three - month overnight index swap rate plus 1 percentage point for secured corporate debt , 2 percentage points for unsecured corporate debt , and 3 percentage points for asset - backed paper .

the cpff could buy as much commercial paper from any individual issuer as that issuer had outstanding in the year to date .

any potential losses borne by the cpff would ultimately be borne by the fed .

at its peak in january 2009 , the cpff held $351 billion of commercial paper , and holdings fell steadily subsequently .

the facility expired february 1 , 2010 .

it earned income of $6.1 billion over the life of the program and suffered no losses .

in the case of the amlf , the banks were not intended recipients of assistance , but rather were the intermediary through which assistance flowed to the commercial paper market .

according to gao , 92% of credit extended under amlf was channeled through two custodial banks ( jpmorgan chase and state street ) that were among the three largest providers of fund administration and account services for mmmfs .

the cpff removed the role of banks as intermediary and provided fed assistance directly to commercial paper issuers .

on october 21 , 2008 , the fed announced the creation of the money market investor funding facility ( mmiff ) and pledged to lend it up to $540 billion .

the mmiff was planned to lend to private - sector special purpose vehicles ( spvs ) that invest in commercial paper issued by highly rated financial institutions .

each spv would have been owned by a group of financial firms and could only purchase commercial paper issued by that group .

the intent was for these spvs to purchase commercial paper from money market mutual funds and similar entities facing redemption requests to help avoid runs , such as the run on the reserve fund .

the mmiff was never accessed , and the facility expired on october 30 , 2009 .

term asset - backed securities loan facility on november 25 , 2008 , the fed created the term asset - backed securities loan facility ( talf ) in response to problems in the market for asset - backed securities ( abs ) .

according to the fed , "new issuance of abs declined precipitously in september and came to a halt in october .

at the same time , interest rate spreads on aaa - rated tranches of abs soared to levels well outside the range of historical experience , reflecting unusually high risk premiums. .

the decline in abs issuance is illustrated in figure a - 3 .

the fed feared that if lenders could not securitize these types of loans , less credit would be extended to consumers , exacerbating the economic downturn .

rather than purchase abs directly , the fed made nonrecourse loans to private investment funds to purchase recently issued abs with the highest credit rating , using the abs as collateral .

the minimum loan size was $10 million .

eligible collateral included new securities backed by auto loans , student loans , small business loans , and credit card loans .

talf was later expanded to include "legacy" commercial mbs .

the loans had a term of up to three years for most types of assets ( and up to five years for some types of assets ) , but were repaid when the underlying abs matured or was sold .

interest rates were set at a markup over different maturities of the london interbank offered rate ( libor ) or the federal funds rate , depending on the type of loan and underlying collateral .

if the abs had lost value , because the loans were nonrecourse , the losses would have been borne by the fed and the treasury ( through tarp ) instead of by the borrower — an unusual feature that made talf riskier for taxpayers than typical fed lending facilities .

the fed lent less than the market value of the collateral , so the fed would not have borne losses on the loans until losses exceeded the value of this "haircut" ( different abs receive different haircuts ) .

in addition , treasury initially set aside $20 billion of tarp funds to cover any losses .

peaking at $48 billion , talf turned out to be a relatively small program compared with the $200 billion program envisioned by the fed or the $1 trillion program later envisioned by treasury .

in part , this was because the issuance of assets eligible for talf remained low , which reflected the depressed state of securitization markets and may imply that talf was unable to overcome investor aversion to abs .

 ( while talf was in operation beginning in march 2009 , a sizable share of abs issued were used as collateral for talf loans .

thus , issuance might have been even lower without the presence of talf. ) .

unlike most other fed lending facilities , the amount outstanding under talf steadily rose through 2009 .

the facility stopped making new loans at the end of june 2010 for loans using newly issued commercial mbs as collateral and in march 2010 for loans using other assets .

the last talf loan was repaid on october 29 , 2014 .

all talf loans were repaid in full , with interest .

over the life of the program , talf made profits of $1.6 billion for the fed and $0.7 billion for the treasury .

bear stearns unable to roll over its short - term debt as a result of investor concerns about its mortgage - related losses , the investment bank bear stearns faced bankruptcy in 2008 .

fearing that bear stearns was "too big to fail" and posed systemic risk , the fed stepped in to broker a merger .

on march 14 , 2008 , the fed provided a $12.9 billion bridge loan on a nonrecourse basis to jp morgan chase to provide bear stearns with liquidity , which was repaid with interest .

on march 16 , jpmorgan chase agreed to acquire bear stearns .

as part of the agreement , the fed agreed to lend $28.82 billion to maiden lane i , a delaware limited liability corporation ( llc ) that it created , to purchase financial securities at market value from bear stearns .

these securities were largely mortgage - related assets that were too illiquid for jpmorgan chase to be willing to acquire .

maiden lane i , not jp morgan chase , was to repay the fed interest and principal using the funds from the sale of the assets .

jp morgan chase took a first loss position through a subordinated loan of $1.15 billion , receiving an interest rate of 4.5% above the discount rate on that position , compared with an interest rate of 2.5% above the discount rate on the fed's loan .

any additional losses would be borne by the fed , and any profits in excess of the loans would accrue to the fed .

profits or losses for the fed and jp morgan chase were dependent on whether the market value of those assets rose or declined after maiden lane i acquired them .

by november 2012 , proceeds from the sale or maturation of maiden lane i assets were sufficient to fully repay principal and accrued interest to the fed ( $765 million ) and jp morgan chase .

as of december 30 , 2014 , the value of remaining assets held by maiden lane i was $1.7 billion .

once those remaining assets are sold or have matured , the fed will realize additional capital gains that would be greater or less than $1.7 billion ( less expenses ) , depending on whether the value of those assets subsequently rises or falls .

american international group in september 2008 , facing losses on various operations , aig experienced a significant decline in its stock price and downgrades from the major credit rating agencies .

these downgrades led to immediate demands for significant amounts of collateral ( approximately $14 billion to $15 billion in collateral payments , according to contemporary press reports ) .

as financial demands on the company mounted , bankruptcy appeared a possibility , as had occurred with lehman brothers on september 15 , 2008 .

many feared that aig was too big to fail due to the potential for widespread disruption to financial markets resulting from such a failure .

on september 16 , 2008 ( prior to the existence of tarp ) , the fed announced that it was taking action to support aig in the form of a secured two - year line of credit with a value of up to $85 billion and an interest rate of 8.5 percentage points above the three - month libor .

in addition , the government received warrants to purchase up to 79.9% of the equity in aig .

on october 8 , 2008 , the fed announced that it would lend aig up to an additional $37.8 billion against securities held by its insurance subsidiaries .

in early november 2008 ( following the creation of tarp ) , the financial support for aig was restructured .

the restructured financial support consisted of ( 1 ) reducing the size of the fed loan to up to $60 billion , with the term lengthened to five years and the interest rate reduced by 5.5 percentage points ; ( 2 ) purchasing $40 billion in preferred shares through tarp ; and ( 3 ) replacing the $37.8 billion loan with up to $52.5 billion total in asset purchases by the fed through two llcs known as maiden lane ii and maiden lane iii .

the 79.9% equity position of the government in aig remained essentially unchanged after the restructuring of the intervention .

in march 2009 , the assistance was restructured further through ( 1 ) a partial payback of the fed loan through a swap of debt for equity in two aig subsidiaries worth approximately $25 billion , reducing the maximum to $35 billion and ( 2 ) commitments for additional future tarp purchases of up to $29.8 billion in preferred shares at aig's discretion , and the conversion of existing shares into shares with optional dividend payments .

the maiden lane llcs continued operating under the previous terms , with the actual loans extended to the llcs totaling $43.9 billion at their peak .

in september 2010 , aig and the government announced another restructuring of the government's assistance .

this restructuring closed on january 14 , 2011 .

the expressed goal was to simplify the government's interest in aig and provide a path for the government to divest its stake in aig .

the essence of the plan called for ( 1 ) ending the fed's involvement with aig through loan repayment and transfer of the fed's equity interests to treasury and ( 2 ) converting the government's $49.1 billion in existing preferred shares into common shares , which could then be sold to the public over time .

the specific steps involved several interlocking transactions , including the initial public offering of a large aig subsidiary , the sale of several other aig subsidiaries , and the use of up to approximately $20 billion in tarp funds to transfer equity interests from the fed to the treasury .

all of the fed loans have been repaid , and the assets held in the maiden lane llcs have been sold .

maiden lanes ii and iii were formally terminated on november 12 , 2014 .

the fed earned interest of $8.2 billion on the loan to aig and $9.5 billion on the maiden lanes .

in addition to the income received by the fed , treasury received an additional $17.6 billion on the sale of equity that the fed originally received ( and subsequently transferred to the treasury ) as recompense for the fed's loan to aig .

citigroup on november , 23 , 2008 , the treasury , fed , and federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) announced a joint intervention in citigroup , which had previously received $25 billion in tarp capital purchase program funding .

this exceptional intervention to "[support] financial stability" consisted of an additional $20 billion purchase of preferred shares through the tarp targeted investment program and a government guarantee for a pool of $306 billion in citigroup assets ( reduced to $301 billion when the guarantee was finalized on january 16 , 2009 ) through the tarp asset guarantee program , the fdic , and the fed .

in december 2009 , citigroup and treasury reached an agreement to cancel the asset guarantee .

while the asset guarantee was in place , no losses were claimed and no federal funds were paid out .

the fed's share of the termination fee for the asset guarantee was $50 million .

bank of america on january 16 , 2009 , the treasury , fed , and fdic announced a joint intervention in bank of america , which had previously received $25 billion in tarp capital purchase program funds .

bank of america's losses were largest at merrill lynch , which it was in the process of taking over .

the fed and treasury may have been most concerned that if bank of america was not offered special assistance , the merger would fall through and merrill lynch would experience a disorderly failure .

"[a]s part of its commitment to support financial market stability," this exceptional assistance included the purchase of an additional $20 billion of bank of america preferred shares through the tarp targeted investment program and a joint guarantee on a pool of up to $118 billion of certain bank of america assets ( largely those acquired through its merger with merrill lynch ) .

the announced guarantee was to remain in place for 10 years for residential mortgage - related assets and 5 years for all other assets .

bank of america would have borne up to the first $10 billion of losses on the assets , with subsequent losses split 90% to the government and 10% to bank of america .

within the government , the losses were to be split between the tarp asset guarantee program , the fdic , and the fed .

although the asset guarantee was announced in january 2009 , a final agreement was never signed .

on september 21 , 2009 , bank of america announced that it had negotiated a $425 million termination fee ( of which , the fed received $57 million ) that allowed it to withdraw from the asset guarantee program .

