china ( officially known as the people's republic of china , prc ) is building a modern and regionally powerful military with a limited but growing capability for conducting operations away from china's immediate periphery .

the question of how the united states should respond to china's military modernization effort is a central issue in u.s. defense planning and foreign policy .

congress's decisions on this issue could affect u.s. defense strategy , budgets , plans , and programs , and the u.s. defense industrial base .

this report provides a brief overview of the chinese military .

in order to cover a wide range of issues in a concise format , the report does not go into great depth on many topics and omits other topics that might be considered germane .

crs report rl33153 , china naval modernization: implications for u.s. navy capabilities — background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , provides more in - depth discussion of china's naval modernization effort .

a partial list of crs reports on related topics includes: crs report r43894 , china's air defense identification zone ( adiz ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r42784 , maritime territorial and exclusive economic zone ( eez ) disputes involving china: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44072 , chinese land reclamation in the south china sea: implications and policy options , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report r43116 , ballistic missile defense in the asia - pacific region: cooperation and opposition , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] crs report r41108 , u.s. - china relations: an overview of policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41007 , understanding china's political system , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rl33534 , china's economic rise: history , trends , challenges , and implications for the united states , by [author name scrubbed .

china's changing military capability raises several policy and oversight issues for congress , including those discussed below .

one key issue is whether the u.s. government has appropriately assessed china's changing military capability .

dod's assessment is reflected in various documents , including its annual report to congress on military and security developments involving china .

challenges in assessing china's changing military capability and comparing it to u.s. military capabilities include the following: multiple factors contribute to military capability .

ships , aircraft , vehicles , and ballistic missiles can be relatively easy to count , but quantity is only one aspect of a country's military capability .

other factors include the technological sophistication of those platforms and weapons ; capabilities for knitting those platforms and weapons into networks ; supporting maintenance and logistics capabilities ; doctrine and tactics ; the quality , education , and training of personnel ; and the realism and complexity of exercises .

some of these factors are harder to observe and evaluate than others .

limited chinese transparency .

china's limited transparency on matters relating to its military makes it more difficult to observe and evaluate factors that contribute to or detract from china's military capability .

u.s. officials regularly urge china to be more transparent about its military activities .

in recent years , china has taken small steps in that direction by providing increased information about its military in periodic defense white papers .

information on china's military is also available in a wide array of defense - focused magazines published in china .

even so , china in general makes available much less information about its military than the united states does about its military .

differing geographic scope of responsibilities .

the u.s. military has substantial worldwide responsibilities , including nato - related responsibilities in europe and a security role in the middle east .

consequently , only a portion of the u.s. military might be available for a crisis or conflict scenario involving china .

the pla , in contrast , has limited responsibilities outside china's home region .

consequently , a more substantial fraction of china's military would likely be available for a conflict in china's home region .

d iffering missions .

the missions to be performed by one country's military can differ greatly from the missions to be performed by another country's military .

consequently , more meaning comes from measuring a military's capability against its assigned missions than measuring against other metrics .

this consideration is significant in assessing u.s. and chinese military capabilities , because the missions of the two militaries are quite different .

potential oversight questions for congress include the following: is the executive branch accurately assessing china's changing military capabilities , particularly in relation to the kinds of missions that chinese leaders want the pla to be able to perform ? .

is the executive branch doing enough to encourage greater transparency from china concerning its military capabilities ? .

how well are u.s. surveillance and intelligence - gathering activities able to compensate for china's limited transparency on military matters ? .

are dod and the u.s. intelligence community devoting the right amount of resources toward surveillance and intelligence - gathering activities directed at the pla ? .

what are the limits of what can be learned through these activities ? .

how does u.s. - china military - to - military engagement inform the u.s. government about chinese military capabilities ? .

does dod's annual report to congress on military and security developments involving china provide sufficient information to permit congress to make a well - considered ( if generalized ) independent assessment of china's military capabilities ? .

what changes , if any , might be needed in this report ( 10 u.s.c .

113 note ) ? .

a second key issue for congress is whether the u.s. government has appropriately assessed prc leaders' intentions regarding the pla .

dod's assessment of this issue is reflected in various documents , including its annual report to congress on military and security developments involving china .

challenges in assessing the intentions of china's leaders include the following: statements from chinese ( or other national ) lea d ers about their intentions may not always be reliable .

china's leaders make regular ( if often generalized ) statements about their intentions for their military through white papers and other public statements .

these statements , however , might be attempts to influence foreign audiences or for domestic consumption , and might not be an accurate guide to understanding the actual intentions that china's leaders have for the pla .

on the other hand , not all statements should be dismissed as posturing .

for example , chinese leaders have made statements about china's "core interests" and their willingness to defend them by force if necessary ; such statements might reflect , to some degree at least , genuinely held views .

the challenge is to discern posturing from genuine expressions .

observing what kinds of military capabilities china is pursuing , and how these capabilities appear to align or not align with stated intentions , can help inform judgments on this question .

limited chinese transparency .

as with the matter of assessing china's military capabilities , assessing china's leaders' intentions regarding the military is made more complicated by china's limited transparency regarding intentions .

dod states that "china's lack of transparency surrounding its growing military capabilities and strategic decision - making has also increased concerns in the region about china's intentions .

absent greater transparency , these concerns will likely intensify as the pla modernization progresses. .

u.s. officials regularly urge china to be more transparent regarding their intentions .

mirror imaging .

assessing china's leaders' intentions regarding the military can benefit from having an accurate understanding of the values and belief sets of those leaders .

those values and belief sets can differ , perhaps substantially , from the values and belief sets common to americans .

mirror imaging — tacitly and perhaps unconsciously assuming that one's values and belief sets are shared by the other party — can lead to less accurate assessments of the other party's intentions .

intentions can change .

military analysts often remark that intentions can change , perhaps quite quickly , underscoring the importance of having an accurate assessment of capabilities , which change less quickly over time .

potential oversight questions for congress include the following: is the u.s. government accurately assessing prc leaders' intentions regarding the pla ? .

how do chinese investments in military capabilities align or not align with statements from chinese leaders about their intentions for their military ? .

is the u.s. government doing enough to encourage greater transparency from china's leaders concerning the intentions they have regarding the military ? .

how , if at all , does u.s. - china military - to - military engagement affect the intentions that china's leaders have for their military ? .

how stable are the intentions that chinese leaders have for their military ? .

how likely is it that those intentions might change due to changes in political leadership , in domestic chinese factors ( such as the rate of economic growth ) , or in china's external security environment ? .

to what degree can u.s. actions influence china's leaders' intentions regarding the pla ? .

if u.s. actions can influence those intentions to some degree , is the u.s. government influencing those intentions in a direction favorable to u.s. interests ? .

a third key issue for congress is whether the u.s. government and dod in particular are responding appropriately to china's changing military capabilities and the intentions that china's leaders have for their military .

see the earlier section " u.s .

responses to china's changing military capability " for a summary of the main responses .

potential oversight questions for congress include the following: is the u.s. government responding appropriately to china's changing military capabilities and the intentions of china's leaders regarding the pla ? .

in light of constraints on u.s. defense spending under the budget control act of 2011 ( s. 365 / p.l .

112-25 of august 2 , 2011 ) as amended , and the security concerns generated by russian assertiveness in europe and the rise of the so - called islamic state organization in the middle east , is dod adequately funding initiatives that respond to china's changing military capabilities ? .

has dod struck the right balance in terms of allocating resources among policymakers' concerns , including china ? .

are dod programs for developing and fielding new weapons and supporting systems appropriately oriented and paced for responding to china's changing military capabilities ? .

what areas of u.s. military capability are currently in most need of improvement , and what is being done to address them ? .

what role can u.s. allies and partner countries play in assisting the united states in responding to china's changing military capabilities ? .

is the u.s. government doing enough to encourage u.s. allies and partner countries to respond to china's changing military capabilities in ways that the united states would prefer ? .

what priority should china - related concerns receive in shaping u.s. choices , relative to other concerns of u.s. policymakers ? .

looking ahead , and drawing from the issues for congress discussed above , some general factors that congressional observers of china's military modernization might track are: how might changes in china's economic growth rate affect , if at all , the rate of growth in china's military budget in coming years ? .

how might structural changes in china's military , such as the reduction of pla forces by 300,000 personnel announced in september 2015 and the reorganization of the command structure , affect resources available to the pla for investing in other defense priorities , such as maritime and air platforms and better compensation to recruit more qualified personnel ? .

how are developments in china's military , the u.s. military , and the militaries of other countries in the asia - pacific region affecting the overall military balance in the region , and what implications does this evolving situation have for u.s. interests and policy options ? .

appendix a .

past legislative activity congress has played a role in guiding u.s. foreign and defense policies regarding the prc and the pla .

this section discusses laws that have had significant , continuing impacts on u.s. policies as well as some recent bills that address the present situation .

in addition to legislation , congress influences u.s. policies toward the prc and the pla through budget allocations , hearings , and public statements .

members of congress have attributed some decisions on budget increases or policy positions to china's changing military capabilities , but these cases are the exception , not the rule .

it is usually not possible to make a definitive attribution of the sole or main rationale for legislative activity .

this section discusses bills and other congressional actions that explicitly address security issues related to china , especially the pla .

legislation prior to the 112 th congress numerous laws and resolutions on foreign and defense policy have had impacts on u.s. policies toward the prc and the pla , but four laws stand out for their specific focus and their significant , continuing impact: the taiwan relations act ( p.l .

96-8 ) , the foreign relations authorization act for fy1990 and fy1991 ( p.l .

101-246 , section 902 ) , the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2000 ( p.l .

106-65 , section 1201 ) , and the ndaa for fy2001 ( p.l .

106-398 , section 1238 ) .

these laws outline u.s. policy toward the security of taiwan , prohibit the export of arms to china , govern u.s. - china military - to - military interactions , and establish the u.s. - china commission , respectively .

the taiwan relations act , enacted in 1979 , sets out u.s. policy toward taiwan ( roc ) in the wake of president jimmy carter's decision to establish diplomatic relations with the prc and end formal diplomatic relations with taiwan .

section 2 ( b ) of the act states , it is the policy of the united states.... ( 3 ) to make clear that the united states decision to establish diplomatic relations with the people's republic of china rests upon the expectation that the future of taiwan will be determined by peaceful means ; ( 4 ) to consider any effort to determine the future of taiwan by other than peaceful means , including by boycotts or embargoes , a threat to the peace and security of the western pacific area and of grave concern to the united states ; ( 5 ) to provide taiwan with arms of a defensive character ; and ( 6 ) to maintain the capacity of the united states to resist any resort to force or other forms of coercion that would jeopardize the security , or the social or economic system , of the people on taiwan .

section 3 ( c ) directs the president to inform congress promptly of threats to taiwan and to u.s. interests and states , "the president and the congress shall determine , in accordance with constitutional processes , appropriate action by the united states in response to any such danger. .

following china's deadly crackdown on pro - democracy demonstrators in tiananmen square in june 1989 , congress passed legislation that prohibits the export of defense articles ( and crime control and detection equipment ) to china .

specifically , section 902 ( a ) of the foreign relations authorization act for fy1990 and fy1991 suspends the issuance of licenses under section 38 of the arms export control act for the export to the prc of any defense article on the u.s .

munitions list , including helicopters and helicopter parts .

many european countries followed the united states with their own arms embargoes .

there have been occasional appeals to lift the u.s. ban on exporting arms to china , but few policymakers in washington appear interested in repealing or waiving this provision .

congress restricted military - to - military exchanges with the pla in section 1201 ( a ) of the ndaa for fy2000 .

this law prohibits the secretary of defense from authorizing contact with the pla if that contact would "create a national security risk due to an inappropriate exposure" of the pla to 12 operational areas .

see the section " u.s. - china military - to - military relations " for more discussion of this law and the broader context .

the fy2000 ndaa in section 1202 also created the requirement for dod to produce a report on china's military strategy and military - technological developments .

the floyd d. spence ndaa for fy2001 established the u.s. - china security review commission , which then became the u.s. - china security and economic review commission , in section 1238 .

the law requires the commission to produce an annual report discussing chinese military matters and empowers the commission to hold hearings .

legislative activity in the 112 th , 113 th , and 114 th congresses this section summarizes a selection of enacted legislation and hearings from the 112 th , 113 th , and 114 th congresses that would directly affect u.s. policy toward the pla and the security of the asia - pacific region .

restricting s pace cooperation .

in 2011 , congress passed the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l .

112-10 ) , which in section 1340 ( a ) barred the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) and the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) from using appropriated funds for any participation , collaboration , or bilateral coordination with china or any chinese - owned company .

the pla plays a large role in china's space programs , including ostensibly civilian , non - defense programs .

successive appropriations bills have maintained language restricting cooperation between nasa and chinese entities .

section 7044 ( f ) of the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ( p.l .

112-74 ) , prohibits the export of satellites and satellite components to china without prior notification of congress and prohibits the u.s. state department from using appropriated funds for grants , contracts , or cooperative agreements with the pla and its entities .

the fy2013 ndaa ( p.l .

112-239 ) in section 1261 also prohibits the export or transfer to china of satellites or related items subject to export administration regulations .

assessing chinese military capabilities .

the fy2012 ndaa ( p.l .

112-81 ) in section 1232 directed the comptroller general of the united states to submit to the congressional defense committees an independent review of "any gaps between china's anti - access capabilities and united states' capabilities to overcome them. .

the fy2013 ndaa ( p.l .

112-239 ) in section 1045 required a dod report on u.s. military conventional and nuclear capabilities to neutralize china's "underground tunnel network and what is stored within such tunnels" as well as an independent report on china's nuclear weapons program and posture .

section 1231 required a report on u.s. capabilities in relation to china , iran , and north korea , and any intelligence gaps in assessing those foreign militaries .

the fy2015 ndaa ( p.l .

113-291 ) in section 1256 requested that dod report to congress on taiwan's self - defense capabilities , including sections on the pla's capabilities in ballistic missiles , undersea and surface warfare , amphibious and heavy sealift , and ability to establish air dominance over taiwan .

prohibiting missile defense integration with chinese systems .

in december 2013 , congress passed the fy2014 ndaa ( p.l .

113-66 ) , which prohibits the use of funds to integrate u.s. missile defense systems with prc missile defense systems in section 233 , following reports that nato member turkey was considering a purchase of chinese missile defense systems .

report ing on u.s. defense policy responses .

section 1259 of the fy20215 ndaa ( p.l .

113-291 ) requested a dod report on its strategy for maritime security in the asia - pacific region , which dod published in august 2015 .

section 1601 requests that dod report to congress on the ability of the u.s. military to deter and defeat acts of space aggression by adversaries and alternative defense and deterrence strategies , in response to the counter - space capabilities of china and russia .

senate resolutions 217 and 524 in the 112 th congress expressed the sense of the senate supporting u.s. freedom of navigation operations in the south china sea and "deploring" the use or threat of force by china .

in the 113 th congress , senate resolutions 167 and 412 expressed the sense of the senate on maritime issues in the asia - pacific region .

s.res .

167 both welcomed china's "peaceful development" and identified "dangerous and destabilizing incidents" caused by chinese naval and maritime law enforcement vessels .

h.res .

714 in the 113 th congress encouraged the peaceful resolution of maritime territorial disputes and called on china to refrain from provocative actions in the asia - pacific region .

in recent years , several congressional committees have held numerous hearings to draw attention to developments in the chinese military and to hear from acknowledged experts on the topic .

a survey by crs counted 10 hearings on topics directly related to the chinese military ( not including nomination hearings ) in the 113 th congress and 8 in the 114 th congress , up to august 2015 .

including hearings of the u.s. - china economic and security review commission related to military issues , the totals rise to 14 hearings in the 113 th congress and 10 so far in the 114 th congress .

recent adjustments to the dod china military power report in the fy2000 ndaa , congress instructed dod to publish a report on china's military strategy and military - technological developments , a document that is now titled a nnual report to congress [on] military and security developments involving the people's republic of china .

subsequent ndaas have adjusted the focus and required topics of the dod report .

fy2012 ndaa: section 1238 requests the addition of an assessment of the nature of china's cyber activities directed against dod and any resultant damage to dod .

fy2013 ndaa: section 1271 requests coverage of numerous additional topics: china's electronic warfare capabilities and details on the number of malicious cyber incidents originating from china against dod infrastructure ; china's space and counter - space programs ; nuclear program ; anti - access and area denial capabilities ; command , control , communications , computers , intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( c4isr ) modernization program ; navy and paramilitary and maritime law enforcement vessels , including their response to u.s. naval activities ; military - to - military relationships with other countries ; any significant sale or transfer of military hardware , expertise , and technology from china , and any significant assistance to and from "any selling state with military - related research and development programs in china. .

section 1271 drops the requirement for an assessment of the damage inflicted on dod by china's cyber activities .

fy2014 ndaa: section 1248 requests the addition of coverage of the status of china's fifth - generation fighter program , including an assessment of each individual aircraft type , estimated initial and full operational capability dates , and the ability of those aircraft to provide air superiority .

fy2015 ndaa: section 1252 requests additional detail regarding china's paramilitary and law enforcement vessels .

appendix b .

china's strategic culture mao zedong's principles chinese strategists continue to cite mao zedong as a master of warfare , and describe his military theory as the baseline that subsequent leaders have built upon and improved .

however , in many other ways , the pla has cast aside outdated ideas in favor of modern concepts derived from other militaries' strategies .

mao's dictums that war is a continuation of politics and that the communist party must have political control over the military remain guiding principles today .

mao's concept of "people's war," which traditionally relies on overwhelming numbers , guerrilla tactics , cooperation between the military and the broader population , and protracted conflict , is being updated to apply to modern warfare .

the people's war concept is being integrated with information warfare through the use of modern fighting platforms and domains , thereby in theory allowing "the masses" and pla to work hand - in - hand even in cyber operations .

likewise , some western analysts have assessed that china is applying the concept of people's war to its maritime disputes by organizing some of its fishing fleet into a maritime militia .

the people's war concept continues to be taken seriously by china's leaders and does not appear merely to be a relic from the days of mao .

evolution of chinese "military thought" successive ccp leaders have built upon the principles of ancient strategists and mao zedong in promulgating their own dictums on the military and the strategic environment .

this evolutionary process reflects each leader's understanding of china's strategic environment and the pla's changing abilities to protect the state's interests .

deng xiaoping , who served as china's supreme leader from 1978 until his death in 1997 , judged that the main root of warfare had changed from class struggle to hegemony , reflecting the perceived military threat from the soviet union .

in contrast with the ccp's previous long - held view that war was imminent , deng posited that overall war was avoidable and that , if war did come , it would be a "local war," meaning a war that is short of world war or nuclear war .

deng also applied his principle of "seeking truth from facts" to military development , admitting that the quality of the force was low and therefore incapable of fighting a modern war .

deng advocated large - scale personnel cuts as a means to increase fighting strength and emphasized that army building was secondary to china's other modernization priorities .

jiang zemin was elevated to the top ccp post in 1989 , immediately following the 1989 tiananmen square crackdown .

in response to the harsh crackdown , western countries imposed sanctions to prohibit the sale of advanced weapons to china , which was diplomatically isolated at the time .

nevertheless , the 1991 persian gulf war demonstrated to beijing the importance of the use of high - tech weaponry to defeat a less - advanced opponent .

since that time , "winning local wars under high - tech conditions" has been a mainstay in china's understanding of modern warfare .

jiang supported military budget increases that were commensurate with overall national economic growth , overseeing consistent double - digit annual military budget increases .

like deng , jiang emphasized the need for quality over quantity to improve combat effectiveness , calling for the application of science and technology to enhance military training , education , and logistics .

jiang also took the crucial step of largely divesting the military from its commercial endeavors , which had become a serious source of corruption .

a chinese way of war ? .

chinese thinking about military strategy and operations has idiosyncratic aspects that are amplified by chinese axioms such as , "you fight in your way and we fight in ours , and strive for full initiative. .

the pla is not as transparent as most western militaries regarding military doctrine , but there are several features to highlight here .

mobilization of the civilian population , a corollary of the people's war concept , figures large in chinese military planning , for example .

prc administrative units ( eg , provinces and cities ) regularly conduct exercises for defense mobilization of civilian transportation and infrastructure assets .

analysts assess that alongside kinetic operations , chinese leaders likely would employ the concept of the "three warfares" — legal , media / propaganda , and psychological warfare — during ( and possibly before ) a conflict to achieve their political aims .

following the strategic concept of active defense , pla strategists place a high priority on seizing the initiative in a conflict .

some observers believe that the pla would pair this predilection with its assessment that the cyber and space domains are the "high ground" of contemporary warfare and thus choose to strike its adversary's information networks .

according to one american scholar , china believes that a "preemptive first strike is preferable , as it sets the stage for the remainder of the conflict and puts the aggressor in a distinct position of advantage... .

the pla advocates a cyber - posture that makes no differentiation between peace - time and war - time , and , in fact , advocates for a state of perpetual mobilization. .

the pla may use a variety of operations , including kinetic and electronic warfare methods , to disrupt an adversary's military satellite networks .

since the sino - soviet split in 1960 , china has pursued a course of strategic non - alignment and has eschewed treaty alliances .

china often criticizes u.s. bilateral alliances , calling them outdated relics of the cold war .

china also has made rejection of overseas bases a central part of its foreign policy , but there are indications that the ongoing expansion of pla operations may force china to rethink this policy .

the new logistics facility that the pla plans to establish in djibouti may be a sign that china has already changed its approach .

