the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant provides grants to states , territories , and indian tribes for benefits and services to help ameliorate , or address the root causes of , childhood economic disadvantage .

it was created in the 1996 welfare reform law ( the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 , prwora , p.l .

104-193 ) , which ended the pre - welfare reform program of cash assistance , rewrote the federal rules for cash assistance for needy families , and gave states broad flexibility to meet tanf's statutory goals .

this report discusses the financing of the tanf block grant .

it describes the national funding level , the distribution of funds among the states , and the basis for these funding levels ; describes how states may use tanf funds ; describes how states have actually used tanf funding ; and discusses selected policy issues regarding tanf funding .

the 1996 welfare reform law that created tanf based the bulk of its funding on historical expenditures in its predecessor programs .

therefore , the amount of funding a state receives in tanf today depends on the size of its pre - tanf programs before the enactment of that law .

tanf is a broad - purpose block grant that gives states the flexibility to use its funds to address both the effects of , and the root causes of , childhood economic disadvantage .

there are two sets of rules: those that relate to the use of federal tanf grants , and those for which state expenditures count toward meeting the tanf moe state spending requirement .

tanf allows states to spend their funds on a wider range of activities than did the pre - 1996 programs .

afdc was a cash assistance program ; emergency assistance provided grants to states for a range of activities that provided short - term assistance ; and jobs was an employment services and education and training program for afdc adult recipients .

the number of families receiving cash assistance reached its historical peak in march 1994 , at 5.1 million families .

in the mid - and late 1990s , the cash assistance caseload shrank rapidly , with a 64% decline in the number of families with children receiving cash assistance from fy1995 to fy2000 .

 ( see crs report r43187 , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) : size and characteristics of the cash assistance caseload , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

spending on cash assistance declined correspondingly .

figure 5 shows both the level and composition of spending in fy1995 under the pre - tanf programs and in fy2000 and fy2014 under tanf .

while the overall funding levels in fy1995 and fy2014 were similar , the composition of spending was different .

the figure shows that in fy1995 , afdc cash assistance accounted for 70% of all spending under tanf's predecessor programs .

in fy2014 , cash assistance accounted for 26% of all tanf and moe dollars .

child care expenditures represented 3% of total pre - tanf expenditures in fy1995 , a share that grew to 16% of all spending in fy2014 .

on the other hand , work , education , and training expenditures grew only from 5% to 7% of total spending from fy1995 to fy2014 .

"other work supports" represents spending for state refundable tax credits ( such as state versions of the earned income tax credit ) and transportation aid .

other work supports represented $4.5 billion in fy2014 , or 14.3% of total tanf and moe dollars .

the figure shows that the largest increase in expenditures ( particularly during the fy2000 to fy2014 period ) was in "other spending. .

under tanf , this category represents a wide range of benefits and social services related to families with children .

it includes funding for services related to child abuse and neglect , pre - kindergarten and other early childhood programs , short - term emergency aid , state responsible - fatherhood and marriage programs , and programs for adolescents .

the expenditure reporting system in place for fy2014 did not have enough information to categorize much of this spending properly .

however , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) implemented a new reporting system for fy2015 and later years that will permit a better characterization of spending in the "other" category .

the tanf funding level , both nationally and for each state , is rooted in what states spent in the early to mid - 1990s in the pre - tanf programs that were focused on cash assistance for needy families with children .

the 1996 welfare reform law contemplated no adjustments for changes that have been made to those funding levels since the enactment of tanf .

the law also authorized and provided tanf funding through fy2002 .

however , extensions of tanf funding since fy2002 have maintained basic block grant funding at the $16.5 billion level with no change — neither increases or decreases — extending the "freeze" in funding for now close to 20 years .

the bulk of tanf funding is based on what states spent in the pre - tanf programs in the early to mid - 1990s .

a freeze in the bulk of tanf funding that was originally authorized for 5 years ( fy1997-fy2002 ) has now extended to close to 20 years .

however , a number of considerations are raised by any potential changes in tanf funding , including the following: under current budget rules any increase in tanf funding would have to be offset by spending reductions or revenue increases elsewhere in the budget .

addressing certain issues in a budget - neutral manner — such as disparities in funding among the states — could result in a large redistribution of funding from some states to others .

there are different perspectives with which to evaluate the adequacies of tanf funding .

these different perspectives lead policymakers to fundamental questions about tanf and its goals in conjunction with addressing its financing issues .

history of the tanf block grant funding table a - 1 shows how the tanf basic block grant was derived .

the tanf basic block grant ( state family assistance grant ) provides each state a grant based on its peak funding during the early to - mid 1990s .

the data underlying the formula were the federal share of expenditures in tanf predecessor programs for fy1992 through fy1995 .

the formula provided that each state receive the greatest of the average federal share of expenditures in these programs for fy1992 through fy1994 ( column a ) ; the federal share of expenditures for these programs in fy1994 , adjusted for states that amended their ea programs in fy1994 or fy1995 ( column d ) ; or 4 / 3 times the federal share of expenditures for these programs in the first three quarters of fy1995 ( column e ) .

table a - 2 provides the amount of federal funding through the tanf basic block grant by state as well as state moe levels at 75% and 80% rates of fy1994 predecessor program state expenditures .

the moe is 75% of fy1994 predecessor program state expenditures , but if a state fails to meet tanf work participation standards , the moe rises to 80% of fy1994 expenditures .

table a - 3 shows the total tanf grants to states for fy1997 through fy2015 .

federal and state expenditures under tanf and its predecessor programs table showing allocations based on poor children compared with the current tanf basic block grant unspent tanf fund .

