the fleet of manned aircraft that accomplishes the department of defense's ( dod's ) command and control ( c2 ) and intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) missions for the joint military community ( e - 8 , e - 3 , rc - 135 , wc - 135 , oc - 135 , and e - 6 ) is primarily based on boeing 707 aircraft procured from the 1960s to the early 1990s .

as the age of these legacy c2isr aircraft increases , understanding the air force and navy modernization and recapitalization plans is likely important for congress .

the central issue addressed in this report is the benefits and drawbacks of continued sustainment and modernization of these aircraft compared to funding for recapitalization and transfer of these missions to new aircraft .

this report examines the air force's and navy's current sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization efforts for these boeing 707-based aircraft .

without sufficient sustainment and modernization funding , many analysts argue the legacy c2isr fleet is likely to become a decrepit force ill - suited to the potential challenges posed by future adversaries .

the physical wear - and - tear on these aircraft from the demands of their already lengthy service lives leads aging airframe structures to need reinforcement , engines to require maintenance , and computer and electronic components to face obsolescence .

even if corrosion , metal fatigue , and parts obsolescence do not take their toll on the fleet , military analysts point out that potential adversaries are acquiring advanced , anti - access / area - denial ( a2 / ad ) weapon systems that would make it harder for the legacy c2isr aircraft to get close to the battle .

this report addresses potential congressional oversight and appropriations concerns for the sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization of the dod's boeing 707-based legacy c2isr aircraft fleet .

it does not address options for recapitalization currently being offered by industry to other countries .

congress has the authority to approve , reject , or modify air force and navy funding requests for c2isr aircraft sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization , as well as maintain oversight of the nation's c2isr requirements and capabilities .

congress's decisions on appropriations for the c2isr force could impact the nation's c2isr capabilities and have additional consequences for the u.s. aerospace industry .

a key issue for congress is whether to continue providing sustainment , modernization , and / or recapitalization funding for dod's boeing 707-based legacy c2isr aircraft fleet , and if so , at what levels .

pertinent to the discussion is the potential for a shortfall in the nation's c2isr capabilities if congress or dod chooses to minimize funding for sustainment and upgrades that would keep the weapon systems viable until they are recapitalized .

another issue for congress is dod , air force , and navy priorities for sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization efforts .

an important question is whether development of a c2isr replacement aircraft can or should be further delayed by increasing funding for legacy c2isr aircraft sustainment and modernization .

additionally , potentially shifting some of the legacy c2isr missions to remotely piloted aircraft may affect recapitalization efforts .

congress's decisions on these issues could also have implications for any potential future base realignment and closure ( brac ) decisions as well as impact the u.s. aircraft manufacturing industrial base .

ultimately , the priority the dod places on legacy c2isr sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization , and any decisions considered by congress , could have potential consequences for future national defense strategies and on u.s. c2isr capabilities , given the pivotal role c2isr plays in implementing those strategies .

a note on sources: as small fleets of specialized aircraft , relatively little has been written on the programs discussed in this paper .

description of each therefore relies on air force fact sheets , which are used to introduce each aircraft before discussing the supporting budget items .

the manned aircraft that accomplish the dod's c2isr missions are primarily based on boeing 707 aircraft procured from the 1960s to the early 1990s .

as these legacy c2isr platforms continue to remain in the inventory and their age increases , understanding the air force and navy sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization plans is likely important for congress .

the central issue is how much congress should consider appropriating for the continued sustainment and modernization of these aircraft compared to funding for recapitalization of these missions to new aircraft .

without sufficient sustainment and modernization funding , many analysts argue , the legacy c2isr fleet will quickly become a decrepit force ill - suited to the potential challenges posed by future adversaries .

other suggest that moving to recapitalization and new platforms will result in greater mission effectiveness over the long term , and better cost - effectiveness than keeping up older platforms .

a key issue for congress is whether to continue providing sustainment , modernization , and / or recapitalization funding for the dod's boeing 707-based legacy c2isr aircraft fleet , and if so , at what levels .

pertinent to the discussion is the potential for a shortfall in the nation's c2isr capabilities if congress or the dod chooses to minimize funding for sustainment and upgrades that would keep the weapon systems viable until they are recapitalized .

an important question to ask is whether development of a c2isr replacement aircraft can be further delayed given sufficient levels of funding for legacy c2isr aircraft sustainment and modernization , and if that is a good idea .

additionally , congress's potential oversight of whether to shift some of the legacy c2isr missions to remotely piloted aircraft bears directly on recapitalization efforts .

finally , congress's decisions on these issues could also have implications for any potential future base realignment and closure ( brac ) decisions as well as impact the u.s. aircraft manufacturing industrial base .

ultimately , the priority the dod places on legacy c2isr sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization , and congress's response could have potential consequences on u.s. c2isr capabilities and for the future national defense strategies they support .

fy2015 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

113-291 ) division a – department of defense authorizations title i – procurement subtitle d – air force programs sec .

136 .

limitation on availability of funds for retirement of e – 3 airborne warning and control system aircraft .

 ( a ) limitation .

none of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2015 for the department of defense may be obligated or expended to make significant changes to manning levels with respect to any e – 3 airborne warning and control systems aircraft , or to retire , prepare to retire , or place in storage any such aircraft .

 ( b ) rule of construction. — nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or otherwise affect the requirement to maintain the operational capability of the e – 3 airborne warning and control system aircraft .

title ii – research , development , test , and evaluation subtitle b – program requirements , restrictions , and limitations sec .

219 .

limitation on availability of funds for retirement of joint surveillance and target attack radar systems aircraft .

 ( a ) limitation .

none of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2015 for the air force may be used to make any significant changes to manning levels with respect to any operational joint surveillance and target attack radar systems aircraft or take any action to retire or to prepare to retire such aircraft until the date that is 30 days after the date on which the secretary of the air force submits to the congressional defense committees the report required by subsection ( b ) .

 ( b ) report .

the secretary shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report that includes the following: ( 1 ) an update of the results of the analysis of alternatives for recapitalizing the current joint surveillance and target attack radar systems capability .

 ( 2 ) an assessment of the cost and schedule of developing and fielding a new aircraft and radar system to replace the current joint surveillance and target attack radar systems aircraft that would deliver two replacement aircraft to the joint surveillance and target attack radar systems aircraft operating base by fiscal year 2019 .

