according to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , the united states is expected to be the fourth - largest producer and third - largest exporter of peanuts in the world in 2016 .

in addition to its prominent role in international markets , u.s. peanut production and marketing is an important activity in several states located in the southeastern and southwestern united states .

peanuts have participated in federal farm support programs since the 1930s — initially under a quota system , and since 2002 under the income support programs available for other covered commodities like corn , wheat , soybeans , and rice .

this report uses the most current public information available ( as of september 2016 ) to provide a brief overview of the u.s. peanut sector and current u.s. farm policy including a discussion of how peanuts ( following market adjustments spurred by a 2002 federal quota buyout ) fit within current policy relative to other program crops .

farm policy for peanuts has followed a different policy trajectory from the other program crops for most of the last century .

from the 1930s until 2002 , peanuts operated under a system of marketing quotas that rigidly controlled domestic supplies and prices .

in 2002 , congress eliminated peanut quotas under a new farm bill ( farm security and rural investment act of 2002 , p.l .

107-171 , §1301-§1309 ) through a series of payments that offset the loss of quota rights — these payments are referred to as a "buyout. .

since the 2002 buyout , farm policy for peanuts has followed essentially the same structure as for other "covered" program commodities .

in addition to eligibility for major farm support programs , peanuts initially retained their long - standing eligibility for commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) monthly storage payments ( similar to the cotton storage payment program ) when put under a nine - month nonrecourse marketing loan .

however , eligibility for storage payments was terminated with the 2007 peanut crop .

the current farm commodity program provisions in title i of the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 ; p.l .

113-79 ) include three types of support for covered commodities for crop years 2014-2018: marketing assistance loan benefits , which offer interim ( up to nine months ) financing for loan commodities ( covered crops plus several others ) at statutory loan rates and , if prices fall below loan rates , additional low - price protection in the form of marketing loan gains , loan deficiency payments , or forfeiture ; price loss coverage ( plc ) payments , which are triggered when the national season average farm price for a covered commodity is below its statutorily fixed "reference price" ; and agriculture risk coverage ( arc ) payments , as an alternative to plc , which are triggered when annual crop revenue is below its guaranteed level based on a multiyear moving average of historical crop revenue .

under the 2014 farm bill , farmers with base acres of covered commodities were given a one - time irrevocable choice between plc and "county" arc ( based on a county guarantee ) on a commodity - by - commodity basis for each farm .

alternatively , all covered crops on a farm could be enrolled in "individual" arc , which is based on a farm - level guarantee .

if no choice was made , the producer forfeited any payments for the 2014 crop year and the farm was enrolled automatically in plc for the 2015-2018 crop years .

for peanuts , almost all producers ( 99.7% ) selected plc because they expected it to provide higher payments and greater risk protection than would be available under arc .

similarly most rice producers ( 100% for long grain and 96% for medium grain ) and large majorities of barley ( 75% ) , canola ( 97% ) , sorghum ( 66% ) , and minor oilseed producers ( 56% to 84% ) also selected plc .

in contrast , a near - unanimous majority of corn ( 93% ) and soybean ( 97% ) producers , and a large majority of wheat producers ( 56% ) , selected arc .

crop planting choices in general , and on base acres in particular , are based on relative net returns among competing crops , plus rotational considerations .

farm program payments do not figure in the determination because they are decoupled from planting decisions .

in contrast , crop choices on generic base acres must consider both relative net returns as well as potential proceeds from government programs ( i.e. , both arc and plc ) because of their coupling to crop plantings .

market conditions vary widely based on relative crop prices , yield prospects ( both irrigated and non - irrigated ) , and production costs .

a preliminary assessment of potential market conditions for 2016 using a combination of data from usda and the university of georgia suggests peanuts could be a very competitive option for producers on both irrigated and non - irrigated acres when comparing cost and returns for competing crops ( table 3 ) .

it is important to note that table 3 excludes fixed costs and thus does not attempt to predict actual profitability across crops .

in the short run , crop choices can be made by comparing returns above variable costs ; however , to ensure economic viability in the long run , producers must also cover fixed costs , which are not considered in this table .

this consideration is particularly valid for peanuts , where equipment lines are unique to the crop and represent significant up - front costs .

also , the variable cost estimates used in table 3 represent the estimate for a single point in time and are subject to changing market conditions for a host of farm inputs including fuel , fertilizer , pesticides , labor , and land .

furthermore , it is unclear how market conditions may evolve in 2017 and , thus , whether future prices will be near current levels .

the outlook for 2016 plc and arc payments for major covered commodities — using usda data from september 2016 — suggests that peanuts are an attractive planting option on generic base acres relative to most other competing crops ( table 4 ) .

peanut program payments under plc ( the program choice of over 99% of peanut base owners ) are projected at $290 per acre .

this compares with $86 / acre for wheat , $66 / acre for corn , and $60 / acre for sorghum .

over 90% of corn and soybean base owners chose the arc program , compared with a negligible number of peanut producers .

under the arc scenario presented in table 5 , corn is projected to receive arc payments of $92 per acre , while soybeans are not projected to receive an arc payment in 2016 .

when potential plc and arc program payments ( table 4 and table 5 ) are combined with potential market returns ( table 3 ) , peanuts appear to have a strong advantage over other program crops in competing for generic base acres .

this competitive edge will vary across producing zones with yield and cost conditions , as well as changes in relative prices .

in an extreme case , if a producer with generic base acres expected a sizeable peanut plc payment rate relative to other program crops , their entire farm could be planted to peanuts ( or peanuts and no other covered crop ) , and their plc payments on generic base would be calculated using exclusively the payment rate for peanuts .

alternatively , if expected market returns and plc payment rates do not favor peanuts , farmers with generic base acres could plant their entire farm to crops other than peanuts .

an outcome between these two extremes is expected to prevail if farmers maintain typical rotations , which are needed to maintain soil health and long - term yield potential for all crops .

nevertheless , high potential plc payments on generic base could cause producers to "stretch" their rotations and benefit from additional peanut payments on generic base .

farm policy economists have noted that peanuts ( and rice ) have a statutory reference price that is set disproportionately above historical market prices , particularly when compared to the reference prices for other major program crops .

since the peanut quota buyout in 2002 , monthly peanut farm prices have been below their respective reference price 88% of the time , and below the marketing loan rate 17% of the time .

this compares with monthly corn farm prices ( 58% of the time below the reference price and 5% of the time below the marketing loan rate ) ; soybeans ( 39% and 4% ) , wheat ( 55% and 4% ) , sorghum ( 59% and 11% ) , and barley ( 61% and 0% ) .

rice has comparable "in - the - money" percentages with 91% of the monthly adjusted world price ( awp ) for rice falling below the reference price , and 29% below the marketing loan rate .

some contend that this potential advantage favors peanut production ( relative to other program crops ) on generic base acres .

however , the extent to which this scenario might play out is unclear , and both agronomic and market circumstances suggest that it might be limited .

the outlook for average farm prices across major program crops is likely to be a key determinant of both farm program payments and crop planting choices on generic base .

this is because the size of the farm program payments increases in proportion to the decline in farm price below the reference price and loan rate .

the largest impacts on planting decisions could be in states where the generic base is large relative to the total base ( figure 7 ) because the planting mix determines the payment .

at one extreme is a farm with 100% generic base , when acreage eligible for specific crop payments corresponds directly to the covered crops that are planted .

at the other extreme , for a farm with no generic base acres , the payment acres are predetermined and will not change regardless of what the farmer plants — namely covered crops to the individual crop base acres .

the share of generic base is more than 50% for several peanut - producing states , including alabama , texas , georgia , mississippi , and florida ( figure 7 and table 6 ) .

these states could see additional plantings of peanuts in future years if relative returns ( including government payments ) favor peanuts .

table 6 summarizes peanut base acres and total generic base under the 2014 farm bill .

in addition , annual planted peanut acreage for major producer states is shown for each of 2012 through 2016 .

the domestic and trade policy concern is that farm program payments made to plantings on generic base are fully coupled to production and thus potentially market distorting .

as a result , program payments made to generic base would likely count toward the u.s. amber box limit of $19.1 billion .

furthermore , if such payments are substantial and can be linked to a surge in exports , they could potentially be vulnerable to challenge by another wto member .

as mentioned earlier , large peanut producers who have pledged their peanut crops as collateral for nine - month usda marketing loans could confront a payment limit issue leading to forfeiture of their crop to usda .

this situation could result if incurring marketing loan benefits ( i.e. , marketing loan gains or loan deficiency payments ) would cause them to surpass the payment limit of $125,000 .

in such a situation , a producer could simply forfeit the collateral peanuts to usda ( via the commodity credit corporation ) and keep the original loan value .

the ccc would then be responsible for handling and storage costs and the eventual marketing of the peanuts .

usda , in its november 2015 crop forecast , projected u.s. peanut ending stocks for the 2015 / 16 crop year to be record large at 2.87 billion pounds or 52.3% of total use .

however , record large u.s. exports and domestic use caused usda to substantially lower the estimate for 2015 / 16 peanut ending stocks to 1.79 billion pounds , or 27.1% of total use .

this revised outlook significantly reduced both the likelihood of any forfeitures and the expected level of peanut - related program outlays in 2015 / 16 .

however , the prospects for large peanut plantings — relative to recent years — remains in place heading into 2017 as farm subsidies ( via generic base ) provide significant incentives to plant peanuts .

if future u.s. peanut supplies are large enough to depress prices for successive years , a large amount of peanuts could go under loan and forfeitures could accumulate .

in a severely depressed market , usda might have difficulty finding a buyer without offering a deep discount , which would result in large net outlays for the government .

usda could wait for a price recovery , but doing so would result in additional storage charges .

sufficient storage capacity might also be an issue if stocks increase substantially .

following the 2002 buyout of the peanut quota program , federal peanut income support payments ( including storage payments and the buyout ) averaged over $300 million per year through 2007 .

this includes peanut storage payments of $79 million per year from 1996 to 2007 ( the last year of eligibility ) ( figure 8 ) .

from 2008 through 2015 , federal peanut program outlays have averaged about $90 million .

however , recent long - term budget projections suggest that federal peanut program outlays could become much larger in the future .

in february 2016 , usda projected peanut program costs of $503.6 million in fy2016 , $870 million in fy2017 , and at least $910 million through fy2025 .

this included substantial peanut storage and handling costs ( related to marketing loan forfeitures ) that were projected to rise from $31.2 million in fy2017 to $52 million in fy2021 .

more recently , in august 2016 , cbo projected ccc program outlays for peanuts at $413 million for fy2016 , and averaging $548 million through the remainder of the 2014 farm bill period .

however , cbo projections do not include costs associated with loan forfeiture but are limited to plc , arc , and marketing assistance loan benefits .

as a point of reference , the annual market value of u.s. peanut production has traditionally been in the range of $1.1 billion to $1.4 billion , depending on crop size .

future government payments for u.s. peanut programs will depend on how market conditions evolve and how the average farm price for peanuts compares to the plc reference price .

the american peanut council ( apc ) administers the u.s. peanut industry's export market development program , receiving approximately $2 million per year in government funds under the market access program ( map ) .

map aids in the creation , expansion , and maintenance of foreign markets for u.s. agricultural products .

map funding has been targeted for reductions by some members of congress , who maintain that it is a form of "corporate welfare," or to help offset increased expenditures on other programs .

such efforts have been unsuccessful .

for the domestic market , some in congress have begun encouraging usda to purchase more peanut butter for domestic food programs and for international food aid as a way to increase peanut usage .

in fy2015 , usda purchased 37.5 million pounds of processed peanut products ( for distribution through domestic feeding channels ) and another 39.1 million pounds in fy2016 .

arguments for and against the peanut support programs are the same as for u.s. farm programs in general .

proponents argue that an income safety net is needed to help producers deal with the substantial price volatility associated with commodity markets .

they say a marketing assistance loan program is needed to provide greater marketing options for producers who are at a distinct market - power disadvantage when dealing with a small number of powerful buyers .

and in peanut's particular case , proponents argue that farm program support is needed to help offset the substantial market volatility that has emerged since the elimination of the peanut quota system .

in contrast , critics argue that market signals are sufficient to allocate resources within the sector , and that subsidies distort resources away from more efficient uses .

some critics argue that farm subsidies actually keep small , inefficient operators in business and that , in the absence of subsidies , the inefficient operators would not be competitive and the land would be maintained and operated by more efficient , technologically savvy operators who would get better yields and returns from the same acreage .

others argue further that funds allocated to farm support would have greater returns if spent in other sectors .

