on july 31 , 2014 , president obama issued executive order 13673 , fair pay and safe workplaces , with the stated intent of "increas[ing] efficiency and cost savings in the work performed by parties who contract with the federal government by ensuring that they understand and comply with labor laws. .

the order requires that executive branch procurement contractors disclose information about their compliance with 14 specified federal labor laws and their state equivalents as part of the award process .

it also requires that agency contracting officers take these disclosures into consideration when assessing whether prospective vendors have a "satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics" as part of the responsibility determination process .

agencies generally cannot award a procurement contract without determining that the prospective vendor is "affirmatively responsible" for purposes of the contract .

in addition , the order imposes certain requirements intended to promote "paycheck transparency" for contractor employees and limit mandatory arbitration of employee claims .

subsequently , on march 6 , 2015 , the department of labor ( dol ) issued guidance regarding the roles and responsibilities of the labor compliance advisors whom the order requires to be appointed within procuring agencies .

then , on may 28 , 2015 , dol issued proposed guidance regarding the specific labor law violations to be considered when assessing vendors' responsibility , and the federal acquisition regulatory council ( far council ) proposed amendments to the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) to implement executive order 13673 .

executive order 13673 and its proposed implementing guidance and regulations have prompted debate about both the specific labor and employment policies they seek to promote , as well as the general practice of using the federal procurement process to further social and economic objectives that some have described as "only indirectly related to conventional procurement considerations. .

in particular , there have been questions about the president's authority to impose the requirements of executive order 13673 ; how the requirements of the order compare to preexisting law ; and whether the order will result in blacklisting or the de facto debarment of government contractors .

the term blacklisting is sometimes used to describe a practice of formally or informally identifying — sometimes through the compilation of lists — disfavored vendors with whom the government will not do business .

the term de facto debarment describes the effective exclusion of vendors from the procurement process without the procedural protections afforded to them in formal debarment and suspension proceedings .

depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case , both blacklisting and de facto debarment could , if they occur , be found to have deprived contractors of due process in violation of the fifth amendment to the u.s. constitution .

this report provides the answers to these and other questions about executive order 13673 and its proposed implementing guidance and regulations .

the questions and answers are organized into three sections .

the first provides an overview of the executive order and related materials ; the second discusses the order's relationship to existing law ; and the third addresses other questions , including the president's authority to issue the order .

in considering these questions and answers , note that certain dol guidance and the proposed far amendments have not been finalized , and the order is not scheduled to be implemented until 2016 , at the earliest .

for a two - page overview of materials discussed in this report , see crs report if10258 , fair pay and safe workplaces order: answers to questions , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the questions and answers in this section provide an overview of executive order 13673 and related guidance and regulations , including ( 1 ) the basic requirements of the order ; ( 2 ) the 14 federal labor laws to be considered in assessing vendors' responsibility ; ( 3 ) what state laws are to be seen as equivalent to the specified federal laws ; and ( 4 ) the responsibilities of the labor compliance advisors whom the order requires to be appointed within procuring agencies .

the questions and answers in this section examine how the requirements of executive order 13673 compare to current law and what , if any , changes the order may make to the implementation of federal procurement law .

they address ( 1 ) agencies' authority to consider violations of labor law in the procurement process prior to executive order 13673 ; ( 2 ) the factors agencies have historically considered when assessing vendors' integrity and business ethics in the responsibility determination process ; ( 3 ) whether labor law violations will factor directly into source selection when executive order 13673 is implemented ; ( 4 ) whether the order will result in prequalification of vendors ; ( 5 ) whether vendors who disclose labor law violations will be debarred or suspended from government contracts ; and ( 6 ) whether the order will result in any changes to the certificate of competency ( coc ) process used in determining the responsibility of small businesses .

the questions and answers in this section address the president's authority to impose the requirements of executive order 13673 , as well as de facto debarment , challenges to responsibility determinations , contractor representations and disclosures on other matters , and penalties for false certifications .

this section also addresses the relationship between executive order 13673 and certain amendments made to the far by the clinton administration and subsequently revoked , and potential congressional responses to the executive order .

when issuing executive order 13673 , president obama expressly noted the authority of 40 u.s.c .

§121 and the promotion of "economy and efficiency" in federal contracting .

in so doing , he referenced the specific citation to and general language of provisions of the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 ( fpasa ) , as amended , which authorize the president to "prescribe policies and directives that [he] considers necessary" to provide the "federal government with an economical and efficient system for ... [p]rocuring and supplying property and ... services," among other things .

this is the same authority that president obama and other presidents have previously relied upon when imposing requirements upon the procurement process , as table 2 illustrates .

many requirements imposed by presidents under the authority of fpasa have been seen to involve "housekeeping" matters , and have not been subject to legal challenge .

however , certain requirements have been challenged on the grounds that they exceed the president's authority .

such challenges have generally failed where a "sufficiently close nexus" between the challenged requirements and economy and efficiency in federal procurement is seen to exist .

in applying this "nexus test" in afl - cio v. kahn , the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit expressly noted that economy and efficiency are "not narrow terms," and can encompass factors such as "price , quality , suitability , and availability of goods or services. .

subsequent courts have taken a similarly broad view , finding that challenged requirements have the requisite nexus if they can be said to have an "attenuated link" to economy and efficiency in procurement , or if the president's explanation for how an order promotes efficiency and economy is "reasonable and rational. .

only those requirements which are seen to have too attenuated a link to economy and efficiency , or which are specifically barred by a federal statute , will generally be invalidated .

neither seems likely here under current precedents , at least as to the labor violation provisions that are generally the focus of discussions of executive order 13673 .

president obama , the department of labor , and the far council have all proffered explanations of how disclosure of contractors' labor law violations will promote economy and efficiency in procurement .

for example , in issuing its proposed guidance regarding what violations are to be considered in implementing the order , dol emphasized that contractors' labor law violations create risks to the timely , predictable , and satisfactory delivery of goods and services to the federal government , and federal agencies risk poor performance by awarding contracts to companies with histories of labor law violations .

poor workplace conditions lead to lower productivity and creativity , increased workplace disruptions , and increased workforce turnover .

for contracting agencies , this means receipt of lower quality products and services , and increased risk of project delays and cost overruns .

given such statements , the link between the labor law disclosure requirements and economy and efficiency appears unlikely to be seen as too attenuated — or unreasonable or irrational — under current precedents , which have opined that an alleged link to procurement is not to be seen as too attenuated just because "one can with a straight face advance an argument claiming opposite effects or no effects at all. .

the kahn court similarly noted that economy and efficiency can be said to result even if challenged requirements could result in higher prices .

also , no conflicts between specific statutory requirements and the disclosure or consideration of labor law violations in the responsibility determination process have been noted to date .

the term de facto debarment generally refers to exclusion outside of the formal suspension and debarment process .

it can be seen as improper on this basis alone , because it involves agency action that is not in compliance with the law .

in addition , conduct that constitutes de facto debarment can be seen to violate contractors' rights to due process by depriving them of protected liberty interests in being able to challenge allegations about their integrity that could deprive them of their livelihood without notice or an opportunity for a hearing .

as was previously discussed , notice and an opportunity for a hearing are provided in exclusion proceedings .

 ( see " will contractors who disclose violations be debarred or suspended ? .

" ) .

however , they are generally not provided in the responsibility determination process .

repeated determinations of nonresponsibility made upon the same basis have been found to constitute impermissible de facto debarment , as have agency statements or conduct evidencing a refusal to do business with a contractor without formally excluding the contractor .

some commentators have expressed concern that implementation of executive order 13673 will result in the de facto debarment of contractors who disclose labor law violations .

others disagree , arguing that vendors will receive more procedural protections under the executive order than under current law , which , as previously noted , generally does not provide for vendors to receive notice or an opportunity for a hearing before being determined to be nonresponsible .

which of these two views proves to be correct seems likely to depend upon how executive order 13673 is implemented by the procuring agencies .

the potential for impermissible de facto debarment could be said to exist , particularly insofar as the order can be seen as an attempt to standardize agencies' consideration of labor law violations in the responsibility determination process .

standardization could make it more likely for multiple contracting officers to make the same determination as to responsibility based on the same information .

multiple determinations of nonresponsibility based on the same information are not necessarily impermissible , particularly if that information is the most recent information available .

however , the order expressly calls for contracting officers to consider labor law violations over the past three years when making responsibility determinations , and determinations based on the same older information could be more likely to be seen as a systematic attempt to exclude a vendor outside the formal exclusion process , than as the result of individual contracting officers independently reaching the same conclusion .

on the other hand , agencies could potentially develop practices or procedures whereby they routinely pursue exclusion or labor compliance agreements in situations where there could be multiple determinations of nonresponsibility based on the same older information .

if that were the case , de facto debarment could potentially be avoided , although labor rights activists and competing vendors might then raise concerns about the award of contracts to entities that they believe ought to have been found nonresponsible based on their labor law violations .

 ( see below " can nonresponsibility determinations be challenged ? .

" ) .

as previously noted , contractors are generally not entitled to notice and an opportunity for a hearing prior to being found nonresponsible for the award of a federal contract ( see " what is de facto debarment , and will implementation of the order result in de facto debarment of contractors ? .

" ) .

the cases of any "otherwise qualified" small business contractors who might be found nonresponsible must be referred to the sba , which may certify as to the firm's responsibility ( see " will there be changes in the certificate of competency process used in determining the responsibility of small businesses ? .

" ) .

outside of the sba certificate of competency process , however , the far does not make any provisions for review or appeal of contracting officers' determinations as to responsibility within ( or outside ) the procuring agency .

these determinations could , however , potentially be challenged in the course of a bid protest before the procuring agency , the government accountability office , or the u.s. court of federal claims , the three forums with jurisdiction over bid protests .

in such a protest , a vendor that was denied an award because it was found to be nonresponsible could contest that determination on the grounds that the determination is arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion , or otherwise not in accordance with law .

alternatively , a vendor that lost an award to a competitor which was found to be affirmatively responsible could seek to challenge that determination , although gao regulations , in particular , permit challenges to affirmative determinations of responsibility only in narrow circumstances .

prevailing in such bid protests could be difficult , though , because the reviewing tribunals afford substantial deference to the contracting officers' determinations as to responsibility on the grounds these determinations are committed to agency discretion by law , and the procuring agencies "must bear the brunt of any difficulties experienced during performance. .

this generally means that the protester must show that the contracting officer's determination lacked "any reasonable basis," or was arbitrary or made in bad faith .

moreover , in cases of nonresponsibility determinations , review is generally limited to the information available to the contracting officer at the time of the determination .

the review could potentially encompass information not considered by the contracting officer in cases where the contracting officer has made an affirmative determination of responsibility .

however , affirmative determinations of responsibility are not necessarily seen as invalid just because information exists that is adverse to the contractor , so long as this information was known to and not ignored by the contracting officer when making the determination .

limitations on jurisdiction and standing could also effectively limit vendors' ability to challenge responsibility determinations in certain cases , since the protest forums will generally only hear protests that are seen to be timely .

the protester may also be required to show that any alleged violations of the law are prejudicial to it , in the sense that the protester would be in line for the award but for the alleged violation .

the proposed far amendments implementing executive order 13673 call for contractors to represent whether there has been any "administrative merits determination , arbitral award or decision , or civil judgment , rendered against [them] within the three - year period preceding the date of the offer for violations of labor laws. .

in addition , in cases where a contractor which has represented that there has been such a determination or judgment is the subject of a responsibility determination because the contractor is line for an award , that contractor must disclose "[t]he labor law violated" and other information to the contracting officer .

if these proposed requirements are implemented , the representations and disclosures as to labor law violations would not be the only representations or disclosures that federal contractors are required to make in responding to solicitations or as terms of their contracts .

currently , contractors are required to make representations or certifications regarding whether , among other things , they ( 1 ) are inverted domestic corporations ; ( 2 ) have delinquent federal taxes in an amount greater than $3,000 ; or ( 3 ) have been convicted of or subject to a civil judgment for specified offenses , including fraud or a criminal offense in obtaining a government contract or subcontract .

federal contractors are also required to disclose certain information , including information "sufficient" to identify the nature and extent of any human trafficking offense and the individual ( s ) responsible for the conduct ; any personal conflict - of - interest violation by a contractor employee performing acquisition functions closely associated with inherently governmental functions ; and "credible evidence" that a principal , employee , agent , or subcontractor of the contractor has committed a violation of federal criminal law involving fraud , conflict of interest , bribery , or gratuity violations found in title 18 of the united states code , a violation of the civil false claims act , or significant overpayments in connection with the award , performance , or closeout of the contract or any subcontract thereunder .

the government has a number of potential avenues of recourse if a contractor were to falsely represents that "[t]here has been no administrative merits determination , arbitral award or decision , or civil judgment , rendered against [it] within the three - year period preceding the date of the offer for violations of labor laws," as is required under the proposed far clause .

this proposed clause expressly states that if it is later determined that the offeror knowingly rendered an erroneous representation , in addition to other remedies available to the government , the contracting officer may [but is not required to] terminate the contract resulting from this solicitation in accordance with the procedures set forth in [the far] .

depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case , "other remedies" could include , but are not limited to , liquidated damages , equitable reductions in price or other consideration , reprocurement at the contractor's expense , and reduction or withholding of award or incentive fees .

the contractor could also be subject to negative performance evaluations or debarment or suspension .

monetary damages for fraud are also possible , under the civil false claims act , the contract disputes act , or the program fraud civil remedies act , as discussed in crs report r43460 , contractor fraud against the federal government: selected federal civil remedies , by [author name scrubbed] .

commentators have noted similarities between the fair pay and safe workplaces order and certain amendments that were made to the far by the clinton administration and subsequently revoked by the george w. bush administration .

the clinton administration's amendments could be said to resemble the fair pay and safe workplaces order in that they called for contracting officers to consider prospective vendors' "compliance" with legal requirements in determining whether vendors have a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics , as executive order 13673 does ( see " what does the executive order require ? .

" ) .

the clinton - era amendments also called for vendors to make certain representations and disclosures about whether they have been subject to specified legal actions related to violations of covered laws , as the far amendments proposed by the obama administration would do .

on the other hand , there are some notable differences between the clinton administration's amendments to the far and the far amendments proposed , to date , by the obama administration to implement the fair pay and safe workplaces order .

for example , the clinton administration considered compliance with the broad categories of "tax laws , labor and employment laws , environmental laws , antitrust laws , and consumer protection laws," while the obama administration focuses upon compliance with 14 specific federal labor and employment laws and their state equivalents .

the clinton administration also amended the "general standards" of responsibility in section 9.104-1 of the far to prescribe that vendors [h]ave a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics including satisfactory compliance with the law including tax laws , labor and employment laws , antitrust laws , and consumer protection laws .

the obama administration , in contrast , does not propose to amend these standards , but instead would address compliance with labor laws primarily in a new subpart 22.20 of the far , one provision of which would specify that [t]he contracting officer['s] duty to consider labor violations under this paragraph [which addresses pre - award evaluation of an offeror's labor violations] is in addition to the contracting officer['s] duties under 9.104-5 and 9.104-6 [which are among the far provisions addressing responsibility determinations generally] .

in addition , the clinton administration amended the far provisions regarding the rejection of bids and notifications to unsuccessful offerors to require that contracting officers promptly notify vendors of nonresponsibility determinations and the basis for such determinations .

the obama administration has not proposed any such changes to date , instead leaving in place the preexisting rules regarding notifications of nonresponsibility determinations ( i.e. , such notifications are generally not made ) .

the clinton administration's amendments were revoked by the george w. bush administration shortly after their effective date , making it difficult to assess what their effects on the procurement process would have been .

subsequently , on december 1 , 2011 , the department of agriculture promulgated regulations calling for the incorporation into its contracts of standard terms regarding "labor law violations," which would have specified that , in accepting this contract award , the contractor certifies that it is in compliance with all applicable labor laws and that , to the best of its knowledge , its subcontractors of any tier , and suppliers , are also in compliance with all applicable labor laws .

under these terms , the contractor would also have agreed to "promptly report" to the contracting officer any "formal allegations" or "formal findings" of "non - compliance" with labor laws .

however , like the clinton administration's far amendments , these regulations were withdrawn prior to their effective date .

congress could potentially take various actions — or no action — in response to executive order 13673 , depending upon its policy preferences .

if opposition to the order and its requirements is sufficiently widespread , congress could enact legislation that would bar implementation of the order .

such legislation could take the form of an appropriations rider , barring the use of appropriated funds to promulgate the proposed far amendments or to implement any far provisions requiring that contractors disclose violations of labor laws .

alternatively , congress could amend existing procurement or other statutes in such a way that these statutes would be contrary to the requirements of the executive order , as congress did in 2011 in response to a draft executive order reportedly being considered by the obama administration that would have required contractors to disclose their political contributions .

as previously discussed , the president's authority under fpasa has not been seen to permit the president to impose requirements upon the procurement process that conflict with statutory enactments .

 ( see " what is the president's authority to impose these requirements ? .

" ) .

on the other hand , if congress were to favor the disclosure requirements , it could enact legislation to codify these requirements , thereby ensuring that they are not repealed by a subsequent administration .

certain procurement - related executive orders issued by prior presidents have been revoked by later presidents .

supporters of the policies underlying the executive order could also enact legislation to make any desired expansions , clarifications , or refinements of the labor violation disclosure or other requirements .

for example , in 2008 , congress enacted legislation that extended the so - called "mandatory disclosure rule," which requires contractors to disclose "credible evidence" of certain criminal violations , among other things , then being developed by the executive , to encompass contracts for commercial items or performed overseas .

such contracts had been excluded by the executive in earlier versions of the rule .

