though only about three times the size of washington , dc , and with a population of 5.5 million , the city - state of singapore punches far above its weight in both economic and diplomatic influence .

its stable government , strong economic performance , educated citizenry , and strategic position along key shipping lanes make it a major player in regional affairs .

for the united states , singapore is a crucial partner in trade and security cooperation , as the obama administration executes its rebalance to asia strategy .

singapore's value has only grown as the administration has given special emphasis to the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) as a platform for multilateral engagement .

singapore's heavy dependence on international trade makes maintaining regional stability one of its foremost priorities .

as a result , the nation is a firm supporter of both u.s. trade policy and the u.s. security role in asia .

however , the country also maintains close relations with china .

as an english colony , singapore was a trading post for the east india company , but in 1959 , singapore gained a large degree of self - rule .

that same year , lee kuan yew , who was head of the people's action party ( pap ) , was elected prime minister .

singapore's leaders decided that , given the city - state's small size , it should unite with malaysia .

that merger took place in 1963 , but the federation was short - lived .

disputes arose between singapore leaders and those from malaysia's ruling party , the united malays national organization ( umno ) , over economic management and several other issues .

umno advocated preferential policies to support ethnic malays over the country's sizeable indian and chinese populations , and objected to pap moves to seek greater influence across the merged federation .

many in malaysia felt that singapore , with a majority ethnic - chinese population , could gain greater economic dominance over the federation .

in 1965 , the malaysian parliament expelled singapore from the federation .

despite concerns about singapore's economic prospects and its scant resource base , the economy quickly grew .

because of its location on the strait of malacca — one of the world's busiest maritime thoroughfares — singapore's port soon became one of the world's busiest , and the country attracted foreign businesses and investment .

now , singapore's gdp per capita exceeds that of the united states , japan , and hong kong .

the pap has won every general election since the end of the colonial era in 1959 , aided by a fragmented opposition , singapore's economic success , and electoral procedures , such as group districting , which strongly favor the ruling party .

opposition parties tallied their best results in singapore's history in 2011 parliamentary elections , garnering about 40% of the popular vote and leading pap leaders to vow reforms that would respond to public concerns about widening wealth disparities and the country's expanding reliance on foreign laborers .

in september 2015 , following several gradual policy shifts including the imposition of some limits on foreign labor and improved benefits for the poor and elderly , the pap won nearly 70% of the popular vote in nationwide polls , leaving it with 83 of parliament's 89 seats .

singapore's parliamentary - style government is headed by the prime minister and cabinet , who represent the majority party in parliament .

the president serves as a ceremonial head of state , a position currently held by tony tan keng yam .

lee hsien loong has served as prime minister since 2004 .

lee is the son of former prime minister lee kuan yew , who stepped down in 1990 after 31 years at the helm .

the senior lee , who died in may 2015 , still is widely acknowledged as the architect of singapore's success as a nation .

he resigned his post as "minister mentor" following the 2011 elections , citing a need to pass leadership on to the next generation .

in 2010 , changes to the constitution guaranteed that more non - pap members would be represented in the parliament .

the electoral reforms were seen as an acknowledgement by the pap that it must adjust to a more open and diverse singapore .

the country's leaders have acknowledged a "contract" with the singaporean people , under which individual rights are curtailed in the interest of maintaining a stable , prosperous society .

supporters praise the pragmatism of singapore , noting its sustained economic growth and high standards of living .

others criticize the approach as stunting creativity and entrepreneurship , and insist that singapore's leaders must respond to an increasingly sophisticated and well - educated public's demand for greater liberties for economic survival .

singapore was a founding member of asean , the region's leading multilateral body , which allows southeast asia's mostly smaller countries to influence regional diplomacy , particularly vis - à - vis china .

renewed u.s. engagement in the asia pacific under the obama administration has pleased singapore and may have allowed it more diplomatic space to stand up to beijing on key issues .

singapore has praised the administration's "rebalancing" effort toward asia , yet has been careful to warn that anti - china rhetoric or efforts to "contain" china's rise will be counterproductive .

at the same time , singapore leaders have publicly told chinese audiences that deeper tensions between china and the united states are detrimental to the broader asia region .

maintaining strong relations with both china and the united states is a keystone of singapore's foreign policy .

singapore often portrays itself as a useful balancer and intermediary between major powers in the region .

in the south china sea dispute , for example , in 2011 , singapore — a non - claimant — called on china to clarify its island claims , characterizing its stance on the issue as neutral , yet concerned because of the threat to maritime stability .

at the same time , singapore was hosting a port visit by a chinese surveillance vessel , part of an ongoing exchange on technical cooperation on maritime safety with beijing .

china's economic power makes it a crucial component of trade policy for all countries in the region , but singapore's ties with beijing are multifaceted and extend to cultural , political , and educational exchanges as well .

china is singapore's largest trading partner , and singapore signed on to the chinese - led asian infrastructure investment bank ( aiib ) .

there also are frequent high - level visits between singapore and china .

singapore adheres to a one - china policy , but has an extensive relationship with taiwan and has managed it carefully to avoid jeopardizing its strong relations with beijing .

taiwan and singapore have held large - scale military exercises annually for over 30 years and , in 2010 , announced the launch of talks related to a free - trade pact under the framework of the world trade organization .

while the pap has been elected by a comfortable majority in every election since singapore's founding , the government "has broad powers to limit citizens' rights," according to the u.s. state department's 2015 country report on human rights practices .

the state department noted that "the government could and did censor the media ( from television shows to websites ) if it determined that the content would undermine social harmony or criticized the government. .

it also noted that singapore's broad internal security act ( isa ) permits preventive detention without normal judicial review , although "in recent years , the government has used it against alleged terrorists and not against persons in the political opposition. .

pap's ideology stresses the government's role in enforcing social discipline and harmony , and the party , in the past , has been particularly concerned about racial tensions in singapore .

in the 1960s , there were several race riots in the country , pitting ethnic malays against ethnic chinese .

 ( singapore's population is 74% chinese , 13% malay , and 9% indian. ) .

race riots , since then , have been relatively rare .

yet in december 2013 a traffic accident , which killed an indian national , sparked widespread rioting in singapore's little india district , involving over 400 people .

the police were able to regain control , but the incident may have pointed to frustrations among singapore's migrant laborers .

greater , and generally freer , use of the internet may be threatening to some of the leadership ; in the past the government attempted to tighten control over bloggers , who may not exercise the same restraint as the mainstream media in limiting criticism of the ruling party or touching on sensitive issues such as race in singapore's multi - ethnic environment .

in 2015 , a teenage blogger was arrested for posting a video criticizing lee kuan yew after his death .

he was convicted on charges of obscenity and insulting religious feelings , and was sentenced to four weeks imprisonment .

international watchdog agencies criticize singapore's control of the press as well .

singaporean officials have used defamation suits to intimidate reporters and news outlets , including the economist and the new york times , and in 2016 reporters without borders ranked singapore 154 th out of 180 countries in terms of press freedom , below other nations in the region , including burma , malaysia , and thailand .

new media controls have been stepped up as well: in 2013 the government issued new regulations for online news sites that report on singapore , prompting international internet companies with a presence in the city - state to criticize the move as backward - looking .

