the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) was established on november 3 , 1961 , following enactment of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa , p.l .

87-195 ) which formally established and authorized the assistance programs that usaid implements .

since then , usaid has been the leading international humanitarian and development arm of the u.s. government .

in fy2015 , the agency is responsible for more than $20 billion in appropriations , representing more than half of all traditional foreign aid appropriations and more than two - thirds of total u.s. humanitarian and development funding in that year .

usaid is the workhorse of the u.s. foreign assistance program .

the agency has played a role in multiple contexts and forms of assistance over many years so that no short account can fully characterize it .

focusing as much as possible on points likely to illuminate concerns of congress , this report provides a profile of the agency , putting its operations into brief historical context , and explains how it implements its programs .

selected current issues are then discussed in more depth .

some points of possible interest in the broad description of usaid operations above warrant a more thorough discussion .

almost any current aspect of the agency contains a complex history — for more than 50 years the agency has been challenged by concerns regarding accountability , sustainability , project partners and the best way to do development , its place in the u.s. government , and the priorities of congress .

each of these issues is highlighted below .

usaid , as with any public or private institution , faces multiple challenges in the process of fulfilling its mission .

the peculiar environment in which it operates — with multiple lines of authority , shifting priorities , uncertain budgets , unpredictable partners , and unstable settings — has ensured a degree of difficulty in implementing its programs .

even as the agency addressed old challenges with the usaid forward reforms , new ones have emerged .

among the current continuing and new challenges that observers have noted and that congress may track closely are the following: human resources .

despite the increased numbers of usaid foreign service officers in recent years , the agency may still face shortages of specific skill sets — eg , contract officers to meet the needs generated by aid localization efforts or specialists to implement policy initiatives , such as agriculturalists to manage the feed the future initiative .

unlike the state department and dod , which have larger staff pools , usaid faces a challenge finding sufficient personnel to go to critical priority countries ( afghanistan , sudan ) and unanticipated crisis countries ( haiti earthquake ) without leaving detrimental vacancies elsewhere .

providing sufficient training to new personnel in view of declining operational budgets is another concern .

a related issue is whether the agency can retain the new staff it has recruited in the past few years amid concerns about lack of language and skill training , lack of travel funding to monitor projects , and an environment that , some argue , continues to constrain initiative .

retaining quality foreign national staff in view of relatively low salaries and limited promotion opportunities also poses a challenge given the important role such staff traditionally play in mission operations .

scaling - u p .

usaid innovations in development practice and science and technology , such as those nourished by the global development lab , are often introduced in one or two countries and , within those countries , one or two provinces .

the history of usaid is replete with pilot programs that were never fully developed and adopted by a larger population .

will agency efforts to "scale - up" lab innovations succeed ? .

some observers have suggested that one necessary element is creating a longer time horizon for usaid projects and making funding available for follow - up projects to see new ideas through to maturity .

another factor for success is the extent to which knowledge of innovations in one place can be disseminated throughout the agency .

evaluation .

under usaid forward , the agency has given renewed attention to the number of independent evaluations it undertakes .

a challenge for usaid is to improve the quality of evaluations — including conducting more long - term outcome analysis — and to ensure that evaluation results are used as "lessons learned" to make corrections for future programs .

local solutions .

as discussed earlier in this report , working with local governments and the private sector to implement development efforts requires a commitment of agency personnel and funds , the flexibility to use those funds in a way that reflects country priorities , and a long - term planning and implementation time frame aimed at developing local capacities , while at the same time ensuring that accountability standards are met .

sustainability .

building "country ownership" is one usaid response to the challenge of sustaining development efforts beyond the life of usaid's interventions .

another is more resource mobilization efforts to develop a government's capacity to collect revenue to support development .

a clear path to sustainability , however , remains a work in progress .

security .

lack of security for agency personnel overseas poses significant obstacles to successful project implementation .

how to get past the security - centered structure that many u.s. embassies have become to regularly meet with government and civil society representatives in order to formulate suitable projects , and how to gain safe access to project locales for appropriate monitoring , are major concerns .

security concerns in so - called non - permissive environments , such as south sudan , afghanistan , pakistan , and yemen , pose considerably greater problems , including periodic evacuation of personnel , complications in finding contractors and grantees willing to undertake the risks of work in the field , and difficulty employing foreign national employees willing to undertake work under u.s. auspices .

program flexibility .

usaid staff face multiple imperatives , including objectives listed in the foreign assistance act , congressional mandates , presidential initiatives , direction from state department diplomats , priorities of partner governments , and the influence of the international community .

usaid , as an agency , is challenged to reconcile these varied views , yet remain sufficiently flexible to fashion a coherent development program in priority countries .

