beyond the internet content that many can easily access online lies another layer — indeed a much larger layer — of material that is not accessed through a traditional online search .

as experts have noted , "[s]earching on the internet today can be compared to dragging a net across the surface of the ocean .

while a great deal may be caught in the net , there is still a wealth of information that is deep , and therefore , missed. .

this deep area of the internet , or the deep web , is characterized by the unknown — unknown breadth , depth , content , and users .

the furthest corners of the deep web , known as the dark web , contain content that has been intentionally concealed .

the dark web may be accessed both for legitimate purposes and to conceal criminal or otherwise malicious activities .

it is the exploitation of the dark web for illegal practices that has garnered the interest of officials and policy makers .

take for instance the silk road — one of the most notorious sites formerly located on the dark web .

the silk road was an online global bazaar for illicit services and contraband , mainly drugs .

vendors of these illegal substances were located in more than 10 countries around the world , and contraband goods and services were provided to more than 100,000 buyers .

it has been estimated that the silk road generated about $1.2 billion in sales between january 2011 and september 2013 , after which it was dismantled by federal agents .

the use of the internet , and in particular the dark web , for malicious activities has led policy makers to question whether law enforcement and other officials have sufficient tools to combat the illicit activities that might flow through this underworld .

this report illuminates information on the various layers of the internet , with a particular focus on the dark web .

it discusses both legitimate and illicit uses of the dark web , including how the government may rely upon it .

throughout , the report raises issues that policy makers may consider as they explore means to curb malicious activity online .

many may consider the internet and world wide web ( web ) to be synonymous ; they are not .

rather , the web is one portion of the internet , and a medium through which information may be accessed .

in conceptualizing the web , some may view it as consisting solely of the websites accessible through a traditional search engine such as google .

however , this content — known as the "surface web" — is only one portion of the web .

the deep web refers to "a class of content on the internet that , for various technical reasons , is not indexed by search engines," and thus would not be accessible through a traditional search engine .

information on the deep web includes content on private intranets ( internal networks such as those at corporations , government agencies , or universities ) , commercial databases like lexis nexis or westlaw , or sites that produce content via search queries or forms .

going even further into the web , the dark web is the segment of the deep web that has been intentionally hidden .

the dark web is a general term that describes hidden internet sites that users cannot access without using special software .

while the content of these sites may be accessed , the publishers of these sites are concealed .

users access the dark web with the expectation of being able to share information and / or files with little risk of detection .

in 2005 , the number of internet users reached 1 billion worldwide .

this number surpassed 2 billion in 2010 and crested over 3 billion in 2014 .

as of july 2016 , more than 46% of the world population was connected to the internet .

while data exist on the number of internet users , data on the number of users accessing the various layers of the web and on the breadth of these layers are less clear .

surface web .

the magnitude of the web is growing .

according to one estimate , there were 334.6 million internet top - level domain names registered globally during the second quarter of 2016 .

this is a 12.9% increase from the number of domain names registered during the same period in 2015 .

as of february 2017 , there were estimated to be more than 1.154 billion websites .

as researchers have noted , however , these numbers "only hint at the size of the web," as numbers of users and websites are constantly fluctuating .

deep web .

the deep web , as noted , cannot be accessed by traditional search engines because the content in this layer of the web is not indexed .

information here is not "static and linked to other pages" as is information on the surface web .

as researchers have noted , "[i]t's almost impossible to measure the size of the deep web .

while some early estimates put the size of the deep web at 4,000 – 5,000 times larger than the surface web , the changing dynamic of how information is accessed and presented means that the deep web is growing exponentially and at a rate that defies quantification. .

dark web .

within the deep web , the dark web is also growing as new tools make it easier to navigate .

because individuals may access the dark web assuming little risk of detection , they may use this arena for a variety of legal and illegal activities .

it is unclear , however , how much of the deep web is taken up by dark web content and how much of the dark web is used for legal or illegal activities .

the dark web can be reached through decentralized , anonymized nodes on a number of networks including tor ( short for the onion router ) or i2p ( invisible internet project ) .

tor , which was initially released as the onion routing project in 2002 , was originally created by the u.s .

naval research laboratory as a tool for anonymously communicating online .

tor "refers both to the software that you install on your computer to run tor and the network of computers that manages tor connections. .

tor's users connect to websites "through a series of virtual tunnels rather than making a direct connection , thus allowing both organizations and individuals to share information over public networks without compromising their privacy. .

users route their web traffic through other users' computers such that the traffic cannot be traced to the original user .

tor essentially establishes layers ( like layers of an onion ) and routes traffic through those layers to conceal users' identities .

to get from layer to layer , tor has established "relays" on computers around the world through which information passes .

information is encrypted between relays , and "all tor traffic passes through at least three relays before it reaches its destination. .

the final relay is called the "exit relay," and the ip address of this relay is viewed as the source of the tor traffic .

when using tor software , users' ip addresses remain hidden .

as such , it appears that the connection to any given website "is coming from the ip address of a tor exit relay , which can be anywhere in the world. .

while data on the magnitude of the deep web and dark web and how they relate to the surface web are not clear , data on tor users do exist .

according to metrics from the tor project , the mean number of daily tor users in the united states across the first two months of 2017 was 353,753 — or 19.2% of total mean daily tor users .

the united states has the largest number of mean daily tor users , followed by russia ( 11.9% ) , germany ( 9.9% ) , and united arab emirates ( 9.2% ) .

a number of reasons have been cited why individuals might use services such as tor to anonymize online activity .

anonymizing services have been used for legal and illegal activities ranging from keeping sensitive communications private to selling illegal drugs .

of note , while a wide range of legitimate uses of tor exist , much of the research on and concern surrounding anonymizing services involves their use for illegal activities .

as such , the bulk of this section focuses on the illegal activities .

because of the anonymity provided by tor and other software such as i2p , the dark web can be a playground for nefarious actors online .

as noted , however , there are a number of areas in which the study and use of the dark web may provide benefits .

this is true not only for citizens and businesses seeking online privacy , but also for certain government sectors — namely the law enforcement , military , and intelligence communities .

the deep web and dark web have been of increasing interest to researchers , law enforcement , and policy makers .

however , clear data on the scope and nature of these layers of the internet are unavailable ; anonymity often afforded by services such as tor for users accessing the deepest corners of the web contributes to this lack of clarity , as does the sometimes temporary nature of the websites hosted there .

individuals , businesses , and governments may all rely upon the digital underground .

it may be used for legal and illegal activities ranging from keeping sensitive communications private to selling illegal contraband .

despite some reaching for increased privacy and security online , researchers have questioned whether there will be a corresponding uptick in individuals turning to anonymizing services such as tor .

they've suggested that while there may not be the incentive for individuals to migrate their browsing to these anonymizing platforms , "it is much more likely for technological developments related to the dark web to improve the stealthiness of darknets. .

as such , law enforcement and policy makers may question how best to contend with evolving technology such as encryption and the challenges of attribution in an anonymous environment to effectively combat malicious actors who exploit cyberspace , including the dark web .

