t rade adjustment assistance for workers ( taa ) provides federal assistance to workers who involuntarily lose their jobs due to foreign competition .

the primary benefits for taa - eligible workers are funding for training and reemployment services as well as income support while a worker is enrolled in training .

workers may also be eligible for other benefits , including a tax credit equal to a portion of qualified health insurance premiums .

workers age 50 and over may be eligible for reemployment trade adjustment assistance , a wage supplement program .

after a brief discussion of the program's purpose and most recent reauthorization , this report describes taa as reauthorized by the trade adjustment assistance reauthorization act of 2015 ( taara , title iv of p.l .

114-27 ) .

reduced barriers to international trade are widely acknowledged to offer benefits to consumers in the form of increased choices and lower prices .

expanded trade may also offer expansionary opportunities to firms that produce goods or services that see increased exports .

reduced barriers to trade may , however , have concentrated negative effects on domestic industries and workers that face increased competition .

taa is designed to provide readjustment assistance to workers who suffer dislocation ( job loss ) due to foreign competition or offshoring .

generally , taa provides a more robust set of benefits and services than would be available to a worker who lost his or her job for reasons other than foreign competition .

taa is designed to assist workers who have been adversely affected by reduced trade barriers and increased trade .

its availability to workers who are adversely affected by declines in international trade may be limited .

taa was created in 1962 and , historically , has been reauthorized alongside expansionary trade policies .

a detailed legislative history of the program is in the appendix .

in june 2015 , taa was reauthorized by taara .

the eligibility and benefit provisions of taara are authorized to continue through june 30 , 2021 .

taara was part of a bill that extended other trade - related policies .

taara was also passed in conjunction with a separate bill that reauthorized the trade promotion authority ( tpa , title i of p.l .

114-26 ) .

tpa ( also known as "fast track" ) grants the president authority to negotiate trade agreements , which are then subject to an "up or down" vote in congress .

since the reauthorization of tpa in 2015 , congress has not voted on any presidentially negotiated trade agreements .

taa is jointly administered by the federal government and the states .

it is funded by the federal government .

the respective roles of federal and state governments in administering and financing the taa program were in place prior to taara and were not substantively changed by the reauthorization law .

obtaining taa benefits is a two - stage process .

first , a group of workers or their representative ( eg , firm , union , or state ) must petition dol to establish that their job loss was attributable to foreign trade and met statutory criteria .

once a group has been certified by dol , individual workers covered by the group's petition apply for state - administered benefits at local american job centers ( ajcs ; also known as one - stop career centers ) .

taa is available to workers in the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

taa benefits for individual workers include training and reemployment services and income support for workers who have exhausted their uc benefits and are enrolled in training .

workers age 50 and over may participate in the reemployment trade adjustment assistance ( rtaa ) wage insurance program .

certified workers may also be eligible for a tax credit for a portion of the premium costs for qualified health insurance .

the trade act requires dol to collect and publish specified data on taa participation , benefits , outcomes , and spending .

data to be collected and reported include ( but are not limited to ) the following: data on petitions filed , certified , and denied .

these data include the number of petitions filed , certified , and denied , as well as the average processing time for such petitions .

certified petitions must be disaggregated on the basis of eligibility .

data on benefits received .

these data include the number of workers receiving tra and other benefits as well as the average duration for which workers received benefits .

data on training .

these data include the number of workers who participated in training , the average duration of such training , and the average per - worker cost of training .

data on outcomes .

these data include the percentage of workers who are in unsubsidized employment during the second calendar quarter after exit , the earnings of such workers , the percentage of workers who are in unsubsidized employment in the fourth quarter after exit , and the percentage of workers who received a recognized postsecondary credential .

data on rapid response activities .

these data include whether or not a state provided rapid response services to each firm that petitioned for benefits .

data on spending .

these data include state and national payments for tra benefits , training , administration , and job search and relocation allowances .

the data required by the trade act are collected by the state agencies that administer the taa program .

these data are submitted to dol , which publishes the data and other relevant information in annual reports .

since 2014 , dol has also published quarterly data and analysis on its website .

in addition to participation data , dol maintains a database of individual firms' taa petitions .

users can access firm - level information , including the firm's full petition and dol's assessment and determination of the petition .

early history the first taa programs were enacted in 1962 but little used until the trade act of 1974 eased eligibility requirements .

program use expanded through the 1970s and the number of certified workers increased from about 59,000 in fy1975 to nearly 600,000 in fy1980 .

in light of rapidly increasing program costs , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 ( p.l .

97-35 ) cut spending by reducing benefits and emphasizing training and other reemployment services .

taa participation levels fluctuated throughout the 1980s , but were mostly well below the levels of the 1970s .

in 1988 , the program was reauthorized through fy1993 by the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-418 ) .

among other changes , the 1988 reauthorization expanded eligibility for tra but also placed a new emphasis on training by making it a program requirement .

1990s and nafta the omnibus reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) reauthorized taa through 1998 with reductions in training funding .

the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) implementation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-182 ) established a new component of taa that offered dedicated benefits to workers whose job loss was attributable to trade with mexico and canada .

trade act of 2002 the next major reauthorization of taa was part of the trade act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) .

this law combined taa , tpa , and other trade - related issues into a single piece of legislation .

among other changes , the 2002 taa reauthorization merged the nafta - taa program into the general taa program and created the health coverage tax credit for taa workers .

the trade act of 2002 reauthorized taa through fy2007 .

several short - term extensions continued the program until it was reauthorized in february 2009 .

american recovery and reinvestment act in february 2009 , taa was reauthorized and expanded by the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

unlike other reauthorizations , which tended to be aligned with expansionary trade policy or budget reconciliations , this reauthorization was aligned with other domestic initiatives to spur economic activity during a time of above - average unemployment .

the arra reauthorization of taa expanded the program in several ways .

among other provisions , it increased funding for training , increased the maximum number of weeks that a worker could receive tra , and extended eligibility to service sector and public sector workers who had been displaced by trade .

the arra provisions of taa were scheduled to expire after december 31 , 2010 .

a short - term extension continued the program through february 12 , 2011 .

after that date , taa reverted to the more limited eligibility and benefit provisions that were in place prior to arra .

2011 reauthorization: trade adjustment assistance extension act in october 2011 , the trade adjustment assistance extension act ( taaea ; title ii of p.l .

112-40 ) was enacted .

this reauthorization was aligned with the separate passage of three implementing bills of free trade agreements with colombia , panama , and south korea .

taaea reinstated some , but not all , of the expansions that had been enacted under arra .

most notably , it re - expanded eligibility to service sector ( but not public sector ) workers and increased training funding to near - arra levels .

taaea also curtailed benefits by reducing the eligible reasons for training waivers from six to three .

sunset and termination provisions of 2011 reauthorization the eligibility and benefit provisions initially enacted by taaea were scheduled to remain in place until december 31 , 2013 .

beginning january 1 , 2014 , the taa program reverted to a more limited set of eligibility and benefit provisions ( "reversion 2014 provisions" ) .

among other changes , the reversion 2014 provisions ended eligibility for service workers and reduced the cap on training funding to the 2002 levels .

the reversion 2014 provisions were scheduled to remain in place for one year before authorization expired after december 31 , 2014 , and the program was scheduled to begin to be phased out .

the program did not , however , expire as scheduled at the end of 2014 .

instead , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) provided funding for full operation of the program under the reversion 2014 provisions through fy2015 .

2015 reauthorization: trade adjustment assistance reauthorization act taa continued to operate under the reversion 2014 provisions until the enactment of the trade adjustment assistance reauthorization act of 2015 ( taara ; title iv of p.l .

114-27 ) .

this reauthorization was aligned with the separate extension of the trade promotion authority ( tpa , also known as "fast track" ) .

any agreements negotiated under tpa are subject to an "up or down" vote in congress .

taara reinstated many of the eligibility and benefit provisions that were enacted by taaea in 2011 .

taara reinstated eligibility for service workers and increased training funding to a level between those of taaea and the reversion 2014 provisions .

sunset and termination provisions of 2015 reauthorization taara contains sunset provisions similar to those in taaea that took effect in 2014 .

beginning july 1 , 2021 , the taa program is scheduled to revert to a more limited set of eligibility and benefit provisions that are similar to the reversion 2014 provisions .

these provisions are scheduled to remain in place for one year until authorization is set to expire after june 30 , 2022 , and then the program is scheduled to begin to be phased out .

