the united states is currently facing two key challenges related to the u.s. intercontinental ballistic missile ( icbm ) force .

the first is sustainment of the current force and the implementation of needed improvements in operations and support .

the second is the planned modernization of the icbm force , including building new weapons , expected in the late 2020s .

both would likely necessitate increased funding , but the budget control act ( bca ) limits funding for the department of defense ( dod ) through 2021 .

moreover , the united states also plans to modernize other components of its nuclear forces during the 2020s , which would also likely necessitate further significant increases in spending in the 2020s .

congress has a key role in any decisions related to these issues .

the discussion about whether to modernize or replace the icbm force is a significant part of the national debate about the future of u.s. nuclear weapons .

supporters argue that icbms have been the cornerstone of the u.s. nuclear force posture since the 1960s , when the u.s. fielded the first minuteman iii missile .

while deterrence in the 21 st century is more difficult for the u.s. than it was in the past , having the right mix of nuclear capabilities to deal with new challenges is still seen as crucial .

the 2010 nuclear posture review ( npr ) identifies a variety of emerging situations in which icbms might play a role in deterring adversaries , stabilizing regions and reassuring allies and partners .

both russia and china are modernizing their nuclear weapons .

moreover , the u.s. relationship with china is evolving , north korea has developed nuclear weapons , and iran has pursued a nuclear program that may eventually provide a weapon capability .

the united states also continues to extend deterrence to allies and partner nations with a "credible u.s. 'nuclear umbrella.' .

thus , according to many observers , the united states would need to sustain and modernize its icbm force to manage challenges in the new global security and threat environment .

while long - range nuclear bombers and submarine launched ballistic missiles ( slbms ) are relatively concentrated in location ( and therefore may be vulnerable to attack ) , the size , protection , and dispersion of icbm forces makes them virtually impossible to destroy short of an all - out nuclear attack .

additionally , since an icbm force can only be crippled by a large and unmistakable nuclear attack , land - based icbms can provide clarity about when a country is under attack and who the attacker is .

others , however , argue that icbms are a relic of the cold war and play little or no role in helping the united states meet "21 st century security challenges. .

further , they argue that , in an era of constrained resources and declining defense budgets , u.s. security would be better served by investing in new advanced conventional weapons than by sustaining and modernizing the icbm force .

experts agree that the international security environment has changed dramatically since the end of the cold war .

as president obama noted in the 2010 nuclear posture review report , the threat of global nuclear war has become remote , but the risk of nuclear attack has increased .

some nations may be shifting their security strategy to rely more on nuclear weapons in an effort to counter the u.s. conventional forces .

the nuclear posture review further noted that , "as long as nuclear weapons exist," the united states will sustain secure and effective nuclear forces .

in this view , these nuclear forces will continue to play an essential role in deterring potential adversaries and reassuring allies and partners around the world .

in "a nuclear deterrent for the 21 st century," clark murdock writes , "much like the united states in the 1950s when it faced massive warsaw pact conventional forces , other states are increasing their reliance on nuclear weapons .

nuclear weapons offset conventional military superiority .

when the u.s. military declares that it is seeking 'full spectrum dominance" , it simply reinforces the dependence of our would - be competitors on nuclear weapons. .

there are several issues for congress .

first , congress may consider whether the current plans for the nuclear enterprise ( consisting of leadership , people and things that work on the nuclear mission ) are sufficient to address the problems within the icbm force or whether there may be other ways to sustain the current force .

second , congress may consider whether the united states should continue to deploy icbms in the future nuclear force structure , particularly in light of expected financial constraints .

it may consider whether nuclear weapons modernization programs will compete with each other , or with conventional weapons programs , for scarce resources .

finally , congress may question whether the united states can afford to forgo icbm sustainment and modernization programs in an era of changing national security challenges .

the u.s. nuclear force is a "triad" consisting of strategic ballistic missile submarines ( ssbns ) that carry submarine - launched ballistic missiles ( slbms ) , the land - based icbm force , and long - range bomber aircraft .

each leg of the triad has both strengths and weaknesses , leading some analysts to recognize the complementary capabilities of the three legs .

according to the nuclear posture review , "strategic nuclear submarines and the slbms they carry represent the most survivable leg of the u.s. nuclear triad. .

some argue single - warhead icbms contribute to stability , and like slbms are not vulnerable to air defenses .

unlike slbms and icbms , bombers can be visibly forward deployed , as a signal in crisis to strengthen deterrence of potential adversaries and assurance to allies and partners .

others contend that , because each leg of the triad contributes unique attributes that enhance deterrence and reduce risk , together they comprise a robust deterrent that complicates a potential adversary's offensive and defensive planning .

in this view , they provide a "synergistic force" that provides protection against the failure of any single one of its legs .

as a result , many analysts believe that these complementary capabilities justify retaining all three legs for the foreseeable future .

in october 2010 , the air force produced an icbm master plan that outlined its approach to sustaining and modernizing the minuteman ( mm ) force .

this report indicated that the air force would sustain the minuteman iii missiles through 2030 and deploy a follow - on system after 2030 .

the plan states that "beginning in 2020 , large - scale investment will be required to sustain mm iii through 2030 .

these modernization efforts must support both sustainment through 2030 and recapitalization for a minuteman follow - on after 2030. .

also stated is "mm iii sustainment funding must continue until initial operational capability ( ioc ) of a new or replacement weapon system...." this is currently projected to occur in the dem / val program described above .

the air force has reportedly decided to pursue a "hybrid" plan for the next generation icbm .

it would maintain the basic design of the missile , the current communications system , and the existing launch silos , but would replace the rocket motors , guidance sets , post - boost vehicles , and re - entry systems .

in other words , the air force would deploy a new missile in its existing minuteman infrastructure .

reports also indicate that , although this missile would be deployed in fixed silos , the design would allow the missiles to be deployed on mobile launchers sometime in the future .

the air force has requested $75 million for this program in fy2016 , but expects to spend $945 million through fy2020 .

while the air force appears committed to pursuing the development of a new ground - based strategic deterrent , there is growing recognition among analysts that fiscal constraints may alter this approach .

ever since 2007 , when crews at minot air force base in north dakota mistakenly loaded six cruise missiles carrying nuclear warheads on b - 52s , transported them to barksdale air force base in louisiana , and left them unguarded for 36 hours before anyone realized they were missing , the air force has faced questions about morale and operations within its nuclear enterprise .

studies completed at the time identified a number of issues plaguing the community , including a disregard for safety and security rules and an overall sense of "lack of professional pride. .

although the air force implemented a number of changes in its command structure and operational procedures , new issues have emerged .

specifically , in january 2014 the air force announced that it uncovered cheating on the monthly proficiency exams required of missileers at the 341 st missile wing at malmstrom air force base in montana .

reports of drug use among some airmen and morale problems at air force bases renewed concerns with the state of the air force nuclear enterprise .

in response to these concerns , secretary of defense chuck hagel initiated two reviews , one internal and one external to dod .

these reviews were not about nuclear warheads or nuclear weapons , and the reviews did not focus on the u.s. nuclear force posture or policy .

rather , both reviews focused on the people , systems , and infrastructure of the dod to support the nuclear triad .

the internal review also focused on training , testing , command oversight , mission performance , and investment .

thousands of personnel were interviewed , from officers to enlisted personnel as well as civilians and contractors from across the armed services .

given the complexity and cost of the proposed changes to the nuclear workforce and arsenal , several issues arise before congress .

as the air force begins to revamp the icbm leg of the nuclear triad , three significant issues suggest themselves for potential consideration in congress .

as is noted above , the air force is pursuing several tracks to sustain the current minuteman force .

the first track includes the ongoing projects funded through the air force o&m accounts and the dem / val program , while modernization programs needed to recapitalize the icbm force are planned to be funded in the late 2020s .

included in the president's budget request in fy2016 are requests to fund nuclear enterprise improvements .

these include upgrades to facilities , improvements in manning and safety procedures , as well as technology improvements .

the other issue is addressing the recommendations from the internal and external review teams for the nuclear enterprise .

many argue that in the year since those reports were issued , much has improved .

dod leadership is requesting funds to continue to improve the nuclear enterprise .

defense secretary chuck hagel stated the pentagon would add 10% a year over the next five years to nuclear spending in order to correct the problems .

the pentagon currently spends between $15 billion and $16 billion , so this increase would equate to at least a $7.5 billion increase between 2016 and 2020 .

the 2016 budget request calls for $8 billion in new spending on the nuclear force over the next five years , including about $1 billion for fy2016 .

in addition to money , secretary hagel promised more troops , more trainers , more equipment and more leadership to nuclear forces , all of which have experienced decades of neglect and deterioration .

also , the department of defense began the force improvement program ( fip ) .

under the dod fip program , the air force has approved incentive pay and bonuses for missileers , exchange programs across bases and with the navy , and infrastructure upgrades at missile bases .

air force secretary deborah lee james has supported implementing the identified changes from both the internal and external reviews of the nuclear forces .

james has said "there is no mission more important to our nation's security than the nuclear mission," and the changes to the nuclear force are "aimed at improving morale and shifting from a culture of always preparing for the next test and next inspection. .

after a year , there is a stark contrast from earlier attitudes in each of the missile wings , with the workforce mostly positive toward leadership actions .

approximately 98% of the force improvement program's recommendations either have been or are being implemented .

to ensure focus on each of these programs , secretary hagel established the nuclear deterrent enterprise review group ( nderg ) to establish senior leader accountability and bring together all the elements of the nuclear force into a coherent enterprise .

this group is led by deputy secretary bob work and is to review the actions taken and the progress made in the health of nuclear forces .

in addition , secretary hagel directed office of the secretary of defense / cost assessment and program evaluation ( osd / cape ) to lead an effort to track and assess the implementation of the over 100 recommendations from the internal and external reviews .

cape is to also conduct analysis to determine if corrective actions are having the desired effect as well as to continue assessing the health of the nuclear deterrent enterprise .

congress may remain concerned about the implementation of these programs and ask for updates .

in the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2016 , the house committee on armed services stated as a result of the ner and nderg , the fiscal year 2016 budget request contained approximately $1.00 billion in additional funding for the department of defense nuclear enterprise , with a total of $8.00 billion in additional funding planned over the next 5 years .

the committee believes sustained leadership , follow - through , and investment will be required to ensure the revitalization of our nuclear enterprise , including in certain instances improving or changing the culture and leadership standards .

the committee believes the nderg seems to be successful in this regard , but cautions that institutionalization of such a process may be required to ensure sustained attention after key leaders depart .

the committee expects the secretary , the deputy secretary , and all leaders within the department of defense to ensure continued focus and resources for the department's "highest priority mission .

many experts believe these programs have made a difference and are improving conditions for airmen .

the increased retention of missile combat crews ( and other supporting metrics ) may indicate that the air force initiative is having an effect .

renewed focus on the nuclear forces is paying dividends , some say , but more work is seen as necessary to continue to move the program forward .

however , some are skeptical that more money , more people , and more commitment is the right way to address the issue .

many see that nuclear weapons are no longer useful in the current security environment , especially given their destructive power .

they argue that it is "unlikely that these problems can be solved by more money , more stars , more organizational changes , reducing burdens on airmen , or recommitting to the importance of deterrence without addressing the underlying problem. .

the underlying problem , according to these skeptics , is that nuclear weapons no longer play a prominent role in u.s. national security policy .

others also argue that these reforms will not be sufficient in addressing the underlying problems because no amount of cleaning , paint , or increase in pay can offset the sense , in the icbm force , that there is no meaning to the mission .

the morale problems facing the troops who are part of the nuclear enterprise are unlikely to be fully resolved by any changes that dod can make .

secretary of defense chuck hagel stated in discussing the review that in order to change the situation , "we must change the cultural perception of a nuclear enterprise…we must restore the prestige that attracted the brightest minds of the cold war era , so our most talented young men and women see the nuclear pathway as promising in value. .

some argue that hagel's assessment only draws further attention to the real issue — the united states is no longer in "the cold war era. .

they state the u.s. is in a strategic transition from the cold war to an era characterized by threats such as al qaeda , isis , and ebola .

they say those who work with nuclear weapons ( i ) have not been part of the wars in afghanistan or iraq that have been the formative experience for the military in recent years , and ( ii ) hope they are unlikely ever to be called on to carry out their assigned mission .

both the cost to modernize or replace the icbm arsenal and the future role the icbm force will play in the nation's defense strategy may also prove of interest to congress .

the united states is currently planning a number of programs to update and modernize most aspects of the u.s. nuclear force .

in addition to pursuing sustainment and modernization programs for the icbm force , the air force is beginning work on a new long - range bomber and a new cruise missile , and the navy is beginning the construction of a new ballistic missile submarine while pursuing a life extension program for its submarine launched d - 5 missile .

congress may consider whether the u.s. should continue to deploy icbms in the future nuclear force structure , particularly in light of expected financial constraints .

it may consider whether nuclear weapons modernization programs will compete with each other , or with conventional weapons programs , for scarce resources .

the department of energy ( doe ) is currently investing in life extension programs for u.s. nuclear warheads .

during the cold war , doe sustained the u.s. warhead stockpile by designing , testing , and deploying new warheads to replace aging warheads .

because the united states has observed a testing moratorium since 1992 , it maintains its current inventory through the stockpile stewardship program , a scientific experimentation and simulation undertaking that assesses the status of the nuclear weapon arsenal without underground nuclear tests .

instead of designing and deploying new warheads , doe manages and maintains the stockpile by pursuing life extension programs ( leps ) for existing warheads and investing in the supporting and aging infrastructure .

many analysts agree that investments in both the infrastructure and workforce will help sustain the long - term safety , security , and effectiveness of the u.s. nuclear arsenal , but these investments could add to the cost of the nuclear enterprise at the same time that dod is modernizing its nuclear delivery systems .

as calculated by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , the costs of these programs could reach more than $30 billion per year in the 2020s , and amount to a total of more than $1 trillion over 30 years .

yet , as frank kendall , under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics testified to the senate armed services committee , this plan could generate "affordability problems" in the 2020s .

this can raise questions of whether the united states can , or should , pursue all of these programs .

as a result , some have suggested that the united states forgo the icbm modernization programs and eventually eliminate the icbm leg of the triad .

over the 2015-2024 time period , the administration's plans for nuclear forces would cost $348 billion per cbo estimates ( see table 1 ) .

of that total , cbo projects that $299 billion would be budgeted by dod and doe: $160 billion for strategic nuclear delivery systems and weapons ; $8 billion for tactical nuclear delivery systems and weapons ; $79 billion for nuclear weapons laboratories and their supporting activities ; and $52 billion for nuclear - related command , control , communications , and early - warning systems .

the remaining $49 billion represents cbo's estimate of additional costs that would be incurred over the coming decade if the nuclear program costs grow as expected .

congress may also wish to reconsider the role icbms play in the national defense .

most experts agree that u.s. nuclear strategy has changed since the cold war days of potential massive retaliation and mutual assured destruction , but many argue that nuclear weapons still matter for the united states because they are the most credible means of deterring the use of nuclear weapons by other states .

while few anticipate a u.s. - ussr - style potential nuclear exchange , some experts suggest that a "second nuclear age" has begun in which numerous nations may possess nuclear weapons and the ability to use them in regional conflicts .

the 2010 nuclear posture review recognized this change when it asserted that nuclear terrorism and nuclear proliferation now pose greater threats to u.s. security than established nuclear - armed states .

u.s. strategic nuclear forces are not well designed to combat the threat of nuclear terrorism , but future u.s. nuclear strategy will need to account for the threats that may exist as a result of nuclear proliferation .

some argue that icbms are antiquated systems unchanged since the cold war .

they contend that the icbm force is a relic of the cold war and is not relevant in an environment where the united states no longer faces the threat of a massive attack from the soviet union .

these analysts argue that because the pentagon cannot plan "for every contingency , it must plan for the most conceivable future .

in this case , that might mean a step back from nuclear weapons toward greater focus on those weapons we might actually use. .

others argue that u.s. icbms could only be used against russia because if they were to be sent anywhere else in the world , they would still have to overfly russia , risking the creation of ambiguous attack indicators that could trigger a nuclear response .

on the other hand , some experts argue that icbms continue to provide a deterrent to nuclear attack on the homeland .

they note that the sheer numbers of minuteman iii silos ( 400+ ) that are spread across the american west are invulnerable to all but massive nuclear missile attacks .

this curbs those who may wish to attack the united states: conventionally or with nuclear weapons .

they note that , without icbms , u.s. land - based strategic nuclear targets shrink "from 503 to six , which could all be destroyed with conventional strikes .

only icbms require a nuclear strike. .

moreover , any attack against the icbm force represents a direct attack against the united states .

therefore , icbms deny prospective enemies "any hope of half - way measures against us: if they mean nuclear war , then they must decide upon nuclear war. .

as analysts within and outside dod continue to debate the value of the nuclear deterrent to the defense of the united states , congress may wish to reevaluate whether to continue to support the nation's icbm force .

some analysts have questioned whether the united states can , or should forgo its icbm modernization program even if the missiles' future role is uncertain .

these arguments focus more on the uncertainties and challenges in the emerging strategic environment than on the specific military value of the icbm force .

those who suggest that the united states can forgo its icbm modernization program argue that the force was designed during the cold war and is not suited to match the challenges of the current security environment .

they argue that threats now come in the form of terrorists , suicide bombers , and regimes not friendly to the u.s. looking for nuclear weapons .

they believe that the use of a nuclear icbm in this environment is unlikely and that the united states should better align its nuclear policies to meet the most urgent priorities: preventing nuclear terrorism and nuclear proliferation .

analysts point out that many security concerns are associated with nuclear terrorism that cannot addressed with icbms .

they note that weapon - grade nuclear materials may be stored in insecure locations around the world , vulnerable to loss or theft .

also , sensitive equipment and technologies associated with nuclear weaponry are widely available on the black market .

while most do not believe that any terrorist organization currently has access to a nuclear weapon or nuclear technology , some argue that it remains a possibility in nuclear - armed states that have lax security or face political upheaval .

nuclear proliferation is another contemporary threat .

according to the 2010 nuclear posture review report , both north korea and iran have violated nonproliferation obligations , defied directives of the united nations security council , pursued missile delivery capabilities , and resisted international efforts to resolve through diplomatic means the crises they have created .

this could introduce instability not only within their regions , but also around the globe , creating situations in which neighboring countries may view their only option as pursuing a nuclear weapon to protect their interests .

this could undermine the credibility of the npt and threaten destabilization of international security .

many analysts agree that the united states continues to face challenges in strategic security from both russia and the people's republic of china ( prc ) .

the united states could seek to address these challenges through dialogue and transparency .

though the dialogue with each country would be different , the message could be similar: fostering good will and partnerships .

for example , a strategic dialogue with russia could allow the united states to explain that "our missile defenses and any future u.s. conventionally armed long - range ballistic missile systems are designed to address newly emerging regional threats , and are not intended to affect the strategic balance with russia. .

in turn , the united states could ask russia to explain their modernization programs as well as their strategic doctrine .

a strategic dialogue with china could , likewise , allow both nations to communicate with one another about their views on each other's nuclear strategies , policies , and programs .

china's leaders have been vocal about their concerns over the u.s. ballistic missile defenses .

as stated in the 2010 ballistic missile defense review report , "maintaining strategic stability in the u.s. - china relationship is as important to this administration as maintaining strategic stability with other major powers. .

it is seen as important for the u.s. to highlight willingness to work together with the prc , while simultaneously underlining u.s. support to its allies and partners in the east asia region .

others , however , doubt that dialogue , even when combined with transparency , would resolve emerging concerns with either russia or china .

in the past year , russia has taken a number of steps , such as its invasion of ukraine , its aggressive military exercises , and its violation of the 1987 inf treaty , that challenge the security interests of the united states and its allies .

china has also become more assertive in its region with its actions in the east china and south china seas in ways that have raised concerns about challenges to u.s. interests and allies .

at the same time , both nations are modernizing their nuclear forces and , in some cases , expanding their nuclear arsenals .

as a result , many analysts continue to view nuclear weapons , and the nuclear balance , as a significant marker in the u.s. relationship with both russia and china .

they note that a u.s. commitment to modernizing its triad , in general , and its icbm force , in particular , is necessary to assure stability and u.s. security .

some experts argue that , from a global perspective , the united states must "maintain nuclear parity with the russians and sustain nuclear superiority over the chinese. .

they contend that dealing with a russian government believing it possessed nuclear superiority would be more difficult than it is at present and that dealing with a china that had achieved nuclear parity would tear big holes in the u.s. nuclear umbrella .

therefore , some argue that , in order to remain a credible player on the world stage , the u.s. must ensure that its nuclear forces and capabilities remain a priority .

others may see less need for a specific balance in nuclear forces , but still believe that maintaining strategic stability with russia and china should be a key u.s. priority .

admiral cecil haney , the commander of u.s. strategic command ( stratcom ) highlighted the value of the u.s. nuclear triad in this uncertain strategic environment in a press conference in march 2015 .

he noted that "while our nation's nuclear enterprise is safe , secure , and effective , we cannot take it for granted any longer .

for decades , we have sustained while others have modernized their strategic nuclear forces...." he indicated that , in this environment , "as a nation , we cannot simply afford to underfund our strategic capabilities .

any cuts to the president's budget , including those imposed by sequestration , will hamper our ability to sustain and modernize our joint military forces and put us at real risk of making our nation less secure and able to address future threats. .

secretary of defense ashton carter has not spoken out on this issue , since replacing secretary hagel in february 2015 .

the current icbm force was deployed in the 1970s , which means it has been in service for over 40 years — much longer than anticipated .

the air force determined the best way forward is to develop a replacement missile that utilizes modernized silos to ensure viability of the icbm force structure until 2075 .

this program is called the ground - based strategic deterrent ( gbsd ) .

the president's fy2016 budget allocates for funds for continued development of the gbsd .

congress will play a key role in determining the future of the gbsd .

