naval station guantanamo bay , cuba , must be distinguished from the military commissions and detention facilities located within its boundaries , which are separate and independent military organizations with the naval station acting as host to the other two .

while the obama administration expressed an intention to close the detention facilities at the naval station as early as its first month in office , the administration maintains that it has no intention or plan to alter the status of the naval station itself .

in recent years , however , congress has in successive national defense authorization acts enacted restrictions on the transfer of detainees from guantanamo , as well as provisions designed to prevent the closure or abandonment of the naval station .

naval station guantanamo bay: the 45 square miles of land on which the station sits have been leased from the cuban government since the early years of the twentieth century .

the naval station was established to serve as a protected harbor , coaling station , and eventually a convoy staging area and airfield .

because the station is a facility of the united states navy , its military chain of command runs from the station commanding officer through the commander of navy region southeast in jacksonville , florida , and the commander of navy installations command in washington , dc , to the chief of naval operations .

the naval station provides logistical support to the detention and military commission facilities located within its boundaries .

joint task force – guantanamo: the various detention facilities on the eastern extremities of the station are operated by joint task force ( jtf ) – guantanamo , a combined army , navy , air force , marine corps , and coast guard organization that is currently commanded by a navy rear admiral ( lower half ) .

jtf – guantanamo is a subordinate of u.s. southern command ( ussouthcom ) , one of the nine combatant commands , which is headquartered in doral , florida , near miami .

jtf – guantanamo was established in late 2002 .

office of military commissions – south detachment: military commissions were created by the president under the authority of the military commissions act of 2006 , since amended .

the director of the office of military commissions is directly subordinate to the secretary of defense and the deputy secretary of defense .

the office of military commissions is located in washington , dc .

the office's guantanamo bay detachment ( omc - south ) works in a temporary facility , camp justice , that sits on the closed mccalla airfield on the east side of the mouth of guantanamo bay .

the origins of the u.s. military installation at guantanamo bay , cuba , lie in the execution of military operations during the spanish - american war of april - august 1898 .

while the principal reasons for the declaration of war by both madrid and washington centered on u.s. intervention in an ongoing indigenous revolution in the spanish colony of cuba — a precipitating event was the sinking of the battleship uss maine by an explosion in havana harbor in february — the war was fought on cuban and puerto rican soil in the caribbean and on guam and in the philippines in the pacific .

at war's end , the united states retained control of spain's former territories in the pacific and puerto rico , while cuba eventually established an independent government after several years of u.s. occupation .

the military campaign in cuba began with the landing of u.s. marines at guantanamo bay on the island's southeastern coast in early june 1898 and the eventual capture of the various spanish fortifications in the vicinity by a combined u.s. - cuban force .

the bay proved a valuable staging area for the subsequent land and naval campaigns against the city of santiago de cuba , 41 miles to the west , and puerto rico , 600 miles to the east .

the marine camp created to the east of the bay's mouth during the operation was disestablished in august 1898 , and spain ceded control of cuba , along with the other contested territories , to the united states in the treaty of paris of 1898 .

congress inserted the so - called platt amendment into the army appropriations act for fy1902 .

the provision authorized the president to return control of the island to the people of cuba on the condition that the country ratify a constitution containing specific provisions recognizing certain u.s. rights , including "the right to intervene for the preservation of cuban independence and the maintenance of a government adequate for the protection of life , property , and individual liberty. .

with regard to the future naval station , article vii of the amendment provided: that to enable the united states to maintain the independence of cuba , and to protect the people thereof , as well as for its own defense , the government of cuba will sell or lease to the united states lands necessary for coaling or naval stations at certain specified points , to be agreed upon with the president of the united states .

as previously noted , the wording of article iii of the 1934 treaty of relations between the united states and cuba provides that: until the two contracting parties agree to the modification or abrogation of the stipulations of the agreement in regard to the lease to the united states of america of lands in cuba for coaling and naval station …. , the stipulations of that agreement with regard to the naval station of guantanamo shall continue in effect .

the supplementary agreement in regard to naval or coaling stations …. , also shall continue in effect in the same form and on the same conditions with respect to the naval station at guantanamo .

so long as the united states of america shall not abandon the said naval station of guantanamo or the two governments shall not agree to a modification of its present limits , the station shall continue to have the territorial area that it now has , with the limits that it has on the date of the signature of the present treaty .

thus , the two earlier executive agreements pertaining to the guantanamo lease ( one entered into force on february 23 , 1903 , and the second entered into force on october 6 , 1903 ) can only be modified or abrogated pursuant to an agreement between the united states and cuba .

the territorial limits of the naval station remain as they were in 1934 , unless the united states abandons guantanamo bay ( effectively ending the lease ) or the two governments reach an agreement to modify its boundaries .

the pertinent question is whether , under u.s. law , a modification or termination of the lease agreements can be accomplished with an executive agreement or whether it must take the form of a treaty , ratified pursuant to the advice and consent of the senate .

a second question is whether the president has the authority to "abandon" the naval station without action by congress .

jonathan m. hansen , guantanamo : an american history ( new york: hill and wang , 2011 ) .

theodore k. mason , across the cactus curtain: the story of guanta n amo bay ( new york: dodd , mead , 1984 ) .

marion emerson murphy , the history of guantánamo bay ( san juan: district publications and printing office , tenth naval district , 1953 ) .

michael j. strauss , the leasing of guantanamo bay ( westport , connecticut: praeger security international , 2009 ) .

