the food and drug administration ( fda ) , under the authority of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , regulates the sale of drugs and biological products , such as vaccines , in the united states .

under the act , a manufacturer may not market a prescription drug without an approved new drug application ( nda ) or a vaccine without an approved biologics license application ( bla ) .

however , under limited circumstances — some of which this report addresses — there are certain mechanisms under which the fda may expand access to a drug or biologic outside the standard regulatory framework .

two such mechanisms are expanded access to investigational drugs , commonly referred to as compassionate use , and emergency use authorization .

compassionate use .

one type of compassionate use request may come from a person with a terminal diagnosis who has tried all appropriate fda - approved drugs .

perhaps a promising drug is being tested in a clinical trial closed to new patients or for which the patient does not qualify .

in that case , a physician may ask fda for permission to get the investigational new drug for the patient outside of the clinical trial .

before approaching fda , the patient or physician must already have contacted the sponsor of the investigational drug , usually its manufacturer , to ask for the drug , and the manufacturer must have agreed to provide the drug pending fda authorization .

in 2014 , fda received 1,882 such requests and approved all but 9 .

what that 99.5% rate does not reveal is how many people took the first step — requesting access from manufacturers — and how many of those requests companies denied .

companies do not release those numbers .

an article in biocentury related a conversation with bioethicist arthur caplan , whom it described as consulting with many companies about expanded access , writing that caplan "says it is likely that only a small fraction of the refusals make it into the media. .

also not revealed by the over 99% fda approval rate is how many patients and doctors did not pursue expanded access because the fda process was too involved or lengthy .

emergency use authorization .

emergency use authorization ( eua ) follows another path .

when one of the secretaries of defense , health and human services , or homeland security declares a military , domestic , or public health emergency or potential for such an emergency , fda , following procedures authorized by law , may issue euas for unapproved products .

two circumstances have contributed to a recent increase in public and congressional discussion of expanded access to investigational drugs .

the first is patients and interested groups who are asking state legislatures to pass right - to - try laws , which aim to bypass fda authorization .

these advocates are using the power of social media to influence manufacturers' decisions to provide investigational drugs .

second is the demand for unapproved medical products to fight ebola virus disease .

members of congress ask about fda authorities and practices such as compassionate use , which can apply to one or a few patients , and emergency use authority , which expands access to investigational drugs to protect the public against national security or public health threats .

both mechanisms involve people with an immediate life - threatening condition , no standard therapy , and a possible "nothing - to - lose" attitude who are willing to try a drug that may not work or may even hasten an already imminent death .

this report discusses the underlying philosophy behind how fda , concerned with safety and effectiveness , weighs risks and benefits when deciding whether to allow access to a medical product , either through normal approval channels or outside them ; fda policies on compassionate use and emergency use authority ; obstacles — perceived as the result of fda or manufacturer decisions — to individuals' expanded access to investigational drugs , and some possible remedies ; and how expanded access to compassionate use and emergency use authority might form part of a broader approach to ensuring safe , effective , and available drugs .

who decides whether risks outweigh benefits or vice - versa ? .

on what criteria ? .

such a decision varies , depending on many factors: an individual's prognosis , threat to the community , alternative available treatments , and informed consent , among others .

although sometimes it makes sense to use an unapproved product , doing so presents possible risks to patients , research goals , and manufacturers .

investigators first seek to establish safety and effectiveness thresholds for patients .

no drug — even if fda - approved — is completely safe .

fda approval involves weighing the potential risks ( including known side effects ) against the potential benefits .

the threshold for acceptable risk rises with the risk of not acting at all .

someone with a disease that was 100% certain to be fatal in the next hour might well take a drug with an 80% risk of immediate death and a 2% chance of helping .

when it comes to access questions , fda decisions generally fall into four categories .

approved use for a new drug .

fda approves or licenses a product only when its scientists think the manufacturer has submitted evidence of the drug's safety and effectiveness for a specific use ( among other requirements of approval ) .

unapproved use of a drug that fda has approved for another use .

a product's labeling includes information , including dosage , for the fda - approved use .

with a few exceptions , however , a physician may prescribe that drug for what is called "off - label" use .

the physician may have seen anecdotal evidence or a relationship to fda - reviewed data about another disease .

for example , a product on the market labeled to treat depression might be used by a clinician to treat a patient with obsessive compulsive disorder .

in such a case , a clinician could be aware of the likely safety and side effect profile of the drug but would have limited data , if any , with which to predict the drug's effectiveness in its off - label use .

fda does not require an ind application in this situation .

unapproved use of an investigational new drug .

because all drugs involve risks , regulators require that researchers design clinical trials to protect research participants ( patients ) from unnecessary risks .

that is why the law forbids a sponsor that is testing an as yet unapproved drug from providing it outside that trial without fda permission .

fda may allow individual access to an investigational drug , but it cannot compel the sponsor to provide the drug .

 ( see discussion of " how does fda regulate individual ind applications ? " ) .

unapproved use of a product that has not yet begun clinical testing .

before clinical tests have started , researchers have conducted no human safety ( or effectiveness ) studies .

in considering whether to allow the use of such an experimental product , fda might analyze animal studies and any information about similar drugs or diseases to see whether the animal data might be applicable to humans .

if no other treatment option exists and the patient is likely to die soon , assessing drug risk becomes less relevant to an individual patient .

it may , however , be relevant to a public health decision .

the risk criteria for an individual would not always be the same as they would be for public health policy .

some find the process of asking fda for a treatment ind is too cumbersome .

others question fda's right to act as a gatekeeper at all .

some point to manufacturers' refusal to provide their experimental drugs .

most critics see solutions as within the control of fda or pharmaceutical companies .

those who set national policy seek to balance ( 1 ) protecting the public by trying to ensure that the drugs people take are safe and effective and ( 2 ) protecting the public by getting new products to the market quickly .

that balancing act is reflected in the various authorities congress has granted fda and in the mechanisms fda has developed .

congress has not only given fda tools to keep unsafe or ineffective drugs off the market .

it has also provided fda with various authorities to encourage and expedite drug development and to expedite the review of new marketing applications .

these tools , like compassionate use and emergency use authorization , help get drugs to patients more quickly .

four of these tools are described below .

incentives to development .

the fda provides incentives to those who would develop certain categories of drugs in two main ways .

market exclusivity .

during the period for which fda offers this incentive , it will not grant marketing approval to another manufacturer's product .

ffdca allows market exclusivity for the first generic version of a drug coming to market , a drug used in the treatment of a rare disease or condition , certain pediatric uses of approved drugs , and new qualified infectious disease products .

priority review voucher .

priority review shortens the time between when a manufacturer submits a marketing application to fda and when fda issues its approval decision .

the program works by fda's awarding a priority review voucher to the manufacturer with a successful nda for a drug treating certain tropical or rare pediatric diseases .

the manufacturer may use it to get priority review of a subsequent nda ( which would not have received priority review on its own ) or may sell the voucher to another manufacturer .

expediting development and review .

not all reviews and applications follow standard procedures .

some drugs address unmet needs or serious conditions , have the potential to offer better outcomes or fewer side effects than drugs currently on the market , or meet other criteria associated with better public health .

for those , fda can expedite both development and review .

fast track and breakthrough product designations make the application process faster — but do not change the types of evidence required to demonstrate safety and effectiveness .

accelerated approval and animal efficacy approval change what is needed in an application .

instead of requiring evidence gathered by a clinical endpoint , such as heart attack or death , fda may accept evidence from a surrogate or intermediate clinical outcome .

priority review designation affects the timing of the review but not the process leading to submission of an application .

limiting access .

fda regulates access mostly through product approval and licensing .

fda fine tunes that access for some drugs through risk evaluation and mitigation strategies ( rems ) , which can include restrictions on distribution .

fda enforces restrictions on imports and exports and requirements concerning supply chain .

it also recommends to the drug enforcement administration ( dea in the department of justice ) whether to declare a drug a controlled substance .

separate from the government's role in safety and effectiveness , the government ( not necessarily through fda ) can also control access via other tools , such as laws , regulations , and policies regarding patents , insurance coverage and benefits , medicare and medicaid coverage and payment , and pharmacy benefits .

regulatory science .

not all fda scientists review new drugs .

some study what fda calls regulatory science , "the science of developing new tools , standards , and approaches to assess the safety , efficacy , quality , and performance of all fda - regulated products. .

fda current and planned efforts include further developing expertise in areas such as how to evaluate animal models , biomarkers , genomics , and nanotechnology .

exploring computer simulations and data analysis can yield new statistical techniques for clinical trials that could shorten their length or reduce the number of patients needed .

it might involve new ways to adjust ongoing clinical trials as researchers learn more about how a new drug works .

all these techniques can shorten the time it takes to bring products to market .

an increased interest in compassionate use and emergency use policies comes from two distinct directions .

the ongoing concerns of individuals facing serious and life - threatening conditions have become more apparent , especially with the increasing use of social media to publicize the struggles of those facing life - or - death decisions .

the sudden public interest in the ebola virus disease outbreak in west africa has influenced discussions of international and domestic health care and research and development priorities .

expanding access to drugs in various stages of development — whether to an individual with a stubborn cancer or to a community facing an infectious threat — involves serious decisions .

as the 114 th congress confronts these issues , it may consider the following: how to define , measure , and articulate risks and benefits , and how to choose their appropriate balance , what changes to fda authority and policy might increase appropriate access to unapproved products , how to address manufacturers' reluctance , and what approaches other than expanded access programs might congress and fda develop to encourage research and development of products for unmet needs ; expedite activities of manufacturers and fda in the development and review of investigational products ; and generally ensure that medical products are safe , effective , and available when they can help patients .

as congress considers these issues , new options and ideas may arise , but in a context as old as public health — the constant push and pull between the need for scientific rigor and the equally compelling need for what is reflected in the very name of one policy: compassion .

no fda - approved drugs or vaccines are known to specifically treat or prevent ebola virus disease .

nor are there approved or known drugs or vaccines recognized by other regulatory or medical authorities .

in august 2014 , when the ebola virus disease outbreak in west africa began to attract worldwide attention , news articles reported on several ebola - focused products in the development pipeline .

none of these products had yet reached the stage in which clinical trials of safety or effectiveness had begun in humans .

the world health organization ( who ) convened a panel to consider the ethics of providing unapproved drugs to ebola - infected people .

the who panel said it was ethical in this outbreak .

in addition to urging "ethical criteria" in the use of the drugs , it referred to "a moral obligation to collect and share all data generated" and "a moral duty to also evaluate these interventions ... in the best possible clinical trials under the circumstances. .

further consideration will likely go toward identifying the limit of that ethical threshold , by considering different groups — such as the general population , those at risk of exposure , and those exposed , infected , or symptomatic — each with a different likelihood of death .

around the same time , two volunteers in africa providing medical care to people with ebola were themselves infected with the virus .

while in africa , they received doses of an experimental product that had shown promise in treating nonhuman primates but had not yet reached the human testing stage .

these two u.s. citizens were then flown to a hospital in atlanta for further care .

both survived .

did the experimental drug help ? .

fda's policies on expanded access to investigational drugs were not relied upon in the drug's use for these two individuals .

first , the drug would not have been eligible because it had not yet entered the investigational new drug ( ind ) stage of fda involvement , so clinical trials had not yet begun .

second , the drug was provided outside of the united states and was not , therefore , subject to fda regulation .

since august 2014 , with financial and logistical support from the u.s. and other governments , several ebola - specific medical products ( as well as several products approved for other uses that may also help in the treatment of people with ebola virus disease ) have entered clinical trials .

fda may now allow the use of these investigational drugs and vaccines under its expanded access policies .

however , even if manufacturers are willing to provide the products in that situation , they may be limited by their available supplies .

emergency use authorization ( eua ) could come into play as more information on the investigational ebola products becomes available as clinical trials proceed .

fda has already approved the use of several diagnostic tests under eua .

several commentators , including national institute of allergy and infectious diseases ( niaid ) director anthony fauci , have urged that any emergency distribution of unapproved drugs coincide with data collection that would support an assessment of the drugs' safety and effectiveness .

in deadly situations , placebo is often considered unethical .

in a deadly situation , though , where available drugs are in short supply , not everyone will receive the drug .

a creative design could , within ethical guidelines , either determine who received the drugs or , certainly , keep track of who did and did not receive the drug along with characteristics of the patient , disease stage , and other relevant information .

a former fda chief scientist described how lack of data on a new product's use and outcome could lead to a misinterpretation of a product's utility .

the illustrative example showed how wrongly thinking a drug was effective and wrongly thinking a drug was not effective could both harm future patients .

upon the american doctor's ebola - free release from the hospital , the head of the unit that cared for him and the other infected worker said , "frankly we do not know if it helped them , made any difference , or even delayed their recovery. .

an incorrect assumption of a drug's effectiveness or ineffectiveness might also hurt the larger community , which would lose the opportunity to rigorously assess a drug's safety and effectiveness and then to inform future decisions on whether to use it .

lack of such information could lead to more spending on ineffective or unsafe products in critical situations .

options to solve these issues include emergency use plans that address data collection and explicit decisions about who will have access to those data .

