since 1978 , the federal government has entered into 36 water rights settlements with 40 individual indian tribes .

these indian water rights settlements are a means of resolving ongoing disputes related to indian water rights between tribes , federal and state governments , and other parties ( eg , water rights holders ) .

the federal government is involved in these settlements pursuant to its tribal trust responsibilities .

many of these settlements have been authorized by congress to provide funding for projects that allow tribes to access and develop their water resources .

at issue for congress is not only the new settlements completing negotiations but also how well the current process for negotiating and recommending settlements for authorization is working .

some of the challenges raised by these settlements pertain to satisfying the federal trust responsibility related to tribal water rights , the provision of federal funding associated with the universe of these settlements , and the principles and expectations guiding ongoing and future negotiation of new settlements and renegotiation of past settlements .

this report provides background on indian water rights settlements and an overview of the settlement process .

it provides background on indian water rights , describes the settlement process , and summarizes enacted and potential settlements to date .

it also analyzes issues related to indian water rights , with a focus on the role of the federal government and challenges faced in negotiating and implementing indian water rights settlements .

finally , it focuses on settlements in a legislative context , including enacted and proposed legislation .

indian water rights are vested property rights and resources for which the united states has a trust responsibility .

the federal trust responsibility is a legal obligation of the united states dictating that the federal government must protect indian resources and assets and manage them in the indians' best interest .

historically , the united states has addressed its trust responsibility by acting as trustee in managing reserved lands , waters , resources , and assets for indian tribes and by providing legal counsel and representation to indians in the courts to protect such rights , resources , and assets .

specifically in regard to indian water rights settlements , the united states has fulfilled its trust responsibility to indian tribes by assisting tribes with their claims to reserved water rights through litigation , negotiations , and / or implementation of settlements .

the specifics of indian water rights claims vary , but typically these claims arise out of the right of many tribes to water resources dating to the establishment of their reservations .

indian reserved water rights were first recognized by the supreme court in winters v. united states in 1908 .

under the winters doctrine , when congress reserves land ( i.e. , for an indian reservation ) , congress implicitly reserves water sufficient to fulfill the purpose of the reservation .

in the years since the winters decision , disputes have arisen between indians asserting their water rights and non - indian water users , particularly in the western united states .

in that region , the establishment of indian reservations ( and , therefore , of indian water rights ) generally predated settlement by non - indians and the related large - scale development by the federal government of water resources for non - indian users .

in most western states , water allocation takes place under a system of prior appropriation in which water is allocated to users based on the order in which water rights were acquired .

under the winters doctrine and the western system of prior appropriation , the water rights of tribes often are senior to those of non - indian water rights holders because indian water rights generally date to the creation of the reservation .

however , despite the priority of indian reserved water rights , non - indian populations frequently have greater access to and allocations of water through infrastructure .

this discrepancy leads to disputes that typically have been litigated or , more recently , resolved by negotiated settlements .

litigation of indian water rights is a costly process that may take several decades to complete .

even then , indian water rights holders may not see tangible water resources and may be awarded only paper water — that is , they may be awarded a legal claim to water but lack the financial capital to develop those water resources .

this situation occurs because , unlike congress , the courts cannot provide tangible wet water by authorizing new water projects and / or water - transfer infrastructure ( including funding for project development ) that would allow the tribes to exploit their rights .

as a result , negotiated settlements recently have been the preferred means of resolving many indian water rights disputes .

negotiated settlements afford tribes and other interested stakeholders an opportunity to discuss and come to terms on quantification of and access to tribal water allocations , among other things .

these settlements often are attractive because they include terms and conditions that resolve long - standing uncertainty and put an end to conflict by avoiding litigation .

however , there remains disagreement among some as to whether litigation or settlements are most appropriate for resolving indian water rights disputes .

the primary issue regarding settlement for indian reserved water rights is quantification — identifying the amount of water to which users hold rights within the existing systems of water allocation in various areas in the west .

however , quantification alone often is not sufficient to secure resources for tribes .

thus , the negotiation process frequently also involves provisions to construct water infrastructure that increases access to newly quantified resources .

in addition to providing access to wet water , some negotiated settlements have provided other benefits and legal rights aligned with tribal values .

for instance , some tribal settlements have included provisions for environmental protection and restoration .

the federal government's involvement in the indian water rights settlement process is guided by a 1990 policy statement established during the george h. w. bush administration , "criteria and procedures for the participation of the federal government in negotiations for the settlement of indian water rights claims" by the working group on indian water settlements ( working group ) from the department of the interior ( doi ) .

doi adopted the criteria and procedures in 1990 to establish a framework to inform the indian water rights settlement process and expressed the position that negotiated settlements , rather than litigation , are the preferred method of addressing indian water rights .

as discussed in the below section " steps in settlement process ," the primary federal entities tasked with prenegotiation , negotiation , and implementation duties for indian water rights settlements are doi , the department of justice ( doj ) , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

doi has the majority of responsibilities related to participating in and approving indian water rights settlements .

within doi , two entities coordinate indian water settlement policy .

first , the working group on indian water settlements , established administratively in 1989 and comprised of all assistant secretaries and the solicitor ( and typically chaired by a counselor to the secretary or deputy secretary ) , is responsible for making recommendations to the secretary of the interior regarding water rights settlements , including overarching policy guidance for settlements .

second , the secretary of the interior's indian water rights office ( siwro ) is responsible for oversight and coordination of indian water rights settlements , including interfacing with negotiation and implementation teams for individual settlements , as well as tribes and other stakeholders .

the siwro is led by a director who reports to the chair of the working group .

doi also appoints teams to work on individual indian water rights settlements during the various stages of the settlement process ( see below section , " steps in settlement process " ) .

each team includes a chairman who is designated by the chair of the working group ( i.e. , the counselor to the secretary ) and who represents the secretary in all settlement activities .

federal teams typically are composed of representatives from the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) , bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) , u.s .

fish and wildlife service , office of the solicitor , and doj .

the teams explain general federal policies on settlement and , when possible , help to develop the parameters of a particular settlement .

broadly speaking , there are four steps associated with indian water rights settlements: prenegotiation , negotiation , settlement , and implementation .

the time between negotiation , settlement , and implementation can take several years .

each step , including relevant federal involvement , is discussed below .

the federal government has been involved with indian water rights settlements through assessment , negotiation , and implementations teams ( for enacted settlements ) since 1990 .

as of 2018 , there were 21 ongoing negotiation teams working on settlements projected to cost more than $2 billion .

additionally , there are 23 implementation teams active for carrying out approved settlements .

overall , the federal government has entered into 36 settlements since 1978 , with congress enacting 32 of these settlements .

the remaining settlements were approved administratively by the secretary of the interior or the u.s. attorney general or by judicial decree .

table 1 below lists enacted settlements as of the date of this report , while table 2 lists negotiation teams as of 2017 ( the last time this information was made available ) .

once the stakeholders have agreed to initiate negotiation of a settlement , a number of issues may pose challenges to a successful negotiation and implementation of a settlement .

such challenges may include defining and finding a source of adequate funding for a settlement and contending with other issues within settlements , such as compliance with environmental regulations and identification of sources and conditions for water delivery .

congress may be asked to weigh in on one or more of these issues as they are considered .

several common questions that are raised often in regard to indian water rights settlements are discussed below .

since 2009 , congress has enacted nine indian water rights settlements involving 13 tribes , at an authorized federal cost of more than $2 billion .

these settlements were enacted in four bills: p.l .

111-291 ( the claims resolution act of 2010 ) ; p.l .

113-169 ( the pyramid lake paiute - fish springs ranch settlement act ) ; p.l .

113-223 ( the bill williams river water rights settlement act of 2014 ) ; and p.l .

114-322 ( the water infrastructure improvements for the nation act , or wiin ) .

several of these settlements , including those enacted by the 113 th congress and the choctaw nation and chickasaw nation water settlement act included in wiin , were not associated with any new federal funding authorizations or appropriations .

an issue related to indian water rights settlements in recent congresses has been the circumstances under which this type of legislation is to be transmitted and considered .

during the 115th congress , the chairman of the house natural resources committee sent a letter to the attorney general and the secretary of the interior outlining the committee's process and expectations for considering indian water rights settlement legislation ( this process was similar to that used by the committee dating in the 114 th congress ) .

these requirements included the following: a statement by the relevant departments ( i.e. , doi and doj ) affirming that each proposed settlement adheres to current executive branch criteria and procedures .

specific affirmation by the departments that the cost of a settlement to all parties does not exceed the value of the existing claims as calculated by the federal government and that federal contributions do not exceed the sum of calculable legal exposure and federal trust or programmatic responsibilities .

conveyance to a court by doj and agreement in writing by all settling parties to the settlement , pending a legislative resolution .

approval in writing by the departments of the legislative text needed to codify the settlement .

consent to being available to testify by doj .

listing of the legal claims being settled by both departments .

it is unclear to what extent any of these requirements will continue to apply in the 116 th congress .

long - standing disputes over water rights and use involving indian tribes continue to be negotiated and settled by the executive branch and are thus likely to be an ongoing issue for congress .

this matter includes implementation of ongoing indian water rights settlements , negotiation of new settlements , and consideration of these settlements for potential enactment and subsequent funding .

as of the end of the 115 th congress , 32 settlements had been enacted since 1978 , and 4 settlements had been approved administratively .

additional funding for ongoing settlements and authorization of and appropriations for new settlements are likely to be requested in the future .

in considering indian water rights settlements , primary issues for congress may include the cost , contents , and sufficiency of federally authorized efforts to settle tribal water rights claims , as well as the circumstances under which these settlements are considered and approved by authorizing committees and others ( i.e. , whether the settlements are accompanied by formal statements of administration support , cost estimates , etc. ) .

in addition , the preferred extent of federal involvement in implementing settlements , including the question of whether the federal government or tribes should take the lead in developing and constructing projects , may be of interest to congress .

