the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) is the lead federal law enforcement agency charged with administering and enforcing federal laws related to firearms and explosives commerce .

atf is also responsible for investigating arson cases with a federal nexus , and criminal cases involving the diversion of alcohol and tobacco from legal channels of commerce .

congress funds the atf through an annual appropriation in the commerce , justice , science ( cjs ) , and related agencies appropriations act , because it is a component of the department of justice ( doj ) .

atf's relationship with the firearms industry and gun - owning public has been strained , even adversarial , and this has been a perennial source of controversy .

in the last several years , atf has become embroiled in several controversies related to its mishandling of firearms - related criminal investigations , such as a southwest border gun trafficking operation that allowed hundreds of firearms to be smuggled to mexico and an undercover store front operation in wisconsin that allegedly involved the exploitation of disabled individuals in minority communities .

gun control advocates , conversely , maintain that congress has not provided atf with adequate funding and has placed undue conditions on the funding it has provided the agency .

as discussed in this report , atf's fy2016 budget justification asserts that the agency does not have enough resources to monitor the firearms industry , nor conduct routine firearms traces for other law enforcement agencies .

as one option , congress may want to assess whether atf is properly balancing its administrative ( regulatory ) and enforcement missions , given recent decreases in firearms - related violent crime and ongoing budget constraints .

as ta b le 1 shows , for fy2016 , congress appropriated $1.24 billion for atf in the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

this amount represents a 3.4% increase over the agency's fy2015 appropriations , but 1.7% ( $21.2 million ) less than the administration's request .

in its congressional budget submission , fiscal year 2016 , atf enumerated three overarching challenges to justify its $1.261 billion request .

those challenges include the following: 1. future attrition and retirement of atf special agents and support staff ; 2. maintaining productivity in the face of increased workloads in both areas , atf "law enforcement operations" and "investigative support services" ; and 3. an urgent need to provide accurate intelligence data and to expand law enforcement capabilities to combat violent crime , including active / mass shooter incidents .

as shown in table 2 , the administration requested $1.261 billion for atf for fy2016 , an increase of 5.3% .

this proposed net increase of $63.4 million over atf's fy2015 appropriation included $8.1 million to "address deficiencies in investigative support services. .

these deficiencies , according to atf , are the result of increased application workloads under the national firearms act ( nfa ) of 1934 and increased firearms trace requests under the gun control act ( gca ) of 1968 .

it also included $30.2 million for "staffing restoration" and $25.1 million in other "base adjustments. .

table 2 also shows breakouts for the atf fy2015 enacted budget , fy2016 base budget ( current services ) , and fy2016 request by two budget decision units .

those decision units include "law enforcement operations ( leo ) " and "investigative support services ( iss ) . .

these two budget decision units include the amounts of resources and staff allocated to the agency's enforcement and regulatory operations , respectively .

atf adopted this budget decision unit structure during the fy2015 budget request and appropriations cycle .

prior to the fy2015 budget decision unit realignment , the atf budget structure included three budget decision units: ( 1 ) firearms , ( 2 ) explosives and arson , and ( 3 ) alcohol and tobacco .

while not shown in table 2 , the majority of resources in terms of dollars , positions , and full - time equivalents ( fte ) were and are still allocated principally for firearms - related enforcement and regulatory operations .

in prior years , those operations accounted for over three - quarters of the atf budget .

arson and explosives accounted for one - fifth of the atf budget .

table 2 and table 3 also show that the anticipated fy2015 fte level funded through appropriations was 4,880 and the requested fy2016 fte level was 5,106 , or a net increase of 226 ftes .

table 2 and table 3 show the permanent positions associated with the funded fte , of which five ftes were associated with the requested additional 10 permanent positions for fy2016 .

the $30.2 million for "staffing restoration" included funding to "restore" another 221 ftes not associated with new positions , for a net increase of 226 fte , but only 10 permanent positions .

according to atf , the need to restore the 221 ftes was exacerbated by a three - year , doj - wide hiring freeze .

the $25.1 million for "base adjustments" essentially represented the estimated level of resources that atf projects would be needed for upcoming fiscal year ( fy2016 ) to provide the same level of services that it anticipated providing during the current fiscal year ( fy2015 ) .

in addition , for fy2016 , the administration requested that atf's authority to participate in a personnel management demonstration project be terminated .

this demonstration project had allowed atf to provide some employees with retention pay to compensate them for pay caps that are otherwise required under federal law .

in lieu of the demonstration project , atf sought permanent legislative authority to compensate several employees without a reduction in pay .

section 206 of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) provides atf with that requested authority .

table 4 shows atf permanent positions by selected office of personnel management ( opm ) job series for fiscal years 2012-2015 , for which congress appropriated funding , and the administration's fy2016 request .

for example , special agents ( criminal investigators — opm job series 1811 ) , who are authorized to make arrests and carry firearms , accounted for nearly half of the permanent positions under the fy2016 request .

industry operations investigators ( inspectors — opm job series 1801 ) , who are not authorized to make arrests or carry a firearm , accounted for 16.3% of the permanent positions under the fy2016 request .

besides a fy2013 reduction , the level of funded positions for these two job series discussed above has not changed .

according to atf , the fy2013 reduction in permanent positions was due to sequestration and the three - year doj hiring freeze noted above .

the level of funded positions for intelligence analysts ( opm job series 132 ) and attorneys ( opm job series 905 ) has also remained level , but those job series did not see an fy2013 reduction .

nor did "other" positions see an fy2013 reduction .

the requested 10 additional positions for fy2016 were for "other" positions .

on may 27 , 2015 , the house committee on appropriations reported an fy2016 cjs appropriations bill that would have provided atf with $1.25 billion for fy2016 .

this amount would have provided atf with a 4.1% increase over the amount congress appropriated for fy2015 ( $1.201 billion ) .

at the same time , this amount was $11.2 million less than the administration's fy2015 request ( $1.261 billion ) .

it was also $3.0 million less than the atf projected fy2016 base budget .

within those funding constraints , house report language indicated that atf should: meet its critical staffing requirements ; improve its capacity to process national firearms act ( nfa ) applications and service requests ; and sustain the updating and expansion of the national integrated ballistics information network ( nibin ) .

in addition , the report language directed atf to provide an updated analysis of gun trafficking patterns , including internet - based markets , criminal sources of firearms , and value of crime gun tracing .

on june 3 , 2015 , the house considered and passed h.r .

2578 by a recorded vote ( 242 to 183 , roll no .

297 ) .

during house consideration , the house adopted two amendments that each reduced the appropriation for atf by $5 million to $1.24 billion for fy2016 ( h.amdt .

299 and h.amdt .

300 ) .

the house rejected another amendment that would have further reduced the atf appropriations by 20% , or $250 million ( h.amdt .

301 ) .

on june 16 , 2015 , the senate committee on appropriations reported its version of the fy2016 cjs appropriations bill ( h.r .

2578 , as amended ) that would have provided atf with $1.201 billion , the same amount congress appropriated for atf for fy2015 ( excluding a $3.2 million rescission ) .

senate report language addressed four areas of atf operations: combating gun violence and enforcing gun laws , united states - mexico firearms trafficking , united states bomb data center , and national center for explosives training and research .

while the senate committee amendment would have provided no additional funding for atf for fy2016 , report language maintained that the recommendation is adequate to allow atf to administer and enforce existing federal firearms laws and programs .

for example , report language specifically noted that the amount would be adequate to continue the national integrated ballistics information network ( nibin ) , which allows federal , state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies to share ballistic images of bullets and shell casings recovered at crime scenes , so that striations on bullets and hammer and ejector makings on shell casings can be matched microscopically in a manner similar to latent fingerprint matching .

senate report language did not address atf staffing issues or increases in nfa applications or firearms tracing requests .

with regard to united states - mexico firearms trafficking , report language directed atf to continue reporting back to the committee on the number of firearms recovered by the government of mexico .

and , of those firearms: how many has atf attempted to trace ? .

how many were successfully traced ? .

and how many were found to have originated in the united states prior to being recovered in mexico ? .

the senate version of the bill also included a provision ( §216 ) that would continue to ban any doj agency from using appropriations to transfer an operable firearm to a known or suspected "drug cartel" agent without continuously monitoring and controlling such firearm .

as described in the appendix of this report , this provision was first sponsored as an amendment offered by senator john cornyn for fy2012 .

it has been included in every doj appropriation since then .

it was also included in the house - passed bill for fy2016 ( h.r .

2578 , §215 ) .

this provision is a response to a flawed southwest border gun trafficking investigation known as "operation fast and furious. .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) includes this provision ( also number §216 ) .

in addition , report language lauded atf for co - locating the u.s .

bomb data center with the national center for explosives training and research ( ncetr ) , and noted that doj had directed all its component agencies to use the atf bomb arson tracking system to document explosives - related incidents .

report language directed atf to make space available for federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and department of homeland security's office bombing prevention analysts at the u.s .

bomb data center .

finally , report language directed atf to maintain its fy2015 level of operations at ncetr to train federal , state , local , and tribal technicians in advanced fire investigations and advanced explosives disposal techniques .

congress has placed nine provisos related to domestic gun control on bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) appropriations for salaries and expenses ( s&e ) and included another six provisos in either the department of justice ( doj ) general provisions or the general provisions for the entire commerce , justice , science ( cjs ) and related appropriations act .

congress has included "futurity" language ( eg , "in each fiscal year thereafter" ) in several of these provisos that appears to be intended to make them permanent law .

one proviso — the "tiahrt amendment" — has included futurity language since fy2005 , but was included in subsequent appropriations acts through fy2012 .

this proviso restricts atf from using appropriations to release unfiltered firearms trace data , and prohibits the use of such data for the purposes of supporting civil lawsuits .

gun control advocates have argued that the tiahrt amendment and other limitations on the atf appropriations have unduly hampered that agency from enforcing the law , and consequently have called for their repeal .

supporters of gun rights , on the other hand , maintain that these limitations prevent atf from overreaching its statutory and regulatory authority .

for fy2012 , congress included futurity language in four of those provisos that appears to be intended to make them permanent law .

those fy2012 provisos are: s&e proviso one: firearms acquisition / disposition data collection ; s&e proviso six: trace data and tiahrt amendment ; s&e proviso eight: out - of - business dealers' records searches ; and nics fee prohibition and next - day destruction of records .

for fy2013 , congress included futurity language in several additional provisos .

those fy2013 provisions are: s&e proviso two: curios or relics definition ; s&e proviso seven: dealer inventory ; s&e proviso nine: dealer license denials for lack of business ; and trace data caveats .

as discussed in the text of this report and below in this appendix , the administration has requested for fy2014 , fy2015 , and fy2016 that two of those provisos be repealed .

those provisos include: s&e proviso two: curios or relics definition ; and s&e proviso seven: dealer inventory .

for fy2013 , fy2014 , and fy2015 , the house cjs appropriations bills included futurity language in two other provisions .

while these provisos were included in the enacted appropriations laws , the futurity language was not .

those provisos include: firearms parts exports to canada ; and curios and relics imports .

there are five other provisos for which congress has not included futurity language .

those provisos include: s&e proviso three: relief from firearms disabilities for individuals ; s&e proviso four: relief from firearms disabilities for corporations ; s&e proviso five: atf reorganization and dismantlement ; anti - gun walking amendment ; and shotgun imports .

in the 114 th congress , legislation has been introduced to repeal several of these provisos ( see h.r .

1449 and h.r .

2939 ) .

a more detailed legislative history of all these provisos discussed above along with their language is provided below .

salaries and expenses ( s&e ) provisos atf s&e proviso one: firearms acquisition / disposition data collection for fy1979 through fy2012 , congress included a proviso in the atf s&e appropriations language in response to an administrative proposal made during the carter administration that would have required firearms manufacturers , importers , and dealers to submit quarterly reports on the sale and disposition of firearms .

house and senate report language expressed the view that this proposed regulation exceeded atf's authority under the gun control act of 1968 ( h.r .

12930 ; h.rept .

95-1259 and s.rept .

95-939 ) .

in addition , a proviso was enacted that prohibits atf from using appropriations for the purposes of creating what has often been characterized as a "registry of firearms or firearms owners. .

for fy2012 , futurity language ( "hereafter" ) was included in this proviso , which appears to be intended to make it permanent law .

the proviso reads as follows: provided , that no funds appropriated herein or hereafter shall be available for salaries or administrative expenses in connection with consolidating or centralizing , within the department of justice , the records , or any portion thereof , of acquisition and disposition of firearms maintained by [f]ederal firearms licensees .

atf s&e proviso two: curios or relics definition for fy1996 through fy2013 , congress included a proviso in the atf s&e appropriations language that prohibits atf from using appropriated funding for the purposes of changing the definition of "curios or relics. .

this provision was in response to an atf proposal to amend the definition of "curios or relics," because of concerns about the volume of surplus military firearms that could be imported into the united states .

atf has consistently opposed the importation of certain world war ii era , surplus military firearms .

the language of this proviso is as follows: provided further , that no funds appropriated herein shall be used to pay administrative expenses or the compensation of any officer or employee of the united states to implement an amendment or amendments to 27 cfr 478.118 or to change the definition of "curios or relics" in 27 cfr 478.11 or remove any item from atf publication 5300.11 as it existed on january 1 , 1994 .

for fy2013 , congress included futurity language ( "the current fiscal year and any fiscal year thereafter" ) in this proviso , which appears to have made it permanent law .

for each fiscal year thereafter , fy2014 through fy2016 , the administration has requested as part of its annual congressional budget submissions that this proviso be repealed .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) includes no provision to repeal or change this appropriations limitation .

atf s&e proviso three: relief from firearms disabilities for individuals for fy1993 and every year thereafter , congress included a proviso in the atf s&e appropriations language that prevents that agency from using appropriations to consider applications for disabilities relief ( i.e. , reinstatement of an applicant's right to gun ownership ) from individuals who are otherwise ineligible to be transferred a firearm .

in the 102 nd congress , house report language ( h.r .

5488 ; h.rept .

102-618 ) included the following justification: "the committee believes that the $3.75 million and the 40 man - years annually spent investigating and acting upon these applications for relief would be better utilized by atf in fighting violent crime. .

senate and conference report language were silent on this issue .

the language of this proviso is as follows: provided further , that none of the funds appropriated herein shall be available to investigate or act upon applications for relief from federal firearms disabilities under 18 u.s.c .

925 ( c ) .

for fy2015 , these provisos were included in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) .

for fy2016 , the senate committee on appropriations included identical language in its reported cjs appropriations bill ( h.r .

2578 , as amended ) .

the house - passed version of h.r .

2578 , however , reflects a floor amendment ( h.amdt .

302 ) that would require atf to process disability relief applications for individuals .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) , however , does not include this amended provision .

instead , it includes and maintains the appropriations limitation described above .

atf s&e proviso four: relief from firearms disabilities for corporations for fy1994 and every year thereafter , congress added a related proviso explicitly stating that appropriated funds could be used to process disability relief applications for corporations .

provided further , that such funds shall be available to investigate and act upon applications filed by corporations for relief from federal firearms disabilities under section 925 ( c ) of title 18 , united states code .

for fy2015 , this proviso was included in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) .

for fy2016 , an identical proviso was included in the house - passed cjs appropriations bill ( h.r .

2578 ) and senate - reported bill ( h.r .

2578 , as amended ) .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) includes this appropriations limitation .

atf s&e proviso five: atf reorganization or dismantlement for fy1994 and every year thereafter , congress included a proviso in the atf s&e appropriations language that prevents the use of appropriations to dismantle that agency .

that provision was a response to vice president al gore's national performance review report released on september 7 , 1993 , which called for the transfer of atf's law enforcement functions to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) .

under this recommendation , atf's regulatory and revenue functions were to remain at the department of the treasury , but be transferred to the internal revenue service .

the language of this proviso is as follows: provided further , that no funds made available by this or any other act may be used to transfer the functions , missions , or activities of the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives to other agencies or departments .

for fy2015 , this proviso was included in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) .

for fy2016 , identical language was included in the house - passed and senate - reported versions of h.r .

2578 .

similarly , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) includes this appropriations limitation .

atf s&e proviso six: trace data and the tiahrt amendment for fy2004 through fy2012 , congress included a proviso in the atf s&e appropriations language that is known for the member who originally offered the amendment , representative todd tiahrt .

for fy2003 , congress had previously included a related provision in the treasury - postal appropriations act , which was reportedly included in the bill at the request of representative george r. nethercutt .

as shown below , the nethercutt provision is arguably less restrictive than the tiahrt proviso .

the tiahrt amendment prohibits atf from using appropriations to make unfiltered trace data available to any parties other than domestic and foreign law enforcement ( with greater restrictions in the latter case ) and national security agencies .

the proviso exempts trace reports , which atf has traditionally produced for statistical purposes and firearms trafficking trend analysis .

unlike other atf appropriations provisions , this one has been substantively altered several times .

the last substantive revision was for fy2010 .

nevertheless , it has included some form of futurity language ( "in each fiscal year thereafter" ) since its inception , most recently for fy2012 .

the language of this proviso is as follows: provided further , that , during the current fiscal year and in each fiscal year thereafter , no funds appropriated under this or any other act may be used to disclose part or all of the contents of the firearms trace system database maintained by the national trace center of the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives or any information required to be kept by licensees pursuant to section 923 ( g ) of title 18 , united states code , or required to be reported pursuant to paragraphs ( 3 ) and ( 7 ) of such section , except to: ( 1 ) a federal , state , local , or tribal law enforcement agency , or a federal , state , or local prosecutor ; or ( 2 ) a foreign law enforcement agency solely in connection with or for use in a criminal investigation or prosecution ; or ( 3 ) a federal agency for a national security or intelligence purpose ; unless such disclosure of such data to any of the entities described in ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) or ( 3 ) of this proviso would compromise the identity of any undercover law enforcement officer or confidential informant , or interfere with any case under investigation ; and no person or entity described in ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) or ( 3 ) shall knowingly and publicly disclose such data ; and all such data shall be immune from legal process , shall not be subject to subpoena or other discovery , shall be inadmissible in evidence , and shall not be used , relied on , or disclosed in any manner , nor shall testimony or other evidence be permitted based on the data , in a civil action in any state ( including the district of columbia ) or federal court or in an administrative proceeding other than a proceeding commenced by the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives to enforce the provisions of chapter 44 of such title , or a review of such an action or proceeding ; except that this proviso shall not be construed to prevent: ( a ) the disclosure of statistical information concerning total production , importation , and exportation by each licensed importer ( as defined in section 921 ( a ) ( 9 ) of such title ) and licensed manufacturer ( as defined in section 921 ( a ) ( 10 ) of such title ) ; ( b ) the sharing or exchange of such information among and between federal , state , local , or foreign law enforcement agencies , federal , state , or local prosecutors , and federal national security , intelligence , or counterterrorism officials ; or ( c ) the publication of annual statistical reports on products regulated by the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives , including total production , importation , and exportation by each licensed importer ( as so defined ) and licensed manufacturer ( as so defined ) , or statistical aggregate data regarding firearms traffickers and trafficking channels , or firearms misuse , felons , and trafficking investigations .

after fy2012 , this proviso has not appeared in any subsequent atf appropriations .

it appears that the futurity language discussed above was considered to make this proviso permanent law .

congress included a related provision in the fy2003 treasury - postal appropriations act .

this provision arguably has prohibited , and possibly would continue to prohibit , atf from using appropriated funding for the purposes of processing freedom of information act ( foia ) requests for trace data .

report language stated: the need to maintain these databases [firearms trace data and multiple handgun sales reports] on a limited confidential basis that has been in place at atf for several years for tracing records derives from the long - term nature of criminal investigations .

in addition to jeopardizing criminal investigations and officer safety , such information , once released , might easily be disseminated through the internet .

this would not only pose a risk to law enforcement and homeland security , but also to the privacy of innocent citizens ( h.rept .

107-575 ) .

the language of this provision is as follows: sec .

644 .

no funds appropriated under this act or any other act with respect to any fiscal year shall be available to take any action based upon any provision of 5 u.s.c .

552 with respect to records collected or maintained pursuant to 18 u.s.c .

846 ( b ) , 923 ( g ) ( 3 ) or 923 ( g ) ( 7 ) , or provided by federal , state , local , or foreign law enforcement agencies in connection with arson or explosives incidents or the tracing of a firearm , except that such records may continue to be disclosed to the extent and in the manner that records so collected , maintained , or obtained have been disclosed under 5 u.s.c .

552 prior to the date of the enactment of this act .

this provision was not included in subsequent appropriations laws .

however , it too includes futurity language ( "with respect to any fiscal year" ) , which appears to be intended to make it permanent law .

it is noteworthy that the scope of subsequent tiahrt amendments would have also prohibited all foia disclosures .

atf s&e proviso seven: dealer inventory for fy2004 through fy2013 , congress included a proviso in the atf s&e appropriations language that prohibits the agency from using any appropriations to require federal firearms licensees to conduct inventories before an inspection .

this provision was also part of the fy2004 tiahrt amendment .

the language of this proviso is as follows: provided further , that no funds made available by this or any other act shall be expended to promulgate or implement any rule requiring a physical inventory of any business licensed under section 923 of title 18 , united states code .

for fy2013 , congress included futurity language ( "for any fiscal year thereafter" ) in this provision , which appears to have been intended to make it permanent law .

as part of its fy2014 , fy2015 , and fy2016 budget request , the administration requested that this proviso be repealed .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) includes no provision that would change this appropriations limitation .

atf s&e proviso eight: out - of - business dealers' records searches for fy1997 through fy2012 , congress included a proviso in the atf s&e appropriations language that prohibits atf from using appropriations to search computerized records of out - of - business ffls .

such records — the bound logs of firearms acquisitions and dispositions and atf form 4473s — are digitized for storage purposes and kept in a microform format for evidentiary purposes .

for fy2012 , futurity language ( "hereafter" ) was included in this proviso , which appears to be intended to make it permanent law ( p.l .

112-55 ) .

the language of this provision is as follows: provided further , that , hereafter , no funds made available by this or any other act may be used to electronically retrieve information gathered pursuant to 18 u.s.c .

923 ( g ) ( 4 ) by name or any personal identification code .

atf s&e proviso nine: dealer license denials for lack of business for fy2004 and through fy2013 , congress included a proviso in the atf s&e appropriations language that prohibits atf from using appropriations to deny or renew a dealer license for lack of business .

this proviso was in response to atf efforts during the clinton administration to reduce the number of individuals who arguably held federal firearms licenses simply for the sake of convenience , as opposed to the means to pursue their principal source of livelihood .

pro - gun control groups referred to such dealers as "kitchen table top dealers. .

it too was part of the fy2004 tiahrt amendment .

the language of this provision is as follows: provided further , that no funds authorized or made available under this or any other act may be used to deny any application for a license under section 923 of title 18 , united states code , or renewal of such a license due to a lack of business activity , provided that the applicant is otherwise eligible to receive such a license , and is eligible to report business income or to claim an income tax deduction for business expenses under the internal revenue code of 1986 .

after 2013 , this provision was not included in any subsequent appropriation , possibly because of the futurity language ( "for any fiscal year thereafter" ) in p.l .

113-6 , which appears to have been intended to make it permanent law .

other stand - alone appropriations provisions anti - gun walking amendment for fy2012 through fy2015 , congress has included a provision in the annual cjs appropriations acts that prohibits an investigative tactic known as "gun walking. .

as part of a flawed investigation known as "operation fast and furious," the doj office of the inspector general found that atf special agents did not act in a timely manner to arrest , or at least confront , suspected "straw purchasers" and interdict the firearms they had purchased in multiple transactions from federally licensed gun dealers , when the agents arguably had a reasonable suspicion or probable cause to believe that they , the straw purchasers , were trafficking firearms illegally to known associates of mexican drug trafficking organizations .

senator john cornyn sponsored an amendment to the fy2012 cjs appropriations act that included a related provision to prevent "gun walking. .

while the language of the cornyn amendment was modified , the related fy2012 provision reads as follows: sec .

219 .

none of the funds made available under this act , other than for the national instant criminal background check system established under section 103 of the brady handgun violence prevention act , may be used by a federal law enforcement officer to facilitate the transfer of an operable firearm to an individual if the federal law enforcement officer knows or suspects that the individual is an agent of a drug cartel , unless law enforcement personnel of the united states continuously monitor or control the firearm at all times .

for fy2015 , congress included this provision in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ; §215 ) .

for fy2016 , the house included this provision in the cjs appropriations bill ( h.r .

2578 ; §215 ) .

the senate committee on appropriations included it in its version of the bill ( h.r .

2578 , as amended ; §216 ) .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) includes this provision ( also number §216 ) .

nics fee prohibition and next - day destruction of records for fy1999 through fy2012 , congress has included a provision in the annual cjs appropriations acts that prohibits the department of justice from using appropriations to levy a fee for firearms - related background checks under the national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) .

this provision was crafted to counter a clinton administration proposal to levy a $5 fee for such checks .

for fy2004 and every year thereafter , along with the fee prohibition , congress has included a provision that requires the fbi to destroy background check records within 24 hours on persons who are eligible to receive firearms .

this provision was originally part of the fy2004 tiahrt amendment and was crafted in response to a 90-day audit log that was maintained by the fbi during the clinton administration for audit and other purposes .

for fy2012 , congress inserted futurity language ( "hereafter" ) in this provision .

the language of this provision is as follows: sec .

511 .

hereafter , none of the funds appropriated pursuant to this act or any other provision of law may be used for — ( 1 ) the implementation of any tax or fee in connection with the implementation of subsection 922 ( t ) of title 18 , united states code ; and ( 2 ) any system to implement subsection 922 ( t ) of title 18 , united states code , that does not require and result in the destruction of any identifying information submitted by or on behalf of any person who has been determined not to be prohibited from possessing or receiving a firearm no more than 24 hours after the system advises a federal firearms licensee that possession or receipt of a firearm by the prospective transferee would not violate subsection ( g ) or ( n ) of section 922 of title 18 , united states code , or state law .

after fy2012 , this provision was not included in any subsequent cjs appropriations , possibly because of the futurity language in p.l .

112-55 , which appears to have been intended to make this provision permanent law .

trace data limitations and caveats this provision was first included in the fy2004 cjs appropriations bill as part of the tiahrt amendment presented earlier .

the language of this provision ( originally number §516 ) is as follows: ( a ) tracing studies conducted by the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives are released without adequate disclaimers regarding the limitations of the data .

 ( b ) the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives shall include in all such data releases , language similar to the following that would make clear that trace data cannot be used to draw broad conclusions about firearms - related crime: ( 1 ) firearm traces are designed to assist law enforcement authorities in conducting investigations by tracking the sale and possession of specific firearms .

law enforcement agencies may request firearms traces for any reason , and those reasons are not necessarily reported to the federal government .

not all firearms used in crime are traced and not all firearms traced are used in crime .

 ( 2 ) firearms selected for tracing are not chosen for purposes of determining which types , makes , or models of firearms are used for illicit purposes .

the firearms selected do not constitute a random sample and should not be considered representative of the larger universe of all firearms used by criminals , or any subset of that universe .

firearms are normally traced to the first retail seller , and sources reported for firearms traced do not necessarily represent the sources or methods by which firearms in general are acquired for use in crime .

for fy2013 , congress included futurity language ( "for fy2013 and thereafter" ) in this provision that appears to have been intended to make it permanent law .

firearms parts exports to canada congress first included this provision in the fy2006 science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies appropriations act to prohibit the use of funds provided under this act to require certain export licenses .

this provision was a congressional response to new regulations promulgated during the clinton administration ( 1999 ) that were based on the organization of american states ( oas ) model regulations for the control of the international movement of firearms .

as a result of the export licensing provisions in these regulations , it arguably became cost prohibitive for a canadian resident to acquire certain firearms parts from u.s gun dealers .

hence , this provision ( originally number §520 ) makes certain firearms parts exempt from some , but not all export licensing requirements .

 ( a ) notwithstanding any other provision of law or treaty , none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available under this act or any other act may be expended or obligated by a department , agency , or instrumentality of the united states to pay administrative expenses or to compensate an officer or employee of the united states in connection with requiring an export license for the export to canada of components , parts , accessories or attachments for firearms listed in category i , section 121.1 of title 22 , code of federal regulations ( international trafficking in arms regulations ( itar ) , part 121 , as it existed on april 1 , 2005 ) with a total value not exceeding $500 wholesale in any transaction , provided that the conditions of subsection ( b ) of this section are met by the exporting party for such articles .

 ( b ) the foregoing exemption from obtaining an export license — ( 1 ) does not exempt an exporter from filing any shipper's export declaration or notification letter required by law , or from being otherwise eligible under the laws of the united states to possess , ship , transport , or export the articles enumerated in subsection ( a ) ; and ( 2 ) does not permit the export without a license of – ( a ) fully automatic firearms and components and parts for such firearms , other than for end use by the federal government , or a provincial or municipal government of canada ; ( b ) barrels , cylinders , receivers ( frames ) or complete breech mechanisms for any firearm listed in category i , other than for end use by the federal government , or a provincial or municipal government of canada ; or ( c ) articles for export from canada to another foreign destination .

 ( c ) in accordance with this section , the district directors of customs and postmasters shall permit the permanent or temporary export without a license of any unclassified articles specified in subsection ( a ) to canada for end use in canada or return to the united states , or temporary import of canadian - origin items from canada for end use in the united states or return to canada for a canadian citizen .

 ( d ) the president may require export licenses under this section on a temporary basis if the president determines , upon publication first in the federal register , that the government of canada has implemented or maintained inadequate import controls for the articles specified in subsection ( a ) , such that a significant diversion of such articles has and continues to take place for use in international terrorism or in the escalation of a conflict in another nation .

the president shall terminate the requirements of a license when reasons for the temporary requirements have ceased .

this provision was included in the consolidated and continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 , §517 ) .

for fy2013 through fy2015 , the house committee on appropriations included futurity language in its versions of that provision , but such language was not included in any of the enacted appropriations laws for those fiscal years .

for fy2016 , identical provisions are included in the house - passed and senate - reported versions of h.r .

2578 ( §516 and §517 , respectively ) .

for fy2016 , the house version of the provision does not include futurity language .

section 517 of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) continues to prohibit the use of funds in that act to require export licenses for the purposes described above .

curios and relics imports congress first included this provision in the fy2006 science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies appropriations act to prohibit the use of funds in this act to deny certain import applications .

the language of this provision ( originally numbered §521 ) is as follows: notwithstanding any other provision of law , no department , agency , or instrumentality of the united states receiving appropriated funds under this act or any other act shall obligate or expend in any way such funds to pay administrative expenses or the compensation of any officer or employee of the united states to deny any application submitted pursuant to 22 u.s.c .

2778 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) and qualified pursuant to 27 cfr section 478.112 or .113 , for a permit to import united states origin "curios or relics" firearms , parts , or ammunition .

this provision was included in the consolidated and continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ; §517 ) .

for fy2013 through fy2015 , the house committee on appropriations included futurity language in its version of that provision , but such language was not included in any of the enacted appropriations laws for those fiscal years .

for fy2016 , identical provisions were included in the house - passed and senate - reported versions of h.r .

2578 ( §517 and §518 , respectively ) .

for fy2016 , the house version of the provision does not include futurity language .

section 518 of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) continues to prohibit the use of funds in that act to deny import applications for "curios or relics" firearms , parts , or ammunition .

shotgun imports congress first included this provision in the fy2012 cjs appropriations law in response to an atf study , which characterized certain shotguns as "non - sporting," because they include certain "military - style" features ( eg , pistol grips , folding or collapsible stocks , laser sights , as well as the ability to accept large capacity ammunition feeding devices ) .

the language of this provision ( originally number §541 ) is as follows: none of the funds made available by this act may be used to pay the salaries or expenses of personnel to deny , or fail to act on , an application for the importation of any model of shotgun if — ( 1 ) all other requirements of law with respect to the proposed importation are met ; and ( 2 ) no application for the importation of such model of shotgun , in the same configuration , had been denied by the attorney general prior to january 1 , 2011 , on the basis that the shotgun was not particularly suitable for or readily adaptable to sporting purposes .

this provision was included in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ; §533 ) .

for fy2013 through fy2015 , the house committee on appropriations included futurity language in its version of this provision , but such language was not included in any of the enacted appropriations laws for those fiscal years .

for fy2016 , identical provisions were included in the house - passed and senate - reported versions of h.r .

2578 ( §532 in both bills ) .

section 532 of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) continues to prohibit the use of funds provided in that act from being used to deny the importation of certain shotgun models on the basis that the shotgun was not particularly suitable for or readily adaptable to sporting purposes .

