t he patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) includes a 40% excise tax on high - cost employer - sponsored health insurance coverage , often referred to as the cadillac tax .

the 40% excise tax is assessed on the aggregate cost of employer - sponsored health coverage that exceeds a dollar limit .

if a tax is owed , it is levied on the entity providing the coverage ( eg , the health insurance issuer or the employer ) .

under the aca , the excise tax was to go into effect in 2018 ; however , the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 ( caa of 2016 ; p.l .

114-113 ) delays implementation until 2020 .

the excise tax is included in the aca to raise revenue to offset the cost of other aca provisions ( eg , the financial subsidies available through the health insurance exchanges ) .

the most current publicly available cost estimate from the congressional budget office ( cbo ) indicates that the excise tax was expected to increase federal revenues by $87 billion between 2016 and 2025 , based on 2018 implementation .

the excise tax also is expected to limit the tax advantages for employer - sponsored health coverage .

many economists contend that the tax advantages lead to an overconsumption of coverage and health care services .

this report provides an overview of the excise tax .

the report includes cost estimates for the excise tax and explores the excise tax's relationship with the tax advantages for employer - sponsored health coverage .

the information in this report is based on statute and two notices issued by the department of the treasury ( treasury ) and the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

notice 2015-16 was issued february 17 , 2015 , and the comment period for the notice closed may 15 , 2015 .

notice 2015-52 was issued july 30 , 2015 .

the comment period for the notice closed october 1 , 2015 .

as of the date of this report , regulations related to the excise tax have not been promulgated .

many employers offer health insurance plans and other health - related benefits ( eg , health care flexible spending accounts , or fsas ) .

these benefits are one part of an employee's total compensation .

often employers pay for part or all of these benefits .

to illustrate , 57% of employers offered health insurance plans to their employees in 2015 , and on average employers covered 82% of the premiums for single coverage and 71% of the premiums for family coverage .

beginning in 2020 , a 40% excise tax is to be assessed on the aggregate cost of an employee's applicable coverage that exceeds a dollar limit during a taxable period .

unlike some other aca provisions , assessment of the excise tax is not dependent on an employer's characteristics ( eg , number of workers ) ; assessment is dependent on whether the aggregate cost of an employee's applicable coverage exceeds a dollar limit .

the entity responsible for paying the excise tax to the irs is the coverage provider .

the terms applicable coverage , dollar limit , and coverage provider are defined and described in more detail below .

the excise tax is one of several taxes and fees included in the aca to raise revenue to offset the cost of other aca provisions ( eg , the financial subsidies available through the health insurance exchanges ) .

in march 2015 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) estimated the excise tax would increase federal revenues by $87 billion between 2016 and 2025 , based on the tax's implementation beginning in 2018 .

cbo and jct indicate that the revenue raised by the excise tax will come from both collection of the excise tax and increases in taxable income , with most of the revenue raised a result of increases in taxable income .

the relationship between the excise tax and taxable income is discussed in the following section .

employer - sponsored health insurance and benefits generally are excluded from employees' gross income for purposes of determining employees' income tax liability .

additionally , these amounts generally also qualify for exclusion from social security and medicare ( fica ) taxes and unemployment ( futa ) taxes .

these exclusions often are collectively referred to as the tax exclusion for employer - sponsored health insurance and benefits .

modifying or repealing the tax exclusion has been discussed for many years .

one reason federal policymakers are interested in the tax exclusion is that the exclusion results in considerable revenue loss to the federal government .

jct estimates the income tax exclusion will result in $785 billion in foregone revenue for the federal government between 2014 and 2018 .

ending or modifying the tax exclusion could raise a significant amount of revenue , depending on how it would be modified or repealed and how employers and workers would adjust .

the excise tax does not directly modify or end the tax exclusion ; however , the excise tax is seen as an indirect method for limiting the tax exclusion .

as discussed above , official scores indicate that the revenue raised by the excise tax will come both from collection of the excise tax and from increases in taxable income .

the increases in taxable income are a result of the expectation that employers will reduce the amount of health coverage they offer to employees to avoid paying the excise tax .

provided employers do this but keep total compensation for employees constant ( i.e. , shift the compensation from health benefits to taxable wages ) , the result will be generally higher taxable wages for affected employees .

cbo and jct have estimated that about one - quarter of the revenue raised will come from collection of the excise tax , while about three - quarters of the revenue raised will stem from employers' responses to the tax .

