since 2009 , greece has grappled with a serious debt crisis .

most economists believe that greece's public debt , 180% of greek gross domestic product ( gdp ) ,  is unsustainable .

the ramifications of the debt have been felt throughout the greek economy , which contracted by 25% from its pre - crisis level .

one in five greeks is unemployed , with youth unemployment at nearly 50% , and the greek banking system is unstable .

the greek government has received three financial assistance packages , funded by european creditors and the international monetary fund ( imf ) in 2010 and 2012 , and again by european creditors in 2015 .

the european central bank ( ecb ) has taken unprecedented policy measures in response to the crisis .

greece concluded the largest debt restructuring with private creditors in history in 2012 , in addition to cutting public spending significantly and pledging a host of policy reforms throughout the crisis .

between 2010 and 2013 , the crisis in greece spilled over to ireland , portugal , and cyprus , which negotiated financial assistance packages , and threatened spain and italy .

while these economies have largely stabilized , the greek economy remains in crisis .

questions persist about greece's ability to meet debt repayments , the terms under which european creditors and potentially the imf would continue to provide support to greece , the willingness of european creditors to provide debt relief to greece , and economic reforms that could put greek public finances on a sustainable path and jumpstart growth .

more broadly , the crisis has exposed problems with the institutional architecture of the eurozone , whose member states share a common currency and monetary policy , but retain national control over fiscal and banking policies .

even as greek and european leaders have reiterated throughout the crisis their commitment to keeping greece in the eurozone , some analysts argue that greece exiting the eurozone and adopting a national currency ( "grexit" ) could provide the government with greater autonomy and flexibility for responding to the crisis .

other analysts argue that abandoning the euro in favor of a national currency would result in a chaotic transition and acutely exacerbate the economic situation in greece .

what started and continues as an economic crisis in greece has also become one of a broader set of challenges facing the 28-member european union ( eu ) that many analysts believe collectively represent the most significant setback in over 60 years of european integration .

in greece and other european countries with struggling economies , public opposition to economic reforms widely viewed as unjustly imposed by other governments and institutions has fueled political instability and growing concerns about the democratic legitimacy of european institutions .

greece has had seven different governments since 2009 .

likewise , governments in more prosperous economies , such as germany's , have faced mounting pressure to end financial assistance to what many voters perceive as profligate governments .

analysts argue that the resulting , fraught debates among european leaders about the appropriate crisis response have heightened political tensions to a degree that could negatively affect the eu over the longer term .

committees in both the house and the senate have held hearings on the crisis and issues relating to its impact on the united states , and have exercised congressional oversight of u.s. policy responses .

in terms of impact on the u.s. economy , greece is a small economy , accounting for 2% of eurozone gdp , and the direct financial exposure of the united states to greece is limited .

many experts agree that potential contagion effects from the crisis in greece to the broader eurozone and global economy have largely been contained .

while the rate of economic growth is expected to rise in both the eurozone and in greece , the legacy of fiscal consolidation and other economic reforms has left the country with declining incomes and an unemployment rate above 20% .

members have also raised questions about the role of the imf in responding to the crisis , and whether imf programs put u.s. taxpayer contributions to the imf at risk .

some members have also raised the impact the greek crisis has already and could increasingly have to constrain europe's effectiveness as a partner for the united states , including on issues such as managing a resurgent russia and the ongoing conflict in ukraine .

this report provides a brief overview of the crisis , including negotiations between the greek government , european creditors , and the imf .

it also discusses potential implications of the crisis for the u.s. economy and u.s. - european cooperation on broader strategic and economic cooperation .

europe is an important economic and political partner of the united states , and the impact of the crisis in greece on the united states has been a key issue for congress over the past seven years .

during the obama administration , president obama and key administration officials repeatedly called for a swift and robust response from eurozone leaders , underscoring the economic and strategic importance to the united states of a strong and unified eurozone that keeps greece as a member .

however , while the obama administration wielded an influential voice on the crisis , it ultimately found limited ability to affect policy decisions made by and among the eu member countries and institutions .

in the early days of the trump administration , treasury secretary steven mnuchin stated he views the greek crisis as primarily a european issue and is encouraging the imf to hold a "hard line" on greece .

for the united states , the impact of the greek debt crisis is uncertain .

on one hand , u.s. direct exposure to the crisis is limited: more than 75% of greek debt is owed to eurozone governments or institutions ( figure 3 ) , and banks outside of greece have cut their exposures to greece by roughly 85% since 2010 ( figure 4 ) .

on the other hand , the potential for a broader eurozone crisis tends to multiply the importance of the greek crisis .

these concerns are being temporarily overshadowed by the still - evolving unprecedented exit of great britain from the eu , referred to as brexit .

over the short run , financial markets will closely monitor a number of issues , including ( 1 ) potentially diverging monetary policies between the federal reserve and the ecb ; ( 2 ) ongoing questions regarding the direction of the greek economy ; and ( 3 ) and the economic impact of brexit .

under these circumstances , investors often turn to safe - haven investments .

the combination of diverging monetary policies between the united states ( tightening ) and europe and japan ( accommodative ) and investor uncertainty increases demand for the dollar and dollar - denominated assets .

this increased demand for the dollar causes the dollar to appreciate against both the euro and the yen and can cause u.s. interest rates to fall below the levels they would reach otherwise .

a weaker euro and yen relative to the dollar may boost exports from europe and japan at the expense of u.s. exports .

more broadly , the greek debt crisis and brexit are absorbing much of the attention of european policymakers and restraining their ability to focus on other important financial , economic and trade issues that affect a broad range of ties between europe and the united states .

over the long term , a resolution of the greek debt crisis , whether or not greece stays in the eurozone , could remove one important source of uncertainty in international financial markets .

in such a case , demand for dollar - denominated assets potentially could ease as investors regain interest in euro - denominated assets .

increased demand for the euro relative to the dollar would tend to appreciate the value of the euro relative to the dollar .

while a lower exchange value of the dollar would tend to improve the international price competitiveness of u.s. exports , it also would tend to increase the cost of u.s. imports .

depending on how quickly trade volumes responded to the change in the value of the dollar , the u.s. current account balance could worsen before it improved , delaying any stimulus to the u.s. economy .

a robust european economy is important for u.s. interests .

the united states and eu have the world's largest trade and investment relationship .

trade with the eu accounted for 19% of total u.s. trade ( both exports and imports ) in 2016 , and u.s. direct investment in the eu accounted for over half the total amount of u.s. direct investment abroad in 2015 , while eu direct investment in the united states accounted for 70% of total foreign direct investment in 2015 .

the decline in the value of the euro relative to the dollar in 2015 and 2016 and low interest rates in europe have enticed u.s. firms to issue a large number of euro - denominated bonds in european capital markets , further deepening the financial relationship between the united states and europe .

the proposed free trade agreement ( fta ) that was being negotiated between the united states and eu , known as the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) , has the potential to bolster growth in both economies .

the comprehensive nature of the agreement potentially could improve access by u.s. firms to important financial and services markets ; it also might encourage broader structural reforms in europe that could benefit a broad section of eu firms and consumers .

t - tip was intended to spark economic growth and job creation among countries on both sides of the atlantic following the 2008-2009 global economic downturn resulting from the financial crisis .

t - tip was also initiated in part to assuage fears that the u.s. rebalance towards the asia - pacific was a rebalance away from europe that would deemphasize the importance of europe and the atlantic alliance to u.s. foreign policy .

negotiations started in 2013 and are uncertain .

some members of congress have been concerned about whether imf programs in greece have been an appropriate use of imf resources and adequately protected u.s. taxpayer contributions to the imf .

the united states generally has a leading voice at the imf , as the institution's largest shareholder .

concerns have generally focused on the unusual nature of the programs , particularly that the imf has not generally lent to developed countries in recent decades , and that the programs provide a large amount of financing relative to the size of greece's economy .

additionally , there has been scrutiny of a specific decision by the imf executive board in 2010 .

generally , imf staff had to certify that debt in a country was sustainable over the medium - term before approving a program that exceeded normal limits on the size of imf financing ( referred to as "exceptional access" to imf financing ) .

in may 2010 , the board changed its lending policies to allow the first greek program to go forward , even though imf staff could not certify that greece's debt was sustainable in the medium term , due to concerns about potential spillover effects .

critics argue that the policy change inappropriately relaxed imf lending standards and put the financial commitments of taxpayers in the united states and other countries to the imf at risk .

they point to greece's missed payments to the imf in june and july 2015 as evidence that imf loans to greece have been risky , even though they were later repaid .

proponents of the imf programs in the eurozone point out that the programs are consistent with the imf's mandate of maintaining international monetary stability ; the imf has lent to developed countries in the past , if not recently ; and that as a member of the imf , greece is entitled to draw on imf resources .

they also argue that the imf has several safeguards in place to protect imf resources , including making the disbursement of funds conditional upon economic reforms , and that the imf has a strong historical record of countries meeting their repayment obligations .

proponents argue that imf safeguards had to be changed in 2010 to allow the greece program to go forward in order to protect international monetary stability and limit possible contagion of the crisis in greece to the rest of europe and the broader economy .

they also argue that other large programs for eurozone countries , including portugal , ireland , and cyprus , have been successful .

concerns about imf resources being used to "bail out" greece and other eurozone governments has led to legislation .

in 2010 , a provision in the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( section 1501 of p.l .

111-203 ) requires u.s. representatives at the imf to oppose loans to high - and middle - income countries with large public debt levels ( greater than 100% of gdp ) if it is "not likely" that they will repay the imf .

prospective imf loans to low - income countries are exempted from this requirement .

if the imf does approve a loan to a high - or middle - income country despite u.s. opposition , the law requires the department of the treasury to report regularly to congress about various economic conditions in that country .

additionally , in december 2015 , congress conditioned u.s. participation in a broader reform package at the imf on repeal of the 2010 policy change that allowed the greek program to go forward despite concerns over the sustainability of its debt ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

in response to the legislation , the imf repealed the policy change , and the reform package became effective in january 2016 .

the legislation also touched on a number of other issues raised by the imf programs in greece and other eurozone countries , including new reporting requirements related to imf co - financing arrangements , seniority of imf financing , and exceptional access to imf financing , among other issues .

many u.s. policymakers and analysts maintain that the greece crisis has already and could increasingly constrain europe's effectiveness as a partner for the united states .

the eu is not only the largest u.s. trading and investment partner , but the institution and its member states are key u.s. allies on a range of global challenges , including russian aggression in ukraine , the iranian nuclear program , and instability and terrorism in the middle east and africa .

political tensions in europe and a focus on the greek and broader eurozone crisis arguably has and could continue to prevent the eu from focusing more intently on these and other key u.s. - european policy priorities .

a struggling greece , especially outside the eurozone , may also present significant security challenges for both europe and the united states .

as a long - standing member of nato , greece has been an important u.s. ally and source of stability in a broader balkan region that has been beset by conflict over the past 20 years .

the security implications for the united states of heightened instability in greece could be compounded by greece's geostrategic position near the middle east and north africa , as well as its long - standing tensions with turkey .

greece , for example , is a primary entry point to europe for a major influx of migrants from the middle east and africa , which has been a growing source of concern for the eu .

finally , observers highlight the potential for a greek government that feels spurned by its fellow eu member states to seek closer ties to russia .

during his time in office , tsipras has emphasized the importance of greece's close economic , political , and cultural ties to russia and has spoken out against eu sanctions on the country — though greece has agreed to support existing sanctions .

for his part , russian president vladimir putin has expressed a particular interest in boosting russian investments in greece's energy sector .

