t he patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) includes many provisions that apply to health plans offered in the private health insurance market .

the private market often is described as having three segments: the non - group , small - group , and large - group markets ; and many of the aca's provisions focus specifically on the non - group and small - group insurance markets .

these reforms are intended to address perceived failures in those markets , such as limited access to coverage and higher costs of coverage relative to the large - group market pl ans , and to provide some parity with the large - group market .

for example , benefit coverage in non - group and small - group market health plans generally was perceived to be limited in comparison to benefit coverage in large - group market health plans .

thus , to provide some similarity to plans in the large - group market , the aca requires non - group and small - group health plans to offer the essential health benefits ( ehb ) , which is a core package of health care services .

the ehb are one of the three components of the ehb package .

the ehb package requires plans to ( 1 ) cover certain benefits ( i.e. , the essential health benefits ) ; ( 2 ) comply with specific cost - sharing limitations ; and ( 3 ) meet a certain generosity level .

this report provides an overview of the first component of the ehb package — the essential health benefits .

the report examines how the ehb are defined , regulations related to the ehb , state variation in the ehb , applicability of the ehb to health plans , and how the ehb interact with other aca provisions .

since 2014 , all non - grandfathered plans in the non - group and small - group markets are required to offer a core package of health care services , known as the ehb .

the aca does not specifically define this core package .

instead , it lists 10 benefit categories from which benefits and services must be included ( see figure 1 ) and requires the secretary of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) to further define the ehb .

the hhs secretary has the purview to define and periodically update the ehb .

however , in defining the ehb , the hhs secretary must take a number of parameters into account .

for example , the scope of the ehb is to be equivalent to the scope of benefits typically provided under an employer - sponsored insurance plan .

to accomplish this task , the aca requires the secretary of the department of labor ( dol ) to conduct surveys of employer - sponsored insurance plans to determine typical benefits and provide a summary of the findings to the hhs secretary .

the ehb are to be balanced among the 10 categories , without a weighted preference toward any category .

the hhs secretary cannot make any coverage decisions , determine reimbursement rates , establish incentive programs , or design benefits in ways that discriminate against individuals because of their age , disability , or expected length of life .

furthermore , the hhs secretary must take into account the diverse health care needs of the population , which includes women , children , persons with disabilities , and other groups .

the hhs secretary is tasked with reviewing the ehb , and part of the ehb review process includes providing a report to congress and the public .

the report is supposed to assess whether enrollees are facing any difficulty accessing services , either due to coverage or cost , and to consider whether the ehb need to be modified or updated due to changes in medical evidence or scientific advancement .

if any modifications are to be made , the hhs secretary is to include in the report how the ehb would be modified .

consequently , the secretary periodically may update the ehb based on issues identified during the review process .

the aca imposes an annual cap on consumer cost sharing for the ehb .

the aca specifies that the limits work in two ways: they prohibit ( 1 ) applying deductibles to preventive health services and ( 2 ) annual out - of - pocket limits that exceed existing limits in the tax code .

the cost - sharing limits apply only to in - network benefits and must include all co - payments , coinsurance , and deductibles .

in 2016 , the cost - sharing limits are $6,850 for an individual plan and $13,700 for a family plan .

for 2017 , the cost - sharing limits are $7,150 for an individual plan and $14,300 for a family plan .

prior to the aca , plans generally were able to set lifetime and annual limits — dollar limits on how much the plan would spend for covered health benefits either during the entire period an individual was enrolled in the plan ( lifetime limits ) or during a plan year ( annual limits ) .

the aca prohibited both lifetime and annual limits on the ehb .

plans are permitted to place lifetime and annual limits on covered benefits that are not considered ehbs , to the extent that such limits are permitted by federal and state law .

the ehb differs from minimum essential coverage .

minimum essential coverage is a term defined in the aca and its implementing regulations that refers to the individual mandate , or the aca requirement that most individuals must have health insurance coverage for themselves and their dependents or potentially pay a penalty for noncompliance .

the definition of minimum essential coverage does not refer to minimum benefits but rather includes most private and public coverage ( eg , employer - sponsored coverage , individual coverage , medicare , and medicaid , among others ) .

