for decades , executive permission in the form of a presidential permit has been required for the construction , connection , operation , and maintenance of certain facilities that cross the united states' borders with canada and mexico .

the constitutional basis for the president's cross - border permitting authority was examined in a prior crs report .

however , questions remain about the manner in which this authority is exercised among the agencies to which it has been delegated .

in particular , some members of congress and affected stakeholders seek greater clarity about how presidential permit applications are reviewed for various kinds of cross - border energy projects , including the degree to which there may be differences or similarities among the various agency approaches to evaluating environmental impacts of proposed projects and in determining whether they serve the national or public interest .

with few exceptions , requests for presidential permits for cross - border pipelines or electric transmission lines have involved projects extending a relatively short distance into a u.s. border state before connecting to some existing facility ( eg , a refinery in texas or a power plant in arizona ) .

however , in the last decade , two long cross - border pipeline projects have been approved — transcanada's keystone and enbridge energy's alberta clipper .

in operation since 2010 , both projects transport oil sands crude from alberta , canada , deep into the united states via pipelines that are hundreds of miles long and cross multiple states .

the size and scope of these projects led to increased national attention on the presidential permit process for subsequent proposals .

in particular , there has been significant national attention on the department of state's process for considering transcanada's permit application for its proposed keystone xl pipeline .

the trump administration issued a presidential permit for that project on march 23 , 2017 .

in response to perceived delays in the review of the keystone xl permit application , several legislative proposals in the 114 th congress sought to change some specific or general aspects of the presidential permit process .

most notable was the keystone xl pipeline approval act ( s. 1 ) , which was passed in congress but vetoed by president obama .

other legislative proposals in the 114 th congress included the american energy renaissance act of 2015 ( s. 791 and h.r .

1487 ) and the north american energy infrastructure act ( s. 1228 ) .

given the issues that arose in the wake of transcanada's application for the keystone xl pipeline , congress may again propose legislation intended to expedite approval of future applications for presidential permits .

this report focusses on the presidential permit review processes for cross - border energy infrastructure as implemented by these agencies: the department of state for pipelines and similar facilities that transport liquids such as petroleum , petroleum products , and other hazardous liquids ; the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) for natural gas pipelines and associated facilities ; and the department of energy ( doe ) for electricity transmission lines and associated facilities .

this report compares practices among these three agencies with respect to how they define a proposed project's scope ( which dictates the array of associated impacts they will review ) , conduct environmental reviews , and make final decisions on permit applications .

it also includes a discussion of recent efforts by congress to change those permitting processes .

the state department , ferc , and doe each make their decisions regarding presidential permit applications largely within the context of their own interpretation of directives in a series of executive orders .

the state department makes its permitting decisions primarily in accordance with directives in executive order ( e.o. ) .

11423 , as amended by e.o .

13337 .

ferc and doe make permitting decisions in accordance with e.o .

10485 , as amended by e.o .

12038 .

broadly speaking , each executive order requires the respective agency to do the following: gather necessary project - specific information from the applicant ; seek input from specific outside federal agencies ; and decide whether to seek input from additional local , state , tribal , or federal agencies or from members of the public .

under the applicable executive order , each agency is required to issue a presidential permit if , after evaluating all relevant project information , the agency determines that the project would "serve the national interest" ( pursuant to e.o .

13337 ) or be "consistent with the public interest" ( pursuant to e.o .

10485 ) .

a permit must include any conditions that the permitting agency identifies as necessary to ensure that the project would , in fact , meet the public or national interest standard .

 ( for the sake of brevity , the phrase public or national interest , as it is used later in this report , refers to the standard that is applied or procedures that are implemented by the authorized agency under the applicable executive order to determine whether a proposal will be "consistent with the public interest" or "serve the national interest. .

it does not mean to suggest that such standards or procedures are the same for each agency. ) .

depending on the type of project - and site - specific impacts of the project , additional federal requirements may apply to the proposal .

for example , natural gas pipelines are subject to requirements established by or pursuant to the natural gas act .

each agency authorized to issue presidential permits informs its decisionmaking regarding such permits using information gathered in accordance with its procedures implementing the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) .

in part , nepa requires federal agencies to ensure that the environmental impacts of an action are identified and taken into consideration before making a final agency decision about the action .

permit conditions , such as mitigation measures and additional compliance requirements , are also generally identified during the nepa review .

for example , during the nepa review , an agency may identify construction procedures or mitigation measures that the applicant must implement to ensure compliance with other applicable federal law , such as the endangered species act or clean water act .

since each agency is required to identify conditions under which a proposal must be implemented , it is rare that an agency denies a permit application .

instead , the permitting process is generally used to determine how a project must be implemented to comply with federal law ( and meet the national or public interest standard ) rather than whether it can be implemented .

in 2015 , the state department under the obama administration did deny transcanada's application for a presidential permit , finding that the pipeline would not meet the national interest .

however , such a decision was a rare exception , not the rule .

each agency's permitting process involves the identification and analysis of project - specific impacts of a proposal .

that information is gathered in accordance with executive order directives , the agency's nepa implementation process , and any other applicable federal requirements .

once a presidential permit is issued , the applicant ( then permittee ) must site , construct , operate , and maintain the border - crossing facilities in accordance with conditions specified in the permit .

as a result , subsequent modifications to the facility related to its siting , construction , operation , or maintenance may require additional authorization from the permitting agency .

in recent years , largely within the context of the obama administration's consideration of the presidential permit application for the keystone xl pipeline project , congress has acted on numerous occasions to influence the state department permitting process or to assert direct congressional authority over permit approval through new legislation .

now that a presidential permit has been issued for the keystone xl pipeline , congress may continue to consider legislation addressing agency decisions regarding future presidential permit applications .

such options could include some that , arguably , would have been vetoed in the past — specifically , legislation that may alter or narrow authorities delegated to federal agencies by the president .

for example , congress could choose to consider legislation that would explicitly define the scope of federal agency reviews for some projects , change the agency responsible for authorizing such projects , or explicitly define the criteria that can or must be evaluated to determine whether a proposal is in the national or public interest .

