amid more than a half a century of antagonistic political relations between the united states and cuba during which commercial ties were largely severed , u.s. exports of agricultural products to the island nation currently stand out as one of the few points of engagement between the two countries , if to a limited degree .

u.s. exports of medicine and medical products is the other product category for which the u.s. government has eased its long - standing embargo on trade with cuba .

in a major diplomatic initiative , president obama announced in december 2014 a significant shift in relations with cuba with the goal of transitioning from a decades - long policy of sanctions that were designed to isolate cuba toward a more normal bilateral relationship .

to advance the goal of normalizing relations with cuba , the president announced a series of actions designed to move the two nations closer to this objective .

these included reestablishing diplomatic relations ; reviewing the state department's designation of cuba as a state sponsor of international terrorism ; and providing limited openings for increasing travel , and for expanding commerce and the flow of information .

in may 2015 , the state department removed cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism , and on july 20 , 2015 , the united states and cuba reestablished diplomatic relations and reopened embassies in their respective capitals .

in march 2016 , president obama visited cuba , marking the first visit by a u.s. president in almost 90 years .

while these actions are tangible steps in the direction of a more normal relationship with cuba and will ease the embargo in some areas , the majority of economic restrictions first imposed on cuba in 1962 remain in place .

this report reviews the current state of agricultural trade between the united states and cuba , identifies key impediments to expanding bilateral trade in agricultural products , identifies key provisions in the law to which these obstacles are anchored , and considers the potential consequences for trade in agricultural goods in the event that the current thaw in diplomatic relations was to be extended more broadly so that bilateral trade was returned to a more normal footing .

it also summarizes several of the bills introduced in the 114 th congress that propose to remove specific restrictions that impede trade in agricultural goods or that seek to lift the embargo on cuba entirely .

relations between the united states and cuba deteriorated sharply , and then decisively , in the early 1960s following a series of dramatic events that recast the u.s. - cuba relationship along antagonistic lines .

chief among these events were fidel castro's action in the early 1960s to build a repressive communist regime and move cuba toward close relations with the soviet union ; the expropriation of u.s. economic assets on the island nation located a mere 90 miles from florida ; u.s. covert operations to overthrow the castro regime in the failed bay of pigs invasion of cuba in 1961 ; and the subsequent confrontation between the united states and the soviet union over the kremlin's attempt to install offensive nuclear missiles in cuba in 1962 .

when president obama announced his initiative to alter the course of u.s. - cuba relations late last year , he indicated that he does not have the authority to end the embargo because it is codified in legislation .

under the libertad act , the president would be required to end the trade embargo if he determines that cuba has elected a government under free and fair elections and has met other criteria , among which are showing respect for basic civil liberties and human rights of cuban citizens and cuba moving to establish a free market economic system .

otherwise , congressional action would be required to end it , either by amending or repealing the libertad act and other embargo - related statutes .

the text box below identifies existing statutes that contain restrictions that are of particular importance for trade in food and agricultural products with cuba .

recognizing that u.s. farmers and exporters are competing for food and agricultural markets in cuba under terms that place them at a distinct disadvantage compared with foreign competitors that are not subject to restrictions under the u.s. embargo , some members of congress have proposed legislation that would ease various elements of the u.s. economic embargo on cuba , or repeal it entirely .

a brief review of several of the legislative initiatives that address agricultural aspects of the trade embargo against cuba follows .

three bills would lift the overall embargo: h.r .

274 ( rush ) , h.r .

403 ( rangel ) , and h.r .

735 ( serrano ) .

h.r .

635 ( rangel ) , among its various provisions , has the goal of facilitating the export of u.s. agricultural and medical exports to cuba by permanently redefining the term "payment of cash in advance" to mean that payment is received before the transfer of title and release and control of the commodity to the purchaser ; authorizing direct transfers between cuban and u.s. financial institutions for products exported under the terms of tsra ; establishing an export promotion program for u.s. agricultural exports to cuba ; and prohibiting restrictions on travel to cuba .

s. 491 ( klobuchar ) would remove various provisions of law restricting trade and other relations with cuba , including certain restrictions in the cda , the libertad act , and tsra that currently prohibit financing of agricultural sales to cuba , u.s. export assistance for sales to cuba including credit and guarantees , and the entry of cuban goods into the united states .

s. 1049 ( heitkamp ) would amend tsra to allow for the private financing of agricultural commodity sales to cuba .

s. 1543 ( moran ) / h.r .

3238 ( emmer ) would repeal or amend various provisions of law restricting trade and other relations with cuba , including certain restrictions in the cda , the libertad act , and tsra .

it would repeal restrictions on private financing for cuba in tsra but continue to prohibit u.s. government foreign assistance or financial assistance , loans , loan guarantee , extension of credit , or other financing for export to cuba , albeit with presidential waiver authority for national security or humanitarian reasons .

under the initiative , the federal government would be prohibited from expending any funds to promote trade with cuba or develop markets in cuba , although certain federal commodity research and promotion programs that are funded through mandatory assessments would be allowed .

h.r .

3687 ( crawford ) would amend tsra to remove the prohibition on u.s. entities from making loans or extending credit to cuba to facilitate sales of agricultural commodities .

the bill would also permit u.s. government assistance in support of u.s. agricultural exports to cuba — including the market access program , the export credit guarantee program and the foreign market development cooperator program and federal commodity promotion programs — provided the recipient of the assistance is not controlled by the cuban government .

it would also authorize investment for development of an agricultural business in cuba so long as it is not controlled by the cuban government or does not traffic in property of u.s. nationals confiscated by the cuban government .

