several western states , including california , oregon , nevada , washington , and portions of montana and idaho , are experiencing extreme — and in some cases exceptional — drought conditions .

to date , federal legislative proposals to address drought have focused on the persistence and intensity of the drought in the western states and the federal role in managing water supplies , supporting drought - related projects and programs , and conserving fish species and their habitat .

a number of bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress that would address drought .

these bills include s. 176 , s. 1837 , s. 1894 , h.r .

2898 , h.r .

2983 , and h.r .

3045 , among others .

two of these bills in particular , h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 , have received congressional and broad public attention and are the focus of t his report .

on july 17 , 2015 , h.r .

2898 , the western water and american food security act , was passed by the house .

the house bill has 11 titles , which address a wide range of issues .

on july 29 , 2015 , s. 1894 , the california emergency drought relief act of 2015 , was introduced in the senate .

the senate bill includes four titles , many of which address elements that were not included in h.r .

2898 .

as california experiences its fourth year of drought and the southwest endures more than a decade of drought conditions , western water management will likely remain an issue before congress .

elements from one or both of these bills ( as well as from other bills ) will likely receive continued attention from congress .

this report summarizes the provisions of s. 1894 , as introduced , and h.r .

2898 , as passed by the house .

it identifies comparable provisions between the two bills and discusses some of the ways in which those provisions overlap or differ .

it also summarizes selected other major provisions in each bill .

overall , both bills contain provisions that focus on infrastructure and water conveyance in california .

some of these provisions would be triggered by drought conditions or declarations , and others would result in permanent changes in water management .

some provisions in the bills are associated with specified states ( typically the 17 western states , hawaii , and alaska ) , whereas other provisions may have national application .

many provisions of h.r .

2898 have no specified authorization of appropriations ; s. 1894 , by contrast , contains provisions that authorize either funding subject to appropriations or mandatory funding for certain activities .

many provisions in both bills are specific to the projects and programs of the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) , but others are associated with other federal agencies ( eg , u.s. army corps of engineers [corps] , u.s. environmental protection agency [epa] ) .

some provisions would amend existing programs and activities , whereas others would authorize new programs and activities .

several drought - related issues are addressed in both h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 .

for example , both bills contain multiple sections that focus on infrastructure and water conveyance in california , often specifically pertaining to management of the federal central valley project ( cvp ) .

some of the california - specific common issue areas include management of fish populations and water flows ; the calfed invasive species program ; operational flexibility and drought relief ; operation of the delta cross channel gates ; emergency environmental reviews ; water transfers ; water rights protections ; and completion of calfed storage studies .

other sections discuss common goals to address drought on a broader scale , the most notable of which are construction of new surface water storage projects and amendments to bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) authority under the secure water act ( title iv of p.l .

111-11 ) .

h.r .

2898 includes a number of sections that are not included in s. 1894 .

while addressing many issues , its provisions may be grouped into two categories , those affecting california or the cvp and those addressing other reclamation provisions and funding or financing of water projects .

each of these categories is discussed below .

s. 1894 contains several titles and individual provisions that are not in h.r .

2898 .

among these are modification of and / or explicit authority for existing programs and authorities and creation of new programs that were not previously authorized .

selected examples of these changes are highlighted below .

among the key issues for congress is how to address water supply shortages in general and management of federal water supply projects in particular during times of drought and increasing demand .

myriad laws , regulations , contracts , and other obligations affect federal water project management .

balancing these obligations while meeting growing demands for water for multiple purposes poses challenges for western water managers at all levels: federal , state , tribal , and local .

h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 propose to address some of these challenges by providing guidance for reclamation's management of the cvp , which would result in changes to cvp operations under certain circumstances .

both bills call for maximizing water supplies to users , with certain limitations .

h.r .

2898 also contains specific guidance on the implementation of biops .

these conditions under both bills raise questions of how much discretion federal agencies would have in implementing the cvp's operations and how the management provisions in each bill would be implemented .

some may also question whether aspects of one or both bills contain conflicting operational directives within the bill or among other regulations .

for example , how would cvp directives in either bill be implemented in relation to state water quality regulations ? .

both bills call for measuring the effects of water operations on listed species under esa .

s. 1894 states that operations are to be consistent with applicable laws and regulations ( including esa ) ; h.r .

2898 conditions several actions on the "negative effect on the long term survival of the species. .

some might question if h.r .

2898 would set a new standard for measuring effects on species under esa or if maximizing water supplies in the short term could have long - term effects on the viability of species populations .

each bill contains certain provisions that would direct greater data collection and monitoring .

h.r .

2898 includes provisions that would specify how certain aspects of the delta smelt and salmon biops would be implemented .

these provisions may raise questions about how better data collection and more accurate accounting of species populations could result in higher pumping rates and water exports .

further , these proposed changes might raise the question of whether the effects of operational changes could be better detected and acted upon in a manner that will protect the species .

in a broader sense , some might also question how each bill would address esa implementation and whether the legislation might set precedents for other biops addressing federal activities involving listed species .

limited commonalities exist in other areas of the bills .

both bills would attempt to encourage new water storage in the form of expedited completion of calfed and storage studies , as well as by facilitating the potential authorization of new or augmented surface water storage projects .

both bills would also attempt to facilitate nonfederal completion of water storage projects , to various extents .

however , although h.r .

2898 would focus on streamlining or reforming current reclamation processes to facilitate water storage activities ( eg , alterations to bureau and other agency processes for reporting on new projects , including environmental studies and recommendations to congress ) , s. 1894 would expand the scope of reclamation's authorized activities .

for instance , under the senate bill , reclamation would gain new authorities for desalination , water reuse and recycling projects , groundwater recharge , and stormwater capture , as well as authority for a credit financing mechanism ( i.e. , rifia ) that differs from traditional reclamation project financing .

some of the questions related to both bills may include what quantity of water supplies would be generated by new authorities and programs and at what federal and nonfederal cost .

in addition , some may ask how new authorities and processes that would be established in the bills would be prioritized relative to ongoing agency activities and how ( or whether ) spending provisions might be offset .

