in every war fought by the united states , civilian ships have supported military operations by transporting supplies and personnel .

the civilians that have served on these vessels historically have worked in varying capacities either for private shipping companies under contract with the federal government or for the government itself .

these civilians are collectively referred to as merchant mariners .

in world war ii , an estimated 8,500 merchant mariners were killed and 11,000 were wounded .

during operation enduring freedom ( oef ) and operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) , it is estimated that 63% of the military cargo shipped to the middle east and afghanistan was delivered by u.s. - flagged commercial vessels crewed by merchant mariners and an additional 35% of military cargo was transported by government - owned vessels crewed by civilian federal employees and federal contractors .

although merchant mariners have always played an important role in support of u.s. war efforts , they generally have not been considered veterans for the purposes of federal benefits .

currently , only limited groups of world war ii - era merchant mariners are eligible for benefits from the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

after world war ii , merchant mariners sought through legislation to gain recognition as veterans .

legislation was introduced either to provide benefits to merchant mariners comparable to those provided under the servicemen's readjustment act of 1944 ( p.l .

78-346 ) , commonly known as the gi bill , or to expand the employee benefits merchant mariners were receiving at that time .

during hearings in late 1945 , the house committee on merchant marine and fisheries heard testimony on four bills that would have provided some benefits to merchant seamen .

one of these bills , h.r .

2346 , would have provided benefits to merchant mariners comparable to those of other world war ii veterans .

testimony in favor of h.r .

2346 was heard from a number of former merchant seamen and the merchant marine veterans association .

testimony in opposition to h.r .

2346 came from various agencies , including the war department , the veterans administration , and the american legion .

opponents to granting veteran status to merchant mariners generally focused on the freedom of a merchant mariner to make decisions about whether or not to take a particular voyage or leave service .

they also focused on the higher earnings of merchant mariners relative to uniformed navy personnel .

h.r .

476 , introduced in 1947 , would have expanded the existing benefits for merchant seamen related to health care and disability and introduced an education benefit .

ultimately , no legislation was enacted in the immediate aftermath of world war ii to grant veteran status to merchant mariners or to provide additional benefits to merchant mariners related to health care , disability , or education .

section 402 of the veterans programs enhancement act of 1988 ( p.l .

105-368 ) extended veterans' burial benefits and the right to interment in national cemeteries to merchant mariners who served on vessels engaged in oceangoing service from august 16 , 1945 , to december 31 , 1946 .

in 1999 , the secretary of the air force determined that the service of oceangoing merchant marines during the period from august 15 , 1945 , to december 31 , 1946 ( those covered by p.l .

105-368 ) is not considered active duty under the provisions of p.l .

95-202 for the purposes of other benefits administered by the va .

under current law and regulations , only the following groups of merchant mariners are considered to have served on active duty or are otherwise eligible for veterans' benefits .

no other merchant mariners are eligible for any veterans' benefits administered by the va .

although some world war ii - era merchant mariners were granted eligibility for veterans' benefits in 1985 and 1988 , the passage of time between their service and the granting of this eligibility may have made it impossible for them to fully access these benefits .

for example , when these former merchant mariners were of typical college age after the war , they were not eligible for benefits under the gi bill .

in addition , those with service - connected disabilities or medical conditions may have lost out on nearly 40 years of va disability compensation or medical benefits .

h.r .

154 , the honoring our wwii merchant mariners act of 2017 , would provide compensation to former world war ii - era merchant mariners to account for the benefits they were not able to access before being granted veterans' benefit eligibility in the 1980s .

similar legislation has been introduced in each congress since the 108 th congress .

specifically , this legislation would provide a one - time payment of $25,000 to any merchant mariner who served between december 7 , 1941 , and december 31 , 1946 , and who otherwise meets the definition of service provided for burial benefits and interment eligibility in p.l .

105-368 .

eligible persons would have one year from the date of enactment of the legislation to apply for benefits .

a total of $125 million would be authorized to be appropriated in fy2017 for these benefits , to be available until expended .

although the benefits created by this legislation would partially compensate former merchant mariners for lost benefits , h.r .

154 would place the former merchant mariners in a unique position compared to other civilians who served in world war ii and other veterans .

active duty status for the purposes of eligibility for veterans' benefits has been extended under the provisions of p.l .

95-202 to 33 groups of civilians who served during world wars i and ii , all of whom can claim to have missed the opportunity to claim certain benefits during the period between their service and the granting of active duty status .

however , if h.r .

154 were to be enacted , only the two merchant mariner groups would be eligible for any form of compensation to account for these lost benefits .

in addition , merchant mariners would join medal of honor winners as the only groups eligible for cash compensation from the va without having to demonstrate a financial hardship ( for va pension benefits ) or a service - connected disability ( for va disability compensation ) .

