d uring the new york debates ratifying the u.s. constitution , alexander hamilton commented that "the true principle of a republic is , that the people should choose whom they please to govern them. .

this principle is embodied in congressional redistricting , the drawing of district boundaries from which the people choose their representatives to the u.s. house of representatives .

prior to the 1960s , court challenges to redistricting plans were considered non - justiciable political questions that were most appropriately addressed by the political branches of government , not the judiciary .

in 1962 , in the landmark ruling of baker v. carr , the supreme court pivoted and held that a constitutional challenge to a redistricting plan was not a political question and was justiciable .

since then , a series of constitutional and legal challenges have significantly shaped how congressional districts are drawn .

furthermore , recent and pending supreme court cases will likely continue to impact the process of congressional redistricting , and the degree to which challenges to redistricting plans will be successful .

for example , the supreme court recently clarified how a court should evaluate whether race was a predominant factor in the development of a redistricting plan when considering a fourteenth amendment equal protection claim .

it also recently upheld , under the elections clause , an arizona constitutional provision , enacted by initiative , which established an independent commission for drawing congressional districts .

during the 2015 supreme court term , the court is continuing to focus on redistricting .

in april 2016 , the court ruled that states may draw their legislative districts based on total population rather than based on eligible or registered voters .

in addition , as of the date of this report , two redistricting cases are currently pending before the court: one case presents the question of whether partisanship can justify differences in population in the context of state legislative redistricting ; another case presents the question of whether , in proving that race was a predominant factor in the creation of a redistricting plan , challengers must demonstrate that considerations of race predominated over politics .

this report first examines key constitutional and federal statutory requirements applicable to congressional redistricting , including the standard for equality of population among districts , and the voting rights act ( vra ) .

it then analyzes case law interpreting the constitutional requirement of congressional district equality — the "one person , one vote" standard — including the degree to which districts must be drawn to achieve exact population equality .

it also explores the unsettled question of whether partisanship can justify differences in population , which the supreme court is considering in the pending case of harris v. arizona independent redistricting commission .

then , it discusses the question of who should be counted for the purposes of achieving equality among districts , focusing on the court's recent ruling in evenwel v. abbott .

next , it examines the application of section 2 of the vra to congressional redistricting , and relatedly , limits to vra compliance under the fourteenth amendment .

this section includes discussion of a pending supreme court case , wittman v. personhuballah , regarding what challengers must demonstrate in proving that race was a predominant factor in the creation of a redistricting plan .

case law in this area demonstrates a tension between compliance with the vra and conformance with standards of equal protection .

the report then addresses the court's 2015 ruling in arizona state legislature v. arizona independent redistricting commission , upholding an arizona constitutional provision — enacted through initiative — that established an independent commission for drawing congressional districts .

finally , the report provides an overview of selected legislation in the 114 th congress that would establish additional statutory requirements and standards for congressional redistricting .

the legal framework for congressional redistricting involves , in addition to various state processes , both constitutional and federal statutory requirements , and case law interpretations of each .

the elections clause of the constitution , article i , section 4 , clause 1 , provides that the times , places , and manner of holding congressional elections be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof , but that congress may at any time make or alter such laws .

article i , section 2 , clause 3 requires a count of the u.s. population every 10 years , and based on the census , requires apportionment of seats in the house of representatives among the states , with each state entitled to at least one representative .

a federal statute requires that apportionment occur every 10 years .

in order to comport with the constitutional standard of equality of population among districts , discussed below , at least once every 10 years , in response to changes in the number of representatives apportioned to it or to shifts in its population , most states are required to draw new boundaries for its congressional districts .

the supreme court has interpreted the constitution to require that each congressional district within a state contain approximately the same population .

this requirement is known as the "equality standard" or the principle of "one person , one vote. .

in 1964 , in wesberry v. sanders , the supreme court interpreted article i , section 2 , clause 1 of the constitution , which states that representatives be chosen "by the people of the several states" and "apportioned among the several states ... according to their respective numbers," to require that "as nearly as is practicable , one man's vote in a congressional election is to be worth as much as another's. .

with regard to state legislative redistricting , later that year , the court issued its ruling in reynolds v. sims .

in reynolds , the supreme court held that the one person , one vote standard also applied in the context of state legislative redistricting , holding that the equal protection clause requires all who participate in an election "to have an equal vote. .

congressional districts must be drawn consistent with the voting rights act ( vra ) .

the vra was enacted under congress's authority to enforce the fifteenth amendment , providing that the right of citizens to vote shall not be denied or abridged on account of race , color , or previous servitude .

in a series of cases and evolving jurisprudence , the u.s. supreme court has interpreted how the vra applies in the context of congressional redistricting .

congressional district boundaries in every state are required to comply with section 2 of the vra .

section 2 provides a right of action for private citizens or the government to challenge discriminatory voting practices or procedures , including minority vote dilution , the diminishing or weakening of minority voting power .

specifically , section 2 prohibits any voting qualification or practice — including congressional redistricting plans — applied or imposed by any state or political subdivision that results in the denial or abridgement of the right to vote based on race , color , or membership in a language minority .

the statute further provides that a violation is established if , based on the totality of circumstances , electoral processes are not equally open to participation by members of a racial or language minority group in that its members have less opportunity than other members of the electorate to elect representatives of their choice .

based on this legal framework , this report next analyzes legal issues that arise in the context of congressional redistricting , addressing: the extent to which precise or ideal mathematical population equality among districts is required ; whether partisanship justifies small differences in population between districts ; whether the total population or eligible voters should be counted for the purposes of achieving equality among districts ; when creation of a majority - minority district is required under the vra ; what limits the fourteenth amendment places upon congressional redistricting ; and who is authorized to draw and implement a redistricting plan .

h.r .

75 , the coretta scott king mid - decade redistricting prohibition act of 2015 , would prohibit the states from carrying out more than one congressional redistricting following a decennial census and apportionment , unless a state is ordered by a court to do so in order to comply with the constitution or to enforce the vra .

h.r .

1347 , the john tanner fairness and independence in redistricting act , would prohibit the states from conducting more than one congressional redistricting following a decennial census and apportionment , unless a state is ordered by a court to do so in order to comply with the constitution or to enforce the vra , and would require the states to conduct redistricting through independent commissions .

h.r .

934 , the redistricting and voter protection act of 2015 , would require any state that , after enacting a congressional redistricting plan following a decennial census and apportionment , enacts a subsequent congressional redistricting plan prior to the next decennial census and apportionment , to obtain a declaratory judgment or preclearance as provided under section 5 of the vra in order for the subsequent plan to take effect .

h.r .

1346 , the redistricting transparency act of 2015 , would require the states to conduct the process of congressional redistricting in such a manner that the public is informed about proposed redistricting plans through a public internet site , and has the opportunity to participate in developing congressional redistricting plans before they are adopted .

h.r .

2173 , the redistricting reform act of 2015 , would prohibit the states from conducting more than one congressional redistricting following a decennial census and apportionment , unless a state is ordered by a court to do so in order to comply with the constitution or to enforce the vra , and would require the states to conduct redistricting through independent commissions .

the legal framework for congressional redistricting resides at the intersection of the constitution's limits and powers , requirements prescribed under federal law , and the various processes imposed by the states .

since the 1960s , after determining that constitutional challenges to redistricting plans are justiciable , the supreme court has issued a series of rulings balancing these competing commands .

the court's case law has significantly shaped how congressional districts are drawn .

for example , a recent redistricting decision held that the constitution permits states to create , by ballot initiatives and referenda , nonpartisan independent redistricting commissions for congressional redistricting .

if more states adopt similar laws , it could change the process of congressional redistricting nationwide .

another recent court decision construed the inoperable preclearance requirements in section 5 of the voting rights act to require a covered jurisdiction to maintain minority voters' ability to elect candidates of choice in a new redistricting plan , not to require that a particular numerical percentage of minority voters in a minority - majority district be maintained .

looking ahead , pending supreme court cases could likewise impact the process of congressional redistricting , and the degree to which challenges to redistricting plans will be successful .

