on july 16 , 2015 , the office of surface mining reclamation and enforcement ( osm ) of the department of the interior proposed a stream protection rule .

it would revise regulations that implement title v of the surface mining control and reclamation act ( smcra ) , the law that governs the permitting of coal mining operations .

portions of the existing rules were promulgated more than 30 years ago .

osm asserts that updated rules , which have been under development for more than five years , are needed to reflect current science , technology , and modern mining practices .

the proposed revisions were based on several needs for federal regulatory action identified by osm .

a need for regulatory changes to improve implementation of smcra provisions related to stream protection .

a need for adequate data to evaluate the impacts of coal mining operations and ensure implementation of smcra's requirements .

a need for adequate objective standards to effectively evaluate compliance and limit or prevent adverse impacts , as appropriate .

a need to apply current information , technology , and methods to incorporate advances in scientific knowledge that have occurred since the smcra regulations were adopted .

to stakeholders , the proposed rule raised a number of issues , including whether new federal rules are needed and , in particular , whether osm's proposed approach will improve and strengthen implementation of the law .

the rule has been controversial since osm began developing it in 2009 .

critics in the coal mining industry and some members of congress have argued that revisions of existing rules are not needed and will impose costs that will greatly affect the viability of the coal mining industry in the united states .

the new rules are part of a "war on coal" by the obama administration , some say .

at the same time , some environmental advocacy groups that have generally supported osm's efforts to strengthen regulation of coal mining operations now contended that the proposed rule was not strong enough .

thus , a related issue is whether an alternative regulatory approach with greater benefits but also increased costs would better achieve smcra's purposes .

this report is intended to assist consideration of issues raised by the stream protection rule .

the report briefly describes smcra and the context for the 2015 proposed rule .

it discusses major elements of the 2015 proposal and osm's estimates of its impacts ( costs and benefits ) .

the report describes reactions to the proposed rule by stakeholders and legislation and oversight in congress .

finally , it highlights key elements of the final rule , which was released by osm on december 19 , 2016 .

congress enacted smcra in 1977 ( p.l .

95-87 ) .

the statute established osm within the department of the interior and charged the secretary of the interior with the responsibility to carry out the requirements in the act both directly and by promulgating regulations .

section 102 of the statute specifies a number of purposes , beginning with to "establish a nationwide program to protect society and the environment from the adverse effects of surface coal mining operations. .

another stated purpose acknowledges that the statute reflects a need to "strike a balance between protection of the environment and agricultural productivity and the nation's need for coal as an essential source of energy. .

regarding the statute as a whole , it has been observed that "[e]xcept for the laws governing the handling and disposal of hazardous waste , the complexity of the smcra program is unsurpassed in environmental law. .

congress identified stream protection as a fundamental purpose of smcra , as reflected in one of the congressional findings in the statute .

[m]any surface mining operations result in disturbances of surface areas that burden and adversely affect commerce and the public welfare by destroying or diminishing the utility of land for commercial , industrial , residential , recreational , agricultural , and forestry purposes , by causing erosion and landslides , by contributing to floods , by polluting the water , by destroying fish and wildlife habitats , by impairing natural beauty , by damaging the property of citizens , by creating hazards dangerous to life and property , by degrading the quality of life in local communities , and by counteracting governmental programs and efforts to conserve soil , water , and other natural resources ; section 515 of the act details minimum performance standards for environmental protection and public health and safety , which apply to surface coal mining and reclamation operations , surface effects of underground coal mining operations , and surface coal mining in special areas or in special circumstances ( such as mountaintop removal mining and steep slope mining ) .

it generally requires that land be restored after mining to its approximate original contour ( aoc ) , that it be revegetated , that acid mine drainage be prevented , that subsided lands be restored , that erosion be controlled , and that certain other measures be taken to reclaim affected lands and waters .

section 506 of smcra requires a mining operator to obtain a permit from the regulatory authority prior to the commencement of mining operations .

the scope of the permit encompasses the life - cycle of the mining operations from the siting of the mining area through the extraction of coal and related activities , the management and disposal of mining wastes , and the reclamation of affected lands and waters once extraction is complete .

commencing mining operations without an approved permit issued by the regulatory authority is unlawful under smcra , and is subject to enforcement actions .

in applying for a permit , the applicant must submit its proposal for mining operations to the regulatory authority and specify the measures that would be taken to ensure compliance with the requirements and criteria of smcra and the implementing regulations .

prior to the issuance of the permit by the regulatory authority , section 509 of smcra also requires the applicant to obtain a performance bond to demonstrate its financial capability to fulfill permit obligations through reclamation after mining ceases .

section 503 of smcra provides that any state may obtain primary jurisdiction over regulating surface coal mining and reclamation operations on non - federal and non - indian lands through submission of a program for approval by osm .

once a state's program is approved , the state has the primary responsibility for achieving the purposes of the act .

a primacy state is the sole issuer of permits , and osm maintains a limited role in a state with an approved program .

it evaluates each state's performance in carrying out its approved program , and it provides backup enforcement against violating operators in the event of default by the state .

states are required to submit amendments to their programs ( eg , changes to state statutes or regulations ) to osm for determining consistency with the federal program .

according to osm , coal mining is currently occurring in 26 states .

to date , all but two of those states ( tennessee and washington ) have achieved program primacy ; osm directly regulates surface coal mining and reclamation activities in those two states .

at present , no tribes have primacy .

the permit is the heart of the smcra program , enabling regulatory authorities to determine whether mining may occur and to establish the terms for mining .

the permit requirement is designed to protect the public health , safety , and the environment by conditioning permit issuance on the applicant's demonstration that mining and reclamation can be successfully accomplished .

the permit requires the mine operator to plan the operation in detail to identify and avoid adverse environmental impacts and to facilitate site reclamation after mining is complete .

some have noted that it also gives the regulatory authority significant enforcement powers over the mining operation , including a basis for evaluating the feasibility of reclamation and risk , if any , to water supplies , land surfaces , public facilities , and other resources .

permits generally are issued for five - year terms .

a valid permit carries the right of successive renewal , unless the regulatory authority finds that present mining and reclamation operations are not in compliance with smcra and its regulations , or for other reasons , such as the operator has not provided adequate performance bonding .

the 2015 proposed rule was long — 262 pages in the federal register , consisting of 150 pages of explanatory preamble and 112 pages of regulatory text — and complex .

this section of this report describes major features of the proposal , compared with existing regulations in 30 c.f.r .

chapter vii , drawing in part from descriptions in the draft eis .

in addition to proposing new stream protection regulatory requirements , the rule would revise and reorganize much of the existing smcra implementing rules in the code of federal regulations for clarity purposes , such as making "plain english" revisions to the text .

in the draft eis , osm described its position on the need for regulatory improvements: "despite the enactment of smcra and the promulgation of federal regulations implementing the statute , surface coal mining operations continued to have negative effects on streams , fish , and wildlife. .

documented problems cited in literature surveys and studies , as well as direct observations of impacts of coal mining operations , prompted osm to consider a different approach to implementing the provisions of the statute .

osm concluded that evidence indicated that existing regulations were inadequate to meet smcra's mandate to "establish a nationwide program to protect society and the environment from the adverse effects of surface coal mining operations. .

to develop the proposed rule , osm considered nine regulatory alternatives , including retaining existing rules intact ( the no action alternative ) , reinstating the now - vacated 2008 rules , and seven other options with various combinations of regulatory changes intended to be more environmentally protective than existing rules .

the preferred alternative ( i.e. , the proposed rule ) retained the basic elements of the 1983 stream buffer zone rule and many other portions of the existing rules .

the preferred alternative was not the most environmentally stringent of all of the options evaluated by osm .

however , it included elements from several of the other alternatives considered by osm that would be more stringent than existing rules , such as new requirements for baseline data collection to determine the impacts of proposed mining operations , more specificity on reclamation plans , and more specificity on measures to protect fish and wildlife from adverse impacts of mining .

the draft ria report presented osm's estimates of costs and benefits of the proposed rule , and it also described uncertainties associated with the analyses .

soon after release of the proposed rule , the president of the national mining association ( nma ) issued a statement criticizing the rule , saying "this is a rule in search of a problem. .

he called on congress to block the rule .

according to nma , osm has produced no evidence to justify more regulations , and the rule will needlessly interfere with state agencies' mining and water quality laws .

a statement by the west virginia coal association was similarly critical .

"osm's estimate that 'only' 200 mining jobs would be lost due to the implementation of this plan has about as much validity [as] a carnival sideshow palm reading. .

in october 2015 , nma released a report that estimated that the proposed rule would eliminate from 40,000-78,000 coal mining jobs .

job losses in coal - related industries could total 281,000 , the report said .

in response , osm officials said that they disagreed with some of the mining association study's base assumptions regarding , for example , industry's ability to continue longwall mining , and that those assumptions would mean greatly increased costs .

press reports indicate that state regulators have concerns about the proposed rule , in terms of changes in practices , policies , and state rules that new federal rules would require .

some contend that the proposal would usurp state primacy under smcra .

states also say that osm has underestimated administrative costs to regulators that could result from the rule .

some states and mining industry groups have focused particular criticism on osm for , in their view , failing to adequately consult with affected states during development of the proposed rule .

states cooperated , or worked with , osm in the initial stages of developing the proposed rule , but most dropped out of that process after 2010 , reportedly out of concern with the substance of the rule and lack of access to relevant documents .

the states' concerns led congress in december 2015 to direct osm to provide states with documents , data , drafts , and other material and to re - engage with states prior to finalizing the rule .

osm officials and states disagree about whether the agency has been fully responsive to this congressional directive .

environmental advocacy groups have supported osm's efforts to develop a more environmentally protective rule , but many are now critical of the proposed rule .

some say that it is long - overdue , but that it does not do enough to protect streams .

press reports indicate that some contend that a rule to prohibit mining activities entirely within the buffer zone would be preferable , in their view .

some advocates fault osm for not proposing the most environmentally stringent regulatory alternative among those that the agency considered .

regulatory alternative 2 , which osm did not select , would have prohibited all mining activities in or within 100 feet of perennial streams and would have prohibited the placement of excess spoil in both perennial and intermittent streams .

it would have allowed no exceptions from the requirement to restore mined lands to their approximate original contour .

these changes would require an amendment to smcra , because the law currently allows exceptions to the aoc requirement for mountaintop removal mining and steep slope mining operations .

according to osm , this alternative would have greater benefits than the proposed rule ( eg , 8 stream miles not filled annually , compared with 4 stream miles under the proposal , and 57 stream miles restored annually , compared with 29 stream miles under the proposal ) , but also nearly twice the compliance costs and twice the reduction in coal production .

environmental groups have expressed concern that , no matter how protective a rule is adopted , enforcement should be strengthened .

congressional interest in osm's efforts to develop new smcra implementing rules has been strong for some time .

senate and house authorizing and appropriations committees have held hearings to examine the proposed rule , raising many issues of concern to policymakers , including transparency of the rule development process , sufficiency of coordination between osm and state regulators , and potential economic impacts and job loss resulting from the rules .

legislation was introduced in the 114 th congress to halt or re - direct osm's activities concerning the stream protection rule .

one such bill , the supporting transparent regulatory and environmental actions in mining act ( stream act , h.r .

1644 ) , was passed by the house january 12 , 2016 .

the bill would have amended smcra to authorize osm , in cooperation with the interstate mining compact commission and its member states , to enter into an agreement with the national academy of sciences ( nas ) to conduct a study on the regulatory effectiveness of the 1983 stream buffer zone rule in order to determine the need for an update of the rule .

it also would have required the secretary of the interior to make scientific data and information used by osm to develop any rule , policy , or guidance publicly available .

a similar senate bill , s. 1458 , also titled the stream act , would have amended smcra to require the secretary to make scientific data and information used to develop any rule publicly available , but it did not include a provision for a study by the nas .

a bill reported by the house appropriations committee in 2015 , making fy2016 appropriations for the department of interior , environment and related agencies ( h.r .

2822 ) , included provisions to prevent osm from expending fy2016 appropriated funds to develop , carry out , or implement any guidance , policy , or directive to change the 1983 stream buffer zone rule in fy2016 .

the house debated this bill in july 2015 , but did not take final action on it .

the fy2016 appropriations act ( division g of p.l .

114-113 ) , enacted in december 2015 , did not include provisions to halt osm's development of the rule .

the restriction in h.r .

2822 , had it been enacted , would not have prohibited osm from utilizing unexpired unobligated balances in the osm regulation and technology account that could still be available for the rulemaking .

osm released the final stream protection rule on december 19 , 2016 , to be effective on january 19 , 2017 .

the rule was published in the federal register on december 20 .

the final rule closely resembles the 2015 proposed rule but also reflects a number of revisions .

requirements for baseline water quality monitoring data are revised to reduce required frequency and minimum parameters ( see " baseline data collection " ) .

stream definitions and classifications ( eg , ephemeral , intermittent , and perennial ) in the rule are revised for consistency with u.s. army corps of engineers definitions by limiting the scope to conveyances with channels that have a bed - and - bank configuration and an ordinary high water mark .

the definition of "material damage to the hydrologic balance outside the permit area" is revised by removing all proposed criteria and instead providing a list of factors that the regulatory authority , in consultation with the clean water act authority , must identify in identifying material damage thresholds ( see " definition of 'material damage to the hydrologic balance outside the permit area' " ) .

post - mining requirements for mountaintop removal mining operations are revised .

for example , permit applicants will be required to have substantially , but not fully , implemented approved post - mining land use prior to final bond release , and applicants will not be required to post additional bond sufficient to ensure that lands approved for an aoc variance can be returned to aoc if the proposed post - mining land use is not implemented ( see " approximate original contour ( aoc ) and aoc variances " ) .

osm provided clarification in response to industry criticism that the rule would effectively prohibit underground mining using longwall technology .

the final rule states that it does not prohibit temporary impacts to streams and other water resources as a result of longwall mining as long as those impacts do not rise to the level of material damage to the hydrologic balance outside the permit area .

the final stream protection rule clarifies that streamside vegetative corridors , or riparian corridors , which are required to be adjacent to streams that are mined through , are to be at least 100-feet wide on each side of a restored stream , not 50 feet on either side of a stream .

osm prepared a final regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) for the final rule that forecasts lower baseline coal production and increased industry compliance costs , compared with the draft ria .

a number of aspects of osm's analysis changed as a result of regulatory changes reflected in the final rule , revised estimates based on public comments , and other factors .

for example , osm revised its baseline coal demand estimates because of continuing decline of the coal industry , largely due to substitution of natural gas for coal among u.s. power plants .

as a result of reduced demand , the stream protection rule , and other developments , osm forecast a 10% decrease in national coal production ( 84 million tons , or 10% ) between 2020 and 2040 , compared with its previous estimates .

overall , the total compliance costs of the rule increased from the draft to the final rule .

the final ria concludes that the coal industry will incur annual compliance costs of $81.5 million under the final rule ( or 0.1% or less of aggregate annual industry revenues ) , compared with $52 million under the proposal ( see " impacts of the proposed rule " ) .

this was caused by increases in forecasts for total industry and regulatory costs due to the rule , particularly with regard to bonding costs , industry administrative costs such as monitoring , and regulatory authority administrative costs .

despite the higher compliance cost forecast , osm estimates that employment impacts will be minimal: coal employment will be reduced by 124 coal jobs on average each year due to decreased coal mined , while an additional 280 jobs will be created from increased compliance activity on average each year , for a net employment gain of 156 fulltime equivalents .

industry critics dispute osm's estimates of compliance costs and employment impacts , and they argue that adverse effects on coal production will be greater than osm states .

the final rule does not reflect more stringent regulatory approaches favored by some advocacy groups .

in the final environmental impact statement for the rule , osm stated that it continues to believe ( as it stated when the rule was proposed in 2015 ) that approaches such as absolutely prohibiting all surface coal mining and reclamation activities in or within 100 feet of all streams would result in an unacceptable impact on the nation's energy production via coal .

opposition to the final revised rule by coal industry groups and some members of congress was immediate after its release , and legislation to overturn the rule was soon introduced , including h.j.res .

11 and h.j.res .

16 in the 115 th congress .

these bills would overturn the rule under procedures of the congressional review act ( cra ) , which established a special parliamentary mechanism whereby congress can disapprove a final rule promulgated by a federal agency .

at least one legal challenge to the final rule was filed in federal court .

if the final rule were overturned by legislative or presidential action in the 115 th congress or by a court , existing rules ( i.e. , the 1983 stream buffer zone rule ) would remain in place , unless or until new rules or guidance were issued .

