more than 30 years ago , congress addressed increasing concerns regarding the management of the nation's grow ing stockpile of nuclear waste by calling for the federal collection of spent nuclear fuel ( snf ) and high - level nuclear waste ( hlw ) for safe , permanent disposal .

passed in 1982 , the nuclear waste policy act ( nwpa ) was intended to establish an explicit statutory basis for the department of energy ( doe ) to dispose of the nation's most highly radioactive nuclear waste .

the nwpa requires doe to take title to commercial nuclear power plants' snf and , in exchange for a fee , remove and transport it to a permanent geologic repository or an interim storage facility before permanent disposal .

defense - related hlw was to go into the same repository , unless the president determined separate storage was required .

in an effort to mitigate the political difficulties of imposing a federal nuclear waste facility on a single community , congress attempted to establish an objective , scientifically based , multi - stage statutory process for selecting the eventual site of the nation's new permanent geologic repository .

although doe would be responsible for developing the eventual repository and carrying out the disposal program , individual nuclear power providers would fund a large portion of the program through significant annual contributions , or fees , to the nuclear waste fund ( nwf ) established by the nwpa .

president obama , former secretary of energy steven chu , and current secretary of energy ernest moniz have stated that yucca mountain does not represent a viable option for the permanent storage of nuclear waste .

in accordance with this view , the administration has taken several important steps directed toward terminating the yucca mountain facility .

first , with congress's approval , the administration has sought to defund the yucca mountain project .

second , the president and former secretary chu established a commission to consider alternative solutions to the nation's nuclear waste challenge .

third , and perhaps most controversial , doe attempted to terminate the nrc's yucca mountain licensing proceeding by seeking withdrawal of its application for a construction authorization ( license application ) for the yucca mountain facility .

the obama administration's fy2017 budget request included an increase in funding for disposal of snf , including funding to expand doe's efforts to develop a "consent - based" nuclear waste disposal system in lieu of a repository at yucca mountain .

similar to previous years , the house appropriations committee rejected the administration's program funding request and instead voted to provide $170 million to continue the yucca mountain licensing process .

 ( as noted above , nrc is currently winding down the licensing process using what remains of previously appropriated funds ; the nrc chairman has testified that completion of the licensing process for yucca mountain , including the adjudication , would cost $330 million , not including any costs that would be incurred by doe as the license applicant. ) .

likewise similar to previous years , the senate has not included any funding to continue the yucca mountain licensing process , but did include provisions granting doe authority to move forward with a pilot consolidated interim nuclear waste storage facility with consent - based siting , notwithstanding any other provisions of the nwpa .

the senate approved its version of the fy2017 energy and water development appropriations bill on may 12 , 2016 , but the house version of the bill did not pass a roll call vote on the house floor on may 26 , 2016 .

several bills have been introduced to implement a number of the recommendations made in 2012 by the blue ribbon commission on america's nuclear future .

s. 854 , the nuclear waste administration act of 2015 , would establish a new nuclear waste administration ( nwa ) as an independent agency in the executive branch , to which all current doe functions under the nwpa and all current nuclear waste disposal contracts would be transferred .

repository siting would no longer be set by statute at yucca mountain ; rather , all repository and storage siting would be required to follow a consent - based procedure .

a new nuclear waste oversight board would oversee various funding , fee , and contract - related matters .

s. 854 would remove a number of limitations on the nuclear agency's authority currently imposed by the nwpa .

it would require the nwa to establish a program for at least one federal or private nuclear waste storage facility to provide interim storage , starting with a pilot program for high - priority waste such as waste from decommissioned nuclear reactors .

it would also expressly allow for reevaluation of the determination , made in 1985 , that a separate facility for defense nuclear waste was not "necessary," and would more broadly allow separate facilities "if necessary or appropriate. .

nwpa's current repository volume limitations would also be revoked .

the bill also contains various provisions on nuclear waste transportation , technical assistance , and funding and cost recovery .

s. 854 expressly provides that ongoing litigation against doe regarding nuclear waste disposal contracts shall "not abate by reason of the enactment of this act," and would continue with the administrator of the nwa substituted for the secretary of energy .

however , the bill directs the administrator , together with the attorney general , to settle the claims "as a condition precedent of an agreement of the administrator to take title to and store the nuclear waste of the contract holder at a storage facility," and to modify contracts in accordance with such settlements .

another pair of bills introduced in the 114th congress in both houses , the nuclear waste informed consent act , h.r .

1364 and s. 691 , would relate more narrowly to the blue ribbon commission's recommendation for a new "consent - based approach" to nuclear waste facility siting .

these bills would prohibit the nrc from granting a nuclear waste repository construction license unless doe has entered into a written agreement to host the repository with the governor of the state in which the repository is proposed to be located ; each affected unit of local government as well as any unit of general local government contiguous to the affected unit of local government through which snf or hlw would be transported ; and each affected indian tribe .

the bills also clarify that the consent requirements apply to doe's pending 2008 application for a construction license yucca mountain , as well as to any application submitted thereafter .

notably , comparable provisions of s. 854 would extend to nuclear waste storage facilities as well as permanent repositories , but s. 854 does not include contiguous local governments through which waste would be transported .

the interim consolidated storage act , h.r .

3643 and h.r .

4745 , would amend the nwpa to expressly authorize doe to enter or modify contracts for the storage of hlw or snf with any licensed interim consolidated storage facility , and to specify that doe's transfer of hlw or snf to such a facility would satisfy standard contract obligations .

h.r .

3643 also would enable doe to use "necessary amounts" from the nuclear waste fund for certain costs in connection with an interim consolidated storage facility , without further appropriation ; this provision is removed in h.r .

4745 .

waste control specialists llc ( wcs ) , a private company , in collaboration with andrews county , texas , has proposed to develop an interim consolidated storage facility in texas , and has filed a license application with the nrc ; an application for a second centralized interim storage facility in new mexico is expected to be filed by another company , holtec international , later in 2016 .

taking a contrasting approach to the bills above , in the 113th congress , h.r .

3895 , the energy exploration and production to achieve national demand act , or expand act , would have directed the nrc to continue to review doe's pending license application to construct the repository at yucca mountain and to approve such application within 180 days after enactment , apparently notwithstanding any lack of appropriations or any determinations by the nrc finding deficiencies in the application .

h.r .

3895 also would have removed statutory limitations on the amount of radiological material that can be placed in yucca mountain and required the nrc to replace such limitations with new limits based on scientific and technical analysis .

in addition , h.r .

3895 would have mandated the nrc to take certain measures to accelerate nuclear energy development .

several other bills have been introduced in the 114th congress relating to nuclear waste reduction and storage safety , and they have taken diverging approaches to dealing with the current lack of disposal options stemming from the hurdles that have faced the yucca mountain repository .

with respect to nuclear waste reduction , h.r .

1806 , the america competes reauthorization act of 2015 , contains various provisions for doe nuclear energy research , including "[r]educing used nuclear fuel and nuclear waste products generated by civilian nuclear energy," as well as "[r]educing the environmental impact of nuclear energy - related activities. .

more specifically , the bill replaces doe's nuclear reactor 2010 program with a program for reactor concepts that , among other attributes , "substantially reduce production of high - level waste per unit of output. .

fuel cycle research and development under the bill would also encompass a variety of potential strategies to minimize nuclear waste creation ( including by nuclear fuel recycling ) , improve safety , and improve waste management and storage .

h.r .

1806 passed the house on may 20 , 2015 , on a 217-205 vote and was referred to the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

a series of bills in the senate target snf storage management for active and decommissioned nuclear power plants , with an emphasis on moving snf out of pools .

s. 944 , the safe and secure decommissioning act of 2015 , would prohibit nrc from granting any regulatory waiver or exemption for a nuclear power reactor that has permanently shut down , thereby requiring nrc to impose full safety and security requirements , unless and until all of that reactor's snf has been transferred from pools to dry casks .

s. 945 , the dry cask storage act of 2015 , would require nuclear power plants to develop , and nrc to review and approve or disapprove , plans for removing snf from storage pools and transfer it to dry cask storage facilities .

s. 964 , the nuclear plant decommissioning act of 2015 , would expand requirements for post - shutdown decommissioning activities reports to increase state , local , and public involvement and nrc oversight .

similar bills were introduced in the 113 th congress .

