strong relations between the united states and israel have led to bilateral cooperation in many areas .

matters of particular significance include the following: israel's own capabilities for addressing threats , and its cooperation with the united states .

shared u.s. - israel concerns about iran , within the context of the u.s. exit from the 2015 international nuclear agreement , and growing tension involving iran and hezbollah at israel's northern border with syria and lebanon .

israeli - palestinian issues , including those involving jerusalem , hamas and the gaza strip , funding for palestinians , and a possible trump administration peace plan .

israeli domestic political issues , including probable corruption - related indictments against prime minister binyamin netanyahu and closely contested elections that are scheduled for april 9 , 2019 .

for background information and analysis on these and other topics , including aid , arms sales , and missile defense cooperation , see crs report rl33476 , israel: background and u.s. relations , by jim zanotti ; and crs report rl33222 , u.s. foreign aid to israel , by jeremy m. sharp .

israel relies on a number of strengths to manage potential threats to its security and existence .

these strengths include robust military and homeland security capabilities , as well as close cooperation with the united states .

iran remains of primary concern to israeli officials largely because of ( 1 ) iran's antipathy toward israel , ( 2 ) iran's broad regional influence , and ( 3 ) the probability that some constraints on iran's nuclear program could loosen in the future .

in recent years , israel and arab gulf states have discreetly cultivated closer relations with one another in efforts to counter iran .

the closely contested israeli national elections — scheduled for april 9 , 2019 — and the subsequent government formation process will have significant implications for the country's leadership and future policies .

prime minister netanyahu faces a challenge from the centrist blue and white party under the combined leadership of former top general benny gantz and former finance minister yair lapid .

some setbacks for netanyahu during the campaign have included the attorney general's announcement of probable corruption - related indictments against netanyahu , new media allegations of possible misconduct relating to israel's procurement of german submarines , and questions about some individuals or groups possibly spreading rumors against netanyahu's opponents via social media .

yet , some observers calculate that netanyahu's likud could possibly get fewer knesset seats than blue and white and still form the next coalition .

for more information on the actors involved in the elections , see crs insight in11068 , israel: april 2019 elections and probable indictments against prime minister netanyahu , by jim zanotti and this report's appendix .

in july 2018 , the knesset passed a basic law defining israel as the national homeland of the jewish people .

some observers have expressed concern that the law might further undermine the place of arabs in israeli society , while others view its effect as mainly symbolic .

in march 2019 , netanyahu said that israel is a jewish , democratic state with equal rights for all its citizens , and "the nation - state not of all its citizens , but only of the jewish people," reviving domestic debate about the 2018 law and perhaps seeking support during the election campaign from sympathetic voter groups .

