the agriculture appropriations bill — formally known as the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act — provides funding for: all of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) except the forest service , which is funded in the interior appropriations bill , the food and drug administration ( fda ) in the department of health and human services , and in the house , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) .

in the senate , the financial services bill contains cftc appropriations .

in even - numbered fiscal years , cftc appears in the enacted agriculture appropriation .

jurisdiction is with the house and senate committees on appropriations , and their respective subcommittees on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies .

the bill includes mandatory and discretionary spending , but the discretionary amounts are the primary focus during the bill's development .

the scope of the bill can be shown by the major allocations in the fy2016 appropriation ( figure 1 ) .

the federal budget process treats discretionary and mandatory spending differently .

discretionary spending is controlled by annual appropriations acts and receives most of the attention during the appropriations process .

the annual budget resolution process sets spending limits for discretionary appropriations .

agency operations ( salaries and expenses ) and many grant programs are discretionary .

mandatory spending — though carried in the appropriation and usually advanced unchanged — is controlled by budget enforcement rules ( eg , paygo ) during the authorization process .

spending for eligibility and benefit formulas in so - called entitlement programs are set in laws such as the farm bill and child nutrition act .

in fy2016 , discretionary appropriations totaled 15% ( $21.75 billion ) of the agriculture appropriations bill ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

mandatory spending carried in the bill comprised $119 billion , about 85% of the $141 billion total .

within the discretionary total , the largest discretionary spending items are for the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) , agricultural research , rural development , fda , foreign food aid and trade , farm assistance program salaries and loans , food safety inspection , conservation , and animal and plant health programs ( figure 1 ) .

the main mandatory spending items are the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , and other food and nutrition act programs ) , child nutrition ( school lunch and related programs ) , crop insurance , and farm commodity and conservation programs paid through usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

snap is referred to as an "appropriated entitlement," and requires an annual appropriation .

the nutrition program amounts are based on projected spending needs .

in contrast , the commodity credit corporation operates on a line of credit ; the annual appropriation provides funding to reimburse the treasury for using the line of credit .

the fy2016 agriculture appropriation was enacted as part of an omnibus bill on december 18 , 2015 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

separate agriculture bills were reported in both chambers , but neither went to the floor ( h.r .

3049 , s. 1800 ) .

the fiscal year began under three continuing resolutions .

table 1 summarizes actions on the fy2016 agriculture appropriation — and each annual appropriation since fy1995 — for the subcommittees , full committees , house and senate chambers , and presidential enactment .

figure 2 is a visual timeline of the dates in table 1 .

the last time an agriculture appropriations bill was enacted as a stand - alone measure was for fy2010 ( in calendar 2009 ) .

an agriculture appropriations bill has not cleared a floor vote in either chamber for four years , since the fy2012 bill , when it was the vehicle for a three - bill "minibus" measure .

committee action for fy2016 was somewhat later than in recent years .

the enacted omnibus appropriation uses a budget allocation that was provided in the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 , november 2 , 2015 ) , which was greater than what was available to develop the house - and senate - reported bills .

the final agriculture appropriation provides $21.750 billion for discretionary amounts ( table 2 ) .

about 95% of the total appropriation for the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) is funded through the agriculture appropriations bill .

usda was created in 1862 and carries out widely varied responsibilities through about 17 agencies and about a dozen administrative offices staffed by nearly 100,000 employees .

funding for about two - thirds of those employees is provided in agriculture appropriations .

the remaining one - third of the employees are in the forest service and are funded by the interior and related agencies appropriations bill .

this report is organized in the order that the agencies are listed in the agriculture appropriations bill .

in addition to the usda agencies mentioned above , the agriculture appropriations subcommittees have jurisdiction over appropriations for three related agencies: the food and drug administration ( fda ) of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) — in the house agriculture appropriations subcommittee only , and the farm credit administration ( fca ) , which does not receive an appropriation but rather oversight via a limit on its spending from fees paid to the agency .

agriculture appropriations acts in recent years have had over $1 billion in net offsets that effectively reduce the cost of appropriations in the rest of the bill .

the enacted fy2016 appropriation continues that practice .

these reductions occur in title vii ( general provisions ) through rescissions and chimps ( changes in mandatory program spending ) , and in separate cbo scorekeeping adjustments .

other appropriations are also made .

for fy2016 , reductions are made by placing limitations on mandatory programs ( - $831 million , table 15 ) , recessions from other appropriated accounts ( - $34 million , table 16 ) , and other scorekeeping adjustments that are usually not detailed in the bills ( - $462 million , table 18 ) .

besides reductions , some additional spending is authorized in the general provisions ( $556 million , including $250 million for foreign food aid and $273 million for emergency conservation programs , table 17 ) .

limitations and rescissions are used to score budgetary savings that help meet the discretionary budget allocation .

by offsetting spending elsewhere in the bill , they help provide relatively more to ( or help avoid deeper cuts to ) regular discretionary accounts than might otherwise occur .

the general provisions title also contains many important policy - related provisions that affect how the executive branch carries out the appropriation and authorizing laws , many of which have no budgetary effect .

some of these policy - related provisions are discussed earlier in this report under the relevant agency heading .

mandatory programs usually are not part of the appropriations process since formulas and eligibility rules are set in multi - year authorizing laws ( such as the 2014 farm bill ) .

funding usually is assumed to be available based on the statute and without appropriations action .

however , for more than a decade , appropriators have placed limits on mandatory spending authorized in statutes such as the farm bill ( table 15 ) .

these limits are known as chimps , "changes in mandatory program spending. .

chimps usually are reductions to mandatory spending authority , but they also may be increases in spending authority .

although many chimps have an effect for one year , rescissions may be made to mandatory spending programs to permanently cancel budget authority ( also considered a chimp here and by cbo ) .

when appropriators limit mandatory spending , they do not change the authorizing law .

however , their action has a similar effect through chimps , but usually only for the one year to which the appropriation applies .

appropriators put limits on mandatory program by using language such as: "none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this or any other act shall be used to pay the salaries and expenses of personnel to carry out section [ ... ] of public law [ ... ] in excess of $[ .. .

]. .

limits usually appear in title vii , general provisions , of the agriculture appropriations bill .

historically , most allocations to spend budgetary resources originated from the appropriations committees .

the division over who should fund certain agriculture programs — appropriators or authorizers — has roots dating to the 1930s .

variable outlays for the farm commodity programs were difficult to budget and resembled entitlements .

mandatory funding — the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) — was created to remove the unpredictable funding issue from the appropriations process , and those decisions generally rested with the authorizing committee .

the dynamic further changed after the 1996 farm bill , when mandatory funds were used for programs that usually had been discretionary .

appropriators had not funded some programs as much as authorizers had desired , and authorizing committees wrote farm bills to more broadly use the mandatory funding at their discretion .

tension arose over who should fund certain activities .

some question whether the ccc should be used for outlays that are not uncertain .

the programs affected by chimps typically include conservation , rural development , bioenergy , and some smaller nutrition assistance programs .

chimps have not affected the farm commodity programs or the primary nutrition assistance programs ( such as snap ) .

the enacted fy2016 appropriation contains $831 million in savings attributable to chimps , of which $436 million are from programs authorized in the 2014 farm bill .

these totals are roughly similar to fy2015 , though the subtotal from the farm bill is slightly smaller and the overall total is slightly greater .

they are both smaller than the annual levels that were enacted between fy2011-fy2014 ( table 15 ) .

a complicating factor in understanding the chimp amounts in the proposed bills for fy2016 is budget sequestration , and a methodological difference in how cbo scored the sequestration across various proposals .

budget sequestration of mandatory accounts has occurred every year since fy2013 , reducing the amount available to most mandatory programs .

for example , the chimp to accomplish the complete prohibition on spending for the watershed rehabilitation program resulted in a smaller $153 million chimp in fy2014 , after sequestration , than the $165 million chimp in fy2013 , even though no spending was allowed either year ( table 15 ) .

in fy2016 , the scoring of the administration's request and the senate bill are before sequestration , while scoring of the chimp in the house bill is after sequestration .

by not incorporating sequestration into the chimp estimates , cbo gave the administration and the senate more credit for some chimps than the house bill .

rescissions are a method of permanently cancelling the availability of funds that were provided by a previous appropriations law .

when scoring a bill to determine its budget effect , a rescission results in budgetary savings .

as a budgetary offset , rescissions can allow more spending in an appropriations bill .

but unlike a chimp , a rescission can prevent an unobligated budget authority from being reallocated or repurposed by future appropriations since the cancellation is permanent .

often rescissions relate to the unobligated balances of funds that were appropriated a year or more ago that still remain available for a specific purpose ( eg , buildings and facilities funding that remains available until expended for specific projects , or disaster response funds for losses due to a specifically named hurricane ) .

for fy2016 , the enacted appropriation rescinds $34 million from three discretionary programs ( table 16 ) .

rescissions to mandatory programs are included in the chimps section , according to cbo scoring tables .

these levels of rescissions are typical for most years but are small by comparison to fy2011 , when rescissions were unusually large ( $372 million ) and helped achieve that year's relatively large spending reduction .

the general provisions title may contain appropriations for activities that are not part of regular agency appropriations .

these sometimes include supplemental or disaster appropriations , and may be offset in scorekeeping adjustments by emergency spending designations .

table 17 shows that the fy2016 appropriation contains $273 million for the emergency watershed , conservation and forestry programs , $130 million of which is not subject to the discretionary budget cap .

it also contains $283 million of other spending provisions , including $250 million to supplement the food for peace program and several other programs .

scorekeeping adjustments are a final part of the accounting of the appropriations bill that is not necessarily shown in the tables published by the appropriations committees .

these adjustments are critical , however , for the bill to reach the desired total amount that complies with the 302 ( b ) spending limit for the subcommittee .

some of these amounts are not necessarily specified by provisions in the bill but are related to program operations , such as direct and guaranteed loan programs .

cbo calculates and reports these scorekeeping adjustments in unpublished tables .

for fy2016 , the other scorekeeping adjustment in the enacted appropriation is - $462 million ( table 18 ) .

the disaster designation for emergency programs that offset spending in the enacted bill ( table 17 ) is slightly greater than last year .

also noteworthy , the "negative subsidy" from various usda loan programs has increased in recent years .

negative subsidies effectively reflect "income" to the government when a loan program operates at less cost than it receives in appropriations via the collection of fees or better - than - expected loan repayment .

these negative subsidies have become larger in recent years , and are helping to offset more of the regular appropriation .

prior to fy2013 , these negative subsidies were cumulatively less than $100 million .

since fy2013 they have grown to $408 million in fy2015 , and moderated slightly to $345 million in fy2016 .

appendix a .

historical trends this appendix offers historical perspective on trends in agricultural appropriations from fy1995 to fy2015 .

comparisons are made across ( 1 ) mandatory vs. discretionary spending , ( 2 ) nutrition spending compared to the rest of the bill , ( 3 ) inflation - adjusted amounts , and ( 4 ) agriculture appropriations relative to the entire federal budget , economy , and population .

discretionary spending for each title , over fy2007-fy2016 , is shown in figure 3 .

see figure a - 1 for the mandatory and discretionary breakdown ; table a - 1 contains the nominal data , and table a - 2 contains the inflation - adjusted data .

table a - 3 shows the compounded annualized percentage changes over various time periods .

mandatory and discretionary spending discretionary agriculture appropriations peaked in fy2010 , although mandatory nutrition spending continued to rise through fy2015 .

over the past five years ( since fy2011 ) , total agriculture appropriations grew at a compounded annual rate of +2.4% ( +0.7% on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

the mandatory spending portion of this total shows a +2.5% annual increase over the past five years ( +0.9% on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

the discretionary portion has an annual increase of +1.6% over five years ( basically flat on an inflation - adjusted basis ; - 0.1% annually ) .

in fy2016 , 15% of the total agriculture appropriation is discretionary spending , down from 28% of the total appropriation in fy1998 .

domestic nutrition and the rest of the bill another way to divide the total agriculture appropriation is domestic nutrition compared to everything else ( figure a - 2 ) .

domestic nutrition appropriations include primarily the child nutrition programs ( school lunch and related programs ) , the special supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) — which are mandatory — and the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) , which is discretionary .

the "rest of the bill" includes other usda programs ( except the forest service ) , fda , and cftc .

total domestic nutrition program spending rose at a +4.1% compounded annual rate over five years ( +2.5% annually on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

spending on the rest of the bill ( non - nutrition ) decreased at - 2.7% annually over five years ( - 4.3% per year on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

in fy2016 , 78% of the total agriculture appropriation was for domestic nutrition , up from 59% in 2006 and 46% in fy2001 .

most of domestic nutrition is mandatory spending , primarily in snap and the child nutrition programs .

the mandatory nutrition spending portion rose at a +4.5% annual rate over five years ( +2.8% annually inflation - adjusted basis ) .

the discretionary portion decreased - 0.8% annually over five years .

the relationship is reversed for the rest of the bill .

mandatory spending within the rest of the rest of the bill decreased at a - 6.5% annual rate over five years ( - 8.0% on an inflation - adjusted annual basis ) .

discretionary spending increased at a +2.5% annual rate .

discretionary appropriations appropriators arguably have the most control over discretionary appropriations .

within the discretionary subtotal of figure a - 1 , a similar domestic nutrition vs. rest of the bill comparison can be made as was done for the total appropriation ( see figure a - 3 ) .

in fy2016 , discretionary budget authority rose +4.4% .

for the nutrition portion of the bill , it decreased - 3.6% ; for the rest of the bill , it rose +8.6% .

total discretionary agriculture appropriations grew at +1.6% per year over the past five years ( basically flat on an inflation - adjusted basis ; - 0.1% annually ) .

over a longer period , the annual change is +2.6% per year over the past 10 years , or +0.9% per year on an inflation - adjusted basis .

the domestic nutrition portion of this discretionary subtotal ( primarily wic , commodity assistance programs , and nutrition programs administration ) shows a - 0.8% annual decrease over five years ( - 2.4% per year if adjusted for inflation ) .

the discretionary portion for rest of the bill has risen at +2.8% per year for five years ( +1.1% per year on an inflation - adjusted basis ) .

comparisons to the federal budget , gdp , and population relative to the entire federal budget , the agriculture bill's share has declined from over 4% of the total federal budget in fy1995 and fy2000 , to 2.7% in fy2008 , before rising again to about 4% from fy2013-fy2015 ( figure a - 4 , table a - 4 ) .

within that total , the share for nutrition programs had declined from 2.5% in fy1995 to 1.8% in fy2008 , but the recent recession has caused that share to rise to about 3% through fy2014 , before falling again .

the share for the rest of the bill has declined from 2.2% in fy2000 to about 1.0% since fy2011 and 0.8% in fy2016 .

those shares of the federal budget also can be subdivided into mandatory and discretionary spending ( figure a - 5 ) .

the mandatory share for nutrition is presently about 2.6% ( decreasing since fy2014 ) , while the discretionary share for nutrition is fairly steady at about 0.2% .

the mandatory share for the rest of the bill ( primarily crop insurance , commodity program subsidies , and conservation ) fell from about 0.6% to 0.4% in fy2016 , while the discretionary share for the rest of the bill remains steady at about 0.37% .

the 0.4% share of the federal budget above for mandatory spending on crop insurance , farm commodity subsidies , and conservation is a good proxy for farm bill spending on agricultural ( non - nutrition ) programs ( figure a - 5 ) .

it has been variable and generally declining since 2000 ( consistent with farm commodity spending until recently ) , and steadier since 2009 ( consistent with the recent inverse relationship between the farm commodity programs and crop insurance ) .

as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , agriculture appropriations had been fairly steady at under 0.75% of gdp from fy1997 to fy2009 , but have risen to over 0.8% of gdp from fy2010 to fy2015 , before falling again to 0.76% in fy2016 ( figure a - 6 , table a - 4 ) .

nutrition programs have risen as a percentage of gdp since fy2000 ( 0.32% in fy2001 to 0.66% in fy2012 ) , though they have ameliorated to 0.59% in fy2016 .

the share relative to gdp for non - nutrition agricultural programs has declined ( 0.40% in fy2000 to 0.17% in fy2015 ) .

on a per capita basis , inflation - adjusted total agriculture appropriations have risen slightly over the past 10 to 15 years from about $250 per capita in 1998 ( fy2016 dollars ) to about $435 per capita in fy2016 ( figure a - 7 ) .

nutrition programs have risen more steadily on a per capita basis from about $160 per capita in fy2001 to nearly $340 per capita in fy2016 .

non - nutrition "other" agricultural programs have been more steady or declining , falling from about $200 per capita in fy2000 to slightly under $100 per capita in fy2016 .

appendix b .

budget sequestration sequestration is a process of automatic , largely across - the - board reductions that permanently cancel mandatory and / or discretionary budget authority when spending would exceed statutory budget goals .

the current requirement for sequestration is in the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) .

table b - 1 shows the rates of sequestration and the amounts of budget authority cancelled from accounts in the agriculture appropriations bill .

although the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-67 ) raised spending limits in the bca to avoid sequestration of discretionary accounts in fy2014 and fy2015 — and the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) did it again for fy2016 and fy2017 — they do not prevent or reduce sequestration on mandatory accounts .

in fact , to pay for avoiding sequestration of discretionary spending in the near term , or as a general budgetary offset for other bills , congress extended the original fy2021 duration of sequestration on mandatory programs three times .

first , it extended the duration of mandatory sequestration by two years ( until fy2023 ) as an offset in the 2013 budget act .

second , by another year ( until fy2024 ) to maintain retirement benefits for certain military personnel ( p.l .

113-82 ) .

and third , another year ( until fy205 ) as an offset in the 2015 budget act .

the first farm commodity program payments from the 2014 farm bill were due in october 2015 , and usda indicated that they would be subject to the 6.8% reduction applicable to fy2016 .

some farm bill mandatory programs are exempt from sequestration .

the nutrition programs and the conservation reserve program are statutorily exempt , and some prior legal obligations in crop insurance and the farm commodity programs may be exempt as determined by omb .

generally speaking , the experience since fy2013 is that omb has ruled most of crop insurance as exempt from sequestration , while the farm commodity programs have been subject to it .

since enactment of the bca , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has ordered budget sequestration on non - exempt , non - defense discretionary accounts only once , in fy2013 ( table b - 1 ) , and on mandatory accounts annually in fy2013-fy2016 ( table b - 2 ) .

