the constitution gives congress the authority to impeach and remove the president , vice president , and other federal "civil officers" upon a determination that such officers have engaged in treason , bribery , or other high crimes and misdemeanors .

impeachment is one of the various checks and balances created by the constitution , and is a crucial tool for potentially holding government officers accountable for violations of the law and abuse of power .

rooted in various constitutional provisions , impeachment is largely immune from judicial review .

when considering impeachment matters , members of congress have historically examined the language of the constitution ; past precedents ; the debates at the constitutional convention ; the debates at the ratifying conventions ; english common law and practice ; state impeachment practices ; analogous case law ; and historical commentaries .

although the term "impeachment" is commonly used to refer to the removal of a government official from office , the impeachment process , as described in the constitution , entails two distinct proceedings carried out by the separate houses of congress .

first , a simple majority of the house impeaches — or formally approves allegations of wrongdoing amounting to an impeachable offense , known as articles of impeachment .

the articles of impeachment are then forwarded to the senate where the second proceeding takes place: an impeachment trial .

if the senate , by vote of a two - thirds majority , convicts the official of the alleged offenses , the result is removal from office of those still in office , and , at the senate's discretion , disqualification from holding future office .

the house has impeached 19 individuals: 15 federal judges , one senator , one cabinet member , and two presidents .

the senate has conducted 16 full impeachment trials .

of these , eight individuals — all federal judges — were convicted by the senate .

this report briefly surveys the constitutional provisions governing the impeachment power , examines which individuals are subject to impeachment , and explores the potential grounds for impeachment .

in addition , it provides a short overview of impeachment procedures in the house and senate and concludes with a discussion of the limited nature of judicial review for impeachment procedures .

the house of representatives shall chuse their speaker and other officers ; and shall have the sole power of impeachment .

 — article i , section 2 the president , vice president and all civil officers of the united states , shall be removed from office on impeachment for , and conviction of , treason , bribery , or other high crimes and misdemeanors .

 — article ii , section 4 the senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments .

when sitting for that purpose , they shall be on oath or affirmation .

when the president of the united states is tried , the chief justice shall preside: and no person shall be convicted without the concurrence of two thirds of the members present .

judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from office , and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor , trust or profit under the united states ; but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to indictment , trial , judgment and punishment , according to law .

 — article i , section 3 the constitution provides that impeachment applies only to the "president , vice president , and all civil officers of the united states," and that the grounds for impeachment are limited to "treason , bribery , or other high crimes and misdemeanors. .

the decision to impeach an individual rests solely with the house of representatives .

the house thus has discretion over whether to impeach an individual and what articles of impeachment will be presented to the senate .

the senate , in turn , has the sole power to try impeachments .

conviction of an individual requires a two - thirds majority of the present senators on one of the articles brought by the house .

when conducting the trial , senators must be "on oath or affirmation," and the right to a jury trial does not extend to impeachment proceedings .

as president of the united states senate , the vice president usually presides at impeachment trials ; however , if the president is impeached and tried in the senate , the chief justice of the supreme court presides at the trial .

the immediate effect of conviction upon an article of impeachment is removal from office , although the senate may subsequently vote on whether the official shall be disqualified from again holding an office of public trust under the united states .

if this option is pursued , a simple majority vote is required .

convicted individuals are still subject to criminal prosecutions for the same factual situations , and individuals who have already been convicted of crimes may be impeached for the same underlying behavior later .

finally , the constitution bars the president from using the pardon power to shield individuals from impeachment or removal from office .

in considering the use of the impeachment power , congress confronts at least two preliminary legal questions bearing on whether an impeachment inquiry against a given official is constitutionally appropriate: first , whether the individual whose conduct is under scrutiny holds an office that is subject to impeachment and removal , and second , whether the conduct for which the official is accused constitutes an impeachable offense .

the constitution explicitly makes "[t]he president , vice president and all civil officers of the united states" subject to impeachment and removal .

which officials are to be considered "civil officers of the united states" for purposes of impeachment is a significant constitutional question that remains mostly unresolved .

in the past , congress has seemingly shown a willingness to impeach presidents , federal judges , and cabinet - level executive branch officials , but a reluctance to impeach private individuals and members of congress .

a question which precedent has not thus far addressed is whether congress may impeach and remove subordinate , non - cabinet level executive branch officials .

the constitution does not define "civil officers of the united states. .

nor do the debates at the constitutional convention provide significant evidence of which individuals ( beyond the president and vice president ) the founders intended to be impeachable .

impeachment precedents in both the house and senate are equally unhelpful with respect to subordinate executive officials .

in all of american history , only three members of the executive branch have been impeached: two presidents and a secretary of war .

thus , while it seems that executive officials of the highest levels are "civil officers," historical precedent provides no examples of the impeachment power being used against lower - level executive officials .

one must , therefore , look to other sources for aid in determining precisely how far down the federal bureaucracy the impeachment power might reach .

the general purposes of impeachment may assist in interpreting the proper scope of "civil officers of the united states. .

the congressional power of impeachment constitutes an important aspect of the various checks and balances that were built into the constitution to preserve the separation of powers .

it is a tool , entrusted to the house and senate alone , to remove government officials in the other branches of government , who either abuse their power or engage in conduct that warrants their dismissal from an office of public trust .

at least one commentator has suggested that the framers recognized , particularly with respect to executive branch officials , that there would be instances in which it may not be in the president's interest to remove a "favorite" from office , even when that individual has violated the public trust .

as such , the framers "dwelt repeatedly on the need of power to oust corrupt or oppressive ministers whom the president might seek to shelter. .

if the impeachment power were meant to ensure that congress has the ability to impeach and remove corrupt officials that the president was unwilling to dismiss , it would seem arguable that the power should extend to officers exercising a degree of authority , the abuse of which would be harmful to the separation of powers and good government .

the writings of early constitutional commentators also arguably suggest a broad interpretation of "civil officers of the united states. .

joseph story addressed the reach of the impeachment power in his influential commentaries on the constitution , asserting that " all officers of the united states [] who hold their appointments under the national government , whether their duties are executive or judicial , in the highest or in the lowest departments of the government , with the exception of officers in the army and navy , are properly civil officers within the meaning of the constitution , and liable to impeachment. .

similarly , william rawle reasoned that "civil officers" included "[ a ] ll executive and judicial officers , fro m the president downwards , from the judges of the supreme court to those of the most inferior tribunals ..." consistent with the text of the constitution , these early interpretations suggest the impeachment power was arguably intended to extend to "all" executive officers , and not just cabinet level officials and other executive officials at the highest levels .

but who is an officer ? .

the most thorough elucidation of the definition of "officers of the united states" can be found in judicial interpretations of the appointments clause .

that provision , which establishes the methods by which "officers of the united states" may be appointed , has generally been viewed as a useful guidepost in establishing the definition of "civil officers" for purposes of impeachment .

the appointments clause provides that the president shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ambassadors , other public ministers and consuls , judges of the supreme court , and all other officers of the united states , whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for , and which shall be established by law: but the congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers , as they think proper , in the president alone , in the courts of law , or in the heads of departments .

in interpreting the appointments clause , the court has made clear distinctions between "officers of the united states," whose appointment is subject to the requirements of the clause , and non - officers , also known as employees , whose appointment is not .

the amount of authority that an individual exercises will generally determine his classification as either an officer or employee .

as established in buckley v. valeo , an officer is "any appointee exercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the united states," whereas employees are viewed as "lesser functionaries subordinate to the officers of the united states," who do not exercise "significant authority. .

the supreme court has further subdivided "officers" into two categories: principal officers , whom may be appointed only by the president with the advice and consent of the senate ; and inferior officers , whose appointment congress may vest "in the president alone , in the courts of law , or in the heads of departments. .

the court has acknowledged that its "cases have not set forth an exclusive criterion for distinguishing between principal and inferior officers for appointments clause purposes. .

the clearest statement of the proper standard to be applied in differentiating between the two types of officers appears to have been made in edmo nd v. united states .

in edmond , the court noted that "[g]enerally speaking , the term 'inferior officer' connotes a relationship with some higher ranking officer or officers below the president ... [and] whose work is directed and supervised at some level by others who were appointed by presidential nomination with the advice and consent of the senate. .

thus , in analyzing whether one may be properly characterized as either an inferior or principal officer , the court's decisions appear to focus on the extent of the officer's discretion to make autonomous policy choices and the authority of other officials to supervise and to remove the officer .

applying the principles established in the court's appointments clause jurisprudence to define the scope of "civil officers" for purposes of impeachment , it would appear that employees , as non - officers , are not subject to impeachment .

therefore lesser functionaries — such as federal employees who belong to the civil service , do not exercise "significant authority," and are not appointed by the president or an agency head — would not be subject to impeachment .

at the opposite end of the spectrum , it would seem that any official who qualifies as a principal officer , including a head of an agency such as a secretary , administrator , or commissioner , would be impeachable .

the remaining question is whether inferior officers , or those officers who exercise significant authority under the supervision of a principal officer , are subject to impeachment and removal .

as previously noted , it would appear that an argument can be made from the text and purpose of the impeachment clauses , as well as early constitutional interpretations , that the impeachment power was intended to extend to " all " officers of the united states , and not just those in the highest levels of government .

any official exercising "significant authority" including both principal and inferior officers , would therefore qualify as a "civil officer" subject to impeachment .

this view would permit congress to impeach and remove any executive branch "officer," including many deputy political appointees and certain administrative judges .

there is some historical evidence , however , to suggest that inferior officers were not meant to be subject to impeachment .

for example , a delegate at the north carolina ratifying convention asserted that "[i]t appears to me ... the most horrid ignorance to suppose that every officer , however trifling his office , is to be impeached for every petty offense .. .

i hope every gentleman ... must see plainly that impeachments cannot extend to inferior officers of the united states. .

additionally , governeur morris , member of the pennsylvania delegation to the constitutional convention , arguably implied that inferior officers would not be subject to impeachment in stating that "certain great officers of state ; a minister of finance , of war , of foreign affairs , etc .

... will be amenable by impeachment to the public justice. .

notwithstanding this ongoing debate , the authority to resolve any ambiguity in the scope of "civil officers" for purposes of impeachment lays initially with the house , in adopting articles of impeachment , and with the senate , in trying the officer .

the constitution sets forth the general principles which control the procedural aspects of impeachment , vesting the power to impeach in the house of representatives , while imbuing the senate with the power to try impeachments .

both the senate and the house have designed procedures to implement these general principles in dealing with a wide range of impeachment issues .

this section provides a brief overview of the impeachment process , reflecting the roles of both the house and the senate during the course of an impeachment inquiry and trial .

impeachment proceedings have been challenged in federal court on a number of occasions .

perhaps most significantly , the supreme court has ruled that a challenge to the senate's use of a trial committee to take evidence posed a nonjusticiable political question .

in nixon v. united states , judge walter l. nixon had been convicted in a criminal trial on two counts of making false statements before a grand jury and was sent to prison .

he refused , however , to resign and continued to receive his salary as a judge while in prison .

the house of representatives adopted articles of impeachment against the judge and presented the senate with the articles .

the senate invoked impeachment rule xi , a senate procedural rule which permits a committee to take evidence and testimony .

after the committee completed its proceedings , it presented the full senate with a transcript and report .

both sides then presented briefs to the full senate and delivered arguments , and the senate then voted to convict and remove him from office .

the judge thereafter brought a suit arguing that the use of a committee to take evidence violated the constitution's provision that the senate "try" all impeachments .

the supreme court noted that the constitution grants "the sole power" to try impeachments "in the senate and nowhere else" ; and the word "try" "lacks sufficient precision to afford any judicially manageable standard of review of the senate's actions. .

this constitutional grant of sole authority , the court reasoned , meant that the "senate alone shall have authority to determine whether an individual should be acquitted or convicted. .

in addition , because impeachment functions as the " only check on the judicial branch by the legislature," the court noted the important separation of powers concerns that would be implicated if the "final reviewing authority with respect to impeachments [was placed] in the hands of the same body that the impeachment process is meant to regulate. .

further , the court explained that certain prudential considerations — "the lack of finality and the difficulty of fashioning relief" — weighed against adjudication of the case .

judicial review of impeachments could create considerable political uncertainty , if , for example , an impeached president sued for judicial review .

the court was careful to distinguish the situation from powell v. mcc ormack , a case also involving congressional procedure where the court declined to apply the political question doctrine .

that case involved a challenge brought by a member - elect of the house of representatives , who had been excluded from his seat pursuant to a house resolution .

the precise issue in powell was whether the judiciary could review a congressional decision that the plaintiff was "unqualified" to take his seat .

that determination had turned , the court explained , "on whether the constitution committed authority to the house to judge its members' qualifications , and if so , the extent of that commitment. .

the court noted that while article i , section 5 , does provide that congress shall determine the qualifications of its members , article i , section 2 , delineates the three requirements for house membership — representatives must be at least 25 years of age , have been u.s. citizens for at least seven years , and inhabit the states they represent .

therefore , the powell court concluded , the house's claim that it possessed unreviewable authority to determine the qualifications of its members "was defeated by this separate provision specifying the only qualifications which might be imposed for house membership. .

in other words , finding that the house had unreviewable authority to decide its members' qualifications would violate another provision of the constitution .

the court therefore concluded in powell that whether the three requirements in the constitution were satisfied was textually committed to the house , "but the decision as to what these qualifications consisted of was not. .

applying the logic of powell to the case at hand , the nixon court noted that here , in contrast , leaving the interpretation of the word "try" with the senate did not violate any "separate provision" of the constitution .

in addition , several other aspects of the impeachment process have been challenged .

judge g. thomas porteous brought a suit seeking to bar counsel for the impeachment task force of the house judiciary committee from using sworn testimony the judge had provided pursuant to a grant of immunity .

the impeachment proceedings were initiated after a judicial investigation of judge porteous for alleged corruption on the bench .

during that investigation , judge porteous testified under oath to the special investigatory committee under an order granting him immunity from that information being used against him in a criminal case .

before the u.s. district court for the district of columbia , judge porteous argued that the use of his immunized testimony during an impeachment proceeding violated his fifth amendment right not to be compelled to serve as a witness against himself .

the court rejected his challenge , reasoning that because the use of such testimony for an impeachment proceeding fell within the legislative sphere , the speech or debate clause prevented the court from ordering the committee staff members to refrain from using the testimony .

similarly , judge alcee l. hastings sought to prevent the house judiciary committee from obtaining the records of a grand jury inquiry during the committee's impeachment investigation .

prior to the impeachment proceedings , although ultimately acquitted , judge hastings had been indicted by a federal grand jury for a conspiracy to commit bribery .

judge hastings' argument was grounded in the separation of powers: he claimed that permitting disclosure of grand jury records for an impeachment investigation risked improperly allowing the executive and judicial branches to participate in the impeachment process — a tool reserved for the legislature .

the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit , however , rejected this "absolutist" concept of the separation of powers and held that "a merely generalized assertion of secrecy in grand jury materials must yield to a demonstrated , specific need for evidence in a pending impeachment investigation. .

the u.s. district court for the district of columbia initially threw out judge hastings' senate impeachment conviction , because the senate had tried his impeachment before a committee rather than the full senate .

the decision was vacated on appeal and remanded for reconsideration in light of nixon v. united states .

the district court then dismissed the suit because it presented a nonjusticiable political question .

