in recent years , some scholars , legislators , and others have proposed to reexamine and potentially reinterpret the u.s. constitution's citizenship clause to change and limit the current rule of conferring u.s. citizenship at birth to any person born in the united states , or "birthright citizenship. .

the citizenship clause is the first clause of the fourteenth amendment , and states: "all persons born or naturalized in the united states , and subject to the jurisdiction thereof , are citizens of the united states and of the state wherein they reside…. .

the policy debates on the topic of birthright citizenship are far - ranging , driven by concerns regarding unauthorized immigration , global antiterrorism efforts , reports of "birth tourism," and congressional redistricting , among other issues .

the legal debates , however , center squarely on the six words in the middle of the citizenship clause: "and subject to the jurisdiction thereof. .

the citizenship clause has conventionally been taken to require u.s. citizenship generally to be accorded automatically to any child born within the united states , regardless of the citizenship or status of the child's parents .

the "subject to the jurisdiction thereof" language has been interpreted to impose limited exceptions , such as for children of diplomats and foreign ministers ( who are accorded immunity from u.s. law ) .

this interpretation flows from the english common law doctrine of jus soli ( "right of soil" ) , under which a person's nationality at birth is determined by the territory within which the person was born .

the alternative doctrine of jus sanguinis ( "right of blood" ) , which determines a person's nationality by descent , is now the more common general system outside of north and south america .

however , each system's adherents have incorporated some elements of the other , with few purely adopting one or the other .

the jus soli interpretation of the citizenship clause is recognized in a number of judicial decisions ; however , arguably , no case has ever directly held whether the citizenship clause extends to children of aliens who are present in the united states unlawfully .

the factual scenarios of the key cases interpreting the citizenship clause , elk v. wilkins ( 1884 ) and united states v. wong kim ark ( 1898 ) , involved native americans and children of domiciled resident aliens , respectively .

elk found that members of indian tribes were not granted u.s. citizenship by the fourteenth amendment ( a situation which was eventually remedied by statute ) , while wong kim ark found that the child of chinese citizens residing in san francisco had become a u.s. citizen at the time of his birth and therefore was not subject to the chinese exclusion acts of the time .

some scholarship in the past few decades has argued that the phrase "and subject to the jurisdiction thereof" in the citizenship clause was in fact intended by the framers of the fourteenth amendment to include only those children born to lawfully present or lawfully resident aliens , and not children of unauthorized or nonimmigrant aliens .

these arguments have been embraced by some legislators , who have introduced bills since the early 1990s seeking to change the jus soli rule in various ways .

many of these bills target section 301 of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , which tracks the language of the citizenship clause and states: "the following shall be nationals and citizens of the united states at birth: ( a ) a person born in the united states , and subject to the jurisdiction thereof…. .

any statute reinterpreting the citizenship clause to exclude children of certain aliens would face judicial review by federal courts .

because of the core constitutional principles involved , it seems probable that any case on such a statute could reach the supreme court .

the court could find such a statute constitutional if it interpreted the "subject to the jurisdiction" language of the citizenship clause to exclude the children of certain aliens from the scope of the clause's protection .

to uphold a statute limiting birthright citizenship , it would also appear that the court would have to find either ( 1 ) that the discussion in wong kim ark apparently supporting the conventional interpretation of birthright citizenship was mere dicta , not binding precedent , and the case's holding was limited to the facts of that case ; or ( 2 ) that wong kim ark incorrectly interpreted the citizenship clause , at least in some respects , and should be overruled .

if a statute could not change the meaning of the citizenship clause , then a constitutional amendment , as some have proposed , would have the power to do so .

proponents and opponents of the current birthright citizenship rule have marshalled a variety of arguments and historical records on all of these points .

this report first sets the stage for analyzing the modern debates by providing a brief historical review of u.s. citizenship from the time of the founding through the civil rights act of 1866 and the citizenship clause of the fourteenth amendment of 1868 .

it then describes the primary supreme court decisions analyzing the scope of the citizenship clause , as well as subsequent decisions generally reflecting the conventional understanding of birthright citizenship .

this report then presents an overview of the main legal arguments for and against reassessing the scope of the citizenship clause , building on the history and judicial precedent described in previous sections .

in light of the various bills that have been proposed to modify birthright citizenship , this report closes by discussing the primary legal considerations that would determine whether any congressional action to restrict birthright citizenship of u.s. - born children of alien parents without constitutional amendment could be upheld .

the debate over american birthright citizenship for children of aliens has , of course , significant policy and political philosophy components — and real world consequences — which are generally outside the scope of this report .

in focusing on the legal and constitutional aspects of the debate , the remainder of this report begins by briefly introducing the main competing perspectives and their respective approaches to analyzing the history , constitutional text , and case law developments summarized in previous sections .

it then notes some legislative proposals to limit birthright citizenship and discusses how , if enacted , they would likely be assessed by the supreme court .

those who seek a reinterpretation of the citizenship clause would seem to face substantially greater legal and constitutional hurdles than those who would maintain the birthright citizenship status quo .

nevertheless , it is not necessarily clear that the question has been truly settled .

there are , broadly speaking , two sides to the current legal debate over whether the citizenship clause of the fourteenth amendment requires the automatic granting of u.s. citizenship to all persons born in the united states , including those born to unlawfully or temporarily present aliens .

it would be futile to attempt a comprehensive review of the many statements cited and arguments made on both sides , but even a summary of selected points illustrates the deep philosophical differences underlying the legal disagreements .

the following sections highlight a few of the principal themes , although a full examination of points and counter - points on the issues below — and others — is outside the scope of this report .

what is generally considered the majority view , embodied in applicable law and policy , is that the fourteenth amendment does require u.s. citizenship to be automatically conferred on "[a]ll persons born … in the united states" ; and that the phrase "subject to the jurisdiction thereof" excludes from that general rule only certain common - law - based exceptions to the jus soli doctrine , for those born in the united states to foreign diplomats , hostile occupying forces , or members of recognized indian tribes .

legally , the "jurisdiction" referred to by the citizenship clause is territorial jurisdiction , which is the power of a sovereign to enforce its laws within its territorial limits .

this conventional interpretation has been called the "ascriptive" view ( at least by some opponents ) because it determines citizenship by the objective geographical circumstances of a person's birth .

on the other side , some argue that the fourteenth amendment does not require u.s. citizenship to be automatically granted to persons born in the united states to aliens , especially those aliens who are present unlawfully or who are domiciled elsewhere .

the core of this argument is that the phrase "subject to the jurisdiction thereof" was intended to codify a limitation on the birthright citizenship principle that , in the words of two of its early proponents , "demanded a more or less complete , direct power by government over the individual , and a reciprocal relationship between them at the time of birth , in which the government consented to the individual's presence and status and offered him complete protection. .

the "jurisdiction" referred to by the citizenship clause , in this view , is a more "complete" jurisdiction that entails undivided allegiance .

this opposing view has been called the "consensual" approach , as its proponents would "make political membership a product of mutual consent by the polity and the individual. .

in short , as one of the aforementioned hamdi v. rumsfeld amicus brief argued unsuccessfully before the supreme court in 2004 , "[i]t is not the physical location of birth that defines citizenship , but the express or implied consent to jurisdiction of the sovereign. .

it is generally acknowledged that opposition to the conventional interpretation is the minority viewpoint .

both sides of the birthright citizenship debate look back to colonial and pre - colonial times for evidence for their respective positions .

some legal writers favoring a narrower reinterpretation of birthright citizenship have emphasized statements in english common law cases referring to "aliens in amity" ; they argue that even the common law doctrine of jus soli came to rely upon mutual consent between the citizen and the sovereign , and that the fourteenth amendment did not intend to abandon what they interpret as common law notions of consent .

other consensualist legal writers say that to the extent the english common law made persons english subjects purely on the basis of the place of their birth , the american revolution rejected this element of the english common law and enshrined more consensualist ideals of a social contract .

consensualist legal writers have also emphasized the right of expatriation , or the voluntary ending of citizenship , as a corollary that they argue supports an allegiance based approach to gaining citizenship at birth .

proponents of the conventional interpretation of the citizenship clause generally argue that the american founders understood the english common law doctrine of jus soli to include only limited exceptions for children born to diplomats and hostile occupying forces , and that , as various passages in the wong kim ark decision describe , this understanding of the jus soli doctrine informed the framing of the fourteenth amendment .

interpretations of the legislative history of the citizenship clause of the fourteenth amendment , and of its precursor language in the civil rights act of 1866 , are similarly divergent , even as to some of the very same passages in the congressional globe .

as recognized by the supreme court , "the legislative history of the fourteenth amendment … like most other legislative history , contains many statements from which conflicting inferences can be drawn…. .

those in favor of narrowing birthright citizenship often point to passages in the 1866 congressional debates referring to "complete jurisdiction" or notions of "allegiance," arguing that the framers of the fourteenth amendment would not have understood today's unlawfully present aliens or their u.s. born children as meeting these requirements .

however , the legislators' statements cited by consensualist writers were made largely , though not entirely , in the context of the exclusion from the citizenship clause of members of indian tribes .

as proponents of retaining birthright citizenship point out , other indicia in the legislative history indicate that children of aliens were considered differently than children of indian tribe members and were broadly intended to be included within the citizenship clause's scope .

the two sides also differ as to how the civil rights act of 1866's language giving citizenship to all persons born in the united states "not subject to any foreign power" should be evaluated in interpreting the modified language in the citizenship clause of the fourteenth amendment .

within the consensualist camp , it appears that most argue that wong kim ark could be interpreted narrowly , rather than overturned , in order to support reinterpreting the citizenship clause .

as noted above , wong kim ark's parents had apparently established as firm a foothold in the united states as was legally available to them ; the holding of the case referred to their "permanent domicil and residence in the united states" at the time of his birth , although the rest of the analysis and the discussion in the case ranged much more broadly .

proponents of the birthright citizenship status quo argue that the elk v. wilkins and wong kim ark supreme court decisions in the 1800s essentially settled the meaning of the citizenship clause , in part by enumerating the few exceptions to the jus soli doctrine , which did not include the unlawful or temporary presence in the united states of a person's alien parents at the time of that person's birth .

supporters of the ascriptive and consensual viewpoints also debate , for example , whether other case law supports giving the term "jurisdiction" in the citizenship clause its more conventional and straightforward definition based on geographic territoriality , or a narrower and more context - specific definition based on allegiance and consent .

supporters of the prevailing interpretation also argue that a broader interpretation of "jurisdiction" hews more closely to a textualist approach , and avoids having to draw an "elaborate construct" of consent and allegiance from contextual sources .

an argument often raised by those who wish to change the current rule of birthright citizenship is that illegal immigration , in the form it exists today , did not exist prior to the adoption of general immigration statutes , which was well after the adoption of the fourteenth amendment .

some commentators have argued that "it is simply wrong to assert that there has ever been a conscious deliberate decision , by the framers of the fourteenth amendment or its judicial interpreters , to accord birthright citizenship under the [citizenship] clause to children of illegal aliens. .

proponents of a narrower interpretation argue that the united states embraced a more open borders policy prior to the twentieth century , and point out that the framers of the fourteenth amendment apparently did not discuss unlawfully present aliens per se , as recorded in the congressional globe ( precursor to today's congressional record ) .

the wong kim ark decision also did not expressly declare that the children of unlawfully present aliens were included within the scope of the citizenship clause , because wong kim ark's parents had apparently been lawfully domiciled in san francisco at the time of his birth .

on the other hand , the chinese exclusion acts were a legal fact by the time the wong kim ark case was decided , and any chinese citizen who entered the united states in violation of these acts would have been unlawfully present .

violations of the chinese exclusion acts were known by the time of wong kim ark to have occurred , and some late nineteenth century writers believed they had occurred at a large scale .

some modern commenters have also pointed to slaves imported in violation of the slave import ban that took effect in 1808 , or to socially isolated and generally unwelcome "gypsies" allegedly entering the united states , as nineteenth century precursors to today's unlawfully present aliens that would have been known to the framers and judicial interpreters of the citizenship clause .

the discussion over whether modern illegal immigration is novel also raises broader issues regarding how to apply the constitution to social conditions that may have been unanticipated by the framers .

lawmakers in congress , as well as state - level legislators and various interest groups , have offered proposals since at least the early 1990s to restrict automatic u.s. citizenship at birth .

some of these have taken the form of resolutions proposing to amend the constitution , but it appears that the more often proposed approach is to amend the immigration and nationality act without constitutional amendment .

in 1995 , a hearing was held on a collection of bills and resolutions to deny automatic citizenship at birth to children born in the united states to parents who are not citizens or permanent residents .

a decade later , another hearing was held involving the topic of birthright citizenship .

more recently , companion measures entitled the "birthright citizenship act of 2015" were introduced in both the house and the senate .

the bills would amend section 301 of the immigration and nationality act to provide , applicable prospectively as of the date of enactment , that: acknowledging the right of birthright citizenship established by section 1 of the 14 th amendment to the constitution , a person born in the united states shall be considered 'subject to the jurisdiction' of the united states for purposes of subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) if the person is born in the united states of parents , one of whom is — ( 1 ) a citizen or national of the united states ; ( 2 ) an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the united states whose residence is in the united states ; or ( 3 ) an alien performing active service in the armed forces… .

in other words , if both parents were unlawfully present aliens or were present only on nonimmigrant visas or as refugees or asylees at the time of the birth of their child , that child would not be granted u.s. citizenship .

at least one parent would have to be a citizen , a non - citizen national ( such as an american samoan ) , a lawful permanent resident ( i.e. , green card holder ) , or actively serving in the u.s. armed forces in order for a u.s. born child to obtain citizenship at birth .

an amendment with similar contents was offered in march 2015 to the justice for victims of trafficking act , but the amendment was not added to the bill .

the house judiciary committee's subcommittee on immigration and border security held a hearing in april 2015 entitled "birthright citizenship: is it the right policy for america ? .

attendees and witnesses at the hearing extensively discussed legal and constitutional issues of restricting birthright citizenship by statute , including much of the historical development , legislative history , and case law reviewed in this report .

it is generally acknowledged , even by those who would change it , that the current policy of automatically granting u.s. citizenship to essentially every person born in the united states is at least permissible under the citizenship clause .

this is because the citizenship clause sets a minimum guarantee , a floor above which congress may but is not required to extend u.s. citizenship by birth to additional groups , as it has done for native americans and for children of u.s. citizens born abroad under certain circumstances .

if , as many argue , the current interpretation is required under the language and context of the citizenship clause and relevant judicial precedent , then a statute or other action purporting to reinterpret the citizenship clause more narrowly would be held unconstitutional , and a new amendment to the constitution would be necessary to impose new restrictions on america's birthright citizenship policy .

it would likely fall to the judicial branch to determine whether the citizenship clause would permit a narrower interpretation by congress ( or by the executive branch ) .

this determination could potentially require a court to weigh a number of complex considerations , including: canons of constitutional interpretation , including the degree to which textualist , originalist , traditionalist , prudential , and aspirational or ethical approaches should be applied to the citizenship clause ; separation of powers , and each branch's relative authority to interpret — and particularly to limit — rights set forth in the constitution , especially the fourteenth amendment ; stare decisis , or adherence to judicial precedent , and how to interpret and apply relevant cases ; and the specific nature and language of the citizenship - limiting statute or other action under review .

opinions on the most likely outcome of such a determination differ .

judge richard posner , of the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit , stated in a 1996 concurrence that "[a] constitutional amendment may be required to change the rule whereby birth in this country automatically confers u.s. citizenship , but i doubt it .

… congress would not be flouting the constitution if it amended the immigration and nationality act to put an end to the nonsense. .

some commentators have testified before congress that they believe a statute denying birthright citizenship to children of unlawfully present aliens would likely survive constitutional challenge .

others , however , have concluded that any of a number of legal and constitutional obstacles would more likely prove insurmountable to a narrower reinterpretation of the citizenship clause .

since automatic granting of american citizenship to all who are born here , without inquiring into parental origins or status , has been the practice and the law for more than a century , some supporters of the status quo have contended that a reinterpretation of the citizenship clause would mark a "seismic shift" in constitutional law .

the size of the policy change , in itself , could present an impediment to judicial support for the constitutionality of a citizenship - limiting statute .

opponents of reinterpretation could also urge a court to take into legal consideration what they view as practical , policy , or ethical considerations stemming from issues such as the potential for creation of a stateless subpopulation .

it has also been argued that "[t]he justices may also be reluctant to weaken a constitutional amendment explicitly designed to override a previous supreme court ruling — especially if that ruling was dred scott . .

on the other hand , proponents of a narrower reinterpretation could potentially avail themselves of a number of practical and policy counterarguments ; for example , some have asserted that a major divergence of modern circumstances from historical assumptions warrants a change from the prevailing interpretation .

congress's authority to reinterpret the citizenship clause , to exclude persons born in the united states to unlawfully or temporarily present aliens from its scope , would be significantly constrained if the wong kim ark decision and subsequent case law were to be interpreted as having settled that issue in favor of those persons' inclusion .

factors that the u.s. supreme court generally considers when responding to a request to overrule precedent include whether that precedent "has proved 'unworkable' … , the antiquity of the precedent , the reliance interests at stake , and of course whether the decision was well reasoned. .

ultimately , the court "does not overturn its precedents lightly .

stare decisis … is a foundation stone of the rule of law , … [and] 'any departure' from the doctrine 'demands special justification.' .

however , if any discussion in wong kim ark arguably extending beyond the citizenship of a person born to lawfully present and domiciled aliens is deemed mere dicta , unnecessary to the case's holding , then the court would not be bound by it , although it could still weigh the dicta's persuasive value .

other precedent less specific to citizenship issues could pose legal obstacles to a reinterpretation as well .

for example , courts would have to grapple with the meaning of "jurisdiction" as it has been interpreted in the context of the equal protection clause , which follows the citizenship clause in the fourteenth amendment .

finally , any statute reinterpreting the citizenship clause would be far more difficult to uphold if it were designed to operate retroactively to remove or revoke any living person's u.s. citizenship .

as stated by the supreme court in afroyim v. rusk , a 1967 case that held unconstitutional a statute that provided that a u.s. citizen would lose his citizenship upon voting in a political election in a foreign state: citizenship is no light trifle to be jeopardized any moment congress decides to do so under the name of one of its general or implied grants of power .

… the very nature of our free government makes it completely incongruous to have a rule of law under which a group of citizens temporarily in office can deprive another group of citizens of their citizenship .

we hold that the fourteenth amendment was designed to , and does , protect every citizen of this nation against a congressional forcible destruction of his citizenship , whatever his creed , color , or race .

our holding does no more than to give to this citizen that which is his own , a constitutional right to remain a citizen in a free country unless he voluntarily relinquishes that citizenship .

however , congress tends to propose applying birthright citizenship restrictions only prospectively , which , as a consequence , would not result in the loss of citizenship by any person already a citizen .

nevertheless , a number of hurdles to such bills likely remain , including but not limited to the weight of the legislative history of the fourteenth amendment , the extensive discussion in wong kim ark , the statements in various cases defining "jurisdiction" more often on the basis of territory rather than undivided allegiance , and the embrace of the prevailing birthright citizenship interpretation by more than a century of subsequent law and practice .

in light of these factors , it appears likely that a constitutional challenge to a statute denying citizenship to persons born to unlawfully present or nonimmigrant aliens could possibly succeed in barring the statute , absent a constitutional amendment providing that such persons do not acquire citizenship by right of their birth in the united states .

