established in 2010 , "feed the future" ( ftf ) is a major obama administration foreign assistance initiative designed to alleviate global poverty and improve health and food security .

it supports both implementation of president obama's 2010 policy directive on global development and u.s. food security pledges made at the g8 summit in 2009 .

ftf employs a whole - of - government approach to achieve these ends .

while ftf adds to the suite of existing u.s. international development programs and outlays , it has pioneered new approaches for achieving cross - sectoral international development goals and for aligning existing u.s. food and agriculture programs .

the administration views ftf as promoting a range of international agricultural development best practices and strategies .

ftf acts as a coordination mechanism for all u.s. international agricultural and food security development programs .

ftf is a new federal investment paradigm targeting sustainable reductions in international hunger , malnutrition , and food insecurity .

ftf seeks to foster transparency and accountability and track and assess program implementation progress through the use of publicly released metrics to justify u.s. investments in each recipient country and each development program , indicators to monitor and evaluate progress , and annual reports to congress .

the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) selects the main ftf recipient countries — known as "focus countries" under the initiative — based on country ownership potential , need , and opportunity for reducing food insecurity .

under usaid's selection process , ftf aid targets some of the world's poorest countries , but also channels investments to countries that show the greatest potential to achieve progress .

ftf also emphasizes sustainable and collaborative approaches to development .

key ftf operating principles include recipient - country ownership of and commitment of resources to country - specific investment plans ; reliance on measurable indicators to assess initial needs ; monitor progress toward targets ; and evaluate whether corrections , adjustments , or wholesale changes are needed mid - course ; use of a whole - of - government implementation strategy that cuts across existing u.s. international development programs to facilitate coordination and potentially prevent duplication and gaps ; and an emphasis on coordinating and partnering with recipient - country organizations and private sector entities , as well as with other donors and international organizations .

this report discusses these and other features of ftf .

key issues addressed include the origin , intent , and government - wide inter - agency development approach of ftf ; ftf program implementation , including monitoring and evaluation issues ; and funding .

this report also raises possible oversight issues for congress relating to ftf implementation .

possible matters of interest to members include the limited availability of usaid reporting on program impact results by country , and long - term institutional prospects for ftf , given its status as an ad hoc obama administration presidential initiative .

congress is presently evaluating the overall merits of ftf and whether to permanently authorize the initiative .

the administration established ftf to support implementation of president obama's 2009 pledge to reduce global hunger — a multi - year u.s. food security commitment made at the g8 summit in 2009 — and his 2010 policy directive on global development .

ftf was also motivated by the recognition that global investment in the agricultural sectors of many of the world's poorer nations had declined in recent decades .

investment in developing - country agriculture by the international donor community had fallen off sharply over the previous two decades — the share of total official development assistance devoted to agriculture had fallen to 6% by 2008 , down from 17% in the late 1980s .

matters were made worse by the global financial crisis that began in 2008 and the subsequent global recession , which left an international wake of rising unemployment and ever - tightening budgetary resources .

the administration established ftf , in part , as a vehicle for delivering on u.s. commitments to the international response to these challenges .

the administration also created ftf to act as a key framework for enhancing u.s. agricultural development assistance focused on food security and poverty alleviation goals , key foreign policy priorities of the obama administration .

in his first inaugural address , president obama signaled that alleviating global hunger would be a top priority of his administration .

later , in 2010 , he issued a presidential policy directive ( ppd ) on global development , which defined socioeconomic development as "vital to u.s. national security" and as "a strategic , economic , and moral imperative for the united states. .

three interrelated presidential initiatives , the global climate change initiative , the global health initiative , and ftf , are the core policy and program tools for achieving the goals of the ppd , which lays out the key precepts that define the operation of ftf .

according to usaid , the overarching goal of ftf is to sustainably reduce global hunger and poverty by tackling their root causes using proven strategies and management approaches .

these approaches include the development of strategies and interventions in coordination with stakeholders ; a commitment to sound investments in coordination with reliable partners ; and the adjustment of program elements and activities based on analyses of performance reports .

usaid also requires that host governments demonstrate commitment to the efforts that they agree to pursue under ftf .

ftf focuses on countries that have placed high priority on poverty and hunger reduction and have adopted national plans — called country investment plans ( cips ) — to achieve these ends .

according to usaid's f eed the future guide , ftf prioritizes investments that have the potential to achieve lasting and large - scale impacts — that is , outcomes that can most easily be expanded beyond a ftf activity's initial zone of influence ( zoi , i.e. , the area within a country where ftf operates ) and be sustained over time .

to implement ftf , the united states works with host governments , international and regional development partners , and other stakeholders .

congress has provided funding for ftf programs through the annual department of state , foreign operations and related programs ( sfops ) appropriations bill .

congress does not specify a funding level for feed the future as a whole , but rather allocates funds for bilateral food security and agricultural development activities ( implemented by usaid , mcc , and other agencies such as the peace corps ) , for multilateral food security accounts , and for global health programs implemented by usaid .

since 2010 , congress has allocated nearly $1 billion annually to food security and agricultural development activities under sfops appropriations .

the administration then determines whether or how to allocate these appropriations within the ftf framework .

as a result , it can be difficult to determine ftf funding patterns based on appropriations acts .

data reported in table 4 rely on ftf funding reported by the administration .

under the whole - of - government approach , ftf's operational strategy applies to other federal programs that invest in international agricultural development , even those that derive funding outside of ftf funding in the sfops appropriation .

whole - of - government outlays on food security and agricultural development programs grew nominally ( i.e. , in non - inflation adjusted terms ) from an estimated $1.7 billion in fy2010 to $2.6 billion in fy2013 before declining to $2.4 billion in fy2014 ( table 4 ) .

in addition , ftf efforts are complemented by u.s. spending for nutrition - specific activities under other global health programs and multilateral institutional investments in both health and food security .

usaid publishes an annual ftf progress report that includes data measuring progress made from baseline measures and toward aspirational targets based on select indicators .

usaid publishes ftf progress reports as part of its effort to establish a transparent set of overarching guidelines for justifying and implementing u.s. non - emergency food aid and agricultural development activities .

ftf was created as an ad hoc obama administration initiative .

according to the administration , the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , provides authority for ftf .

concerned that future administrations might not recognize or use that authority to pursue programs broadly akin to those being pursued under the ftf , members of congress introduced legislation in the 113 th congress to permanently authorize an agriculture - focused global food and nutrition security strategy and programs .

h.r .

1567 was enacted by congress and signed into law as p.l .

114-195 in july 2016 , establishing a specific statutory foundation for global food security assistance .

under this law , the president must develop a whole - of - government strategy to promote global food security , resilience , and nutrition , and submit the strategy , including agency - specific plans , to congress by october 1 , 2016 .

congressional consideration of that strategy may be on the agenda of the 115 th congress .

furthermore , the law authorizes funding to support the strategy ( just over $1 billion per year ) only for fy2017 and fy2018 , potentially requiring congressional action in the 115 th congress to extend the funding authorization .

the ftf initiative adopted a whole - of - government approach ostensibly to ensure coordination of related activities and to tap expertise residing outside of the principal agencies in charge of development assistance , usaid and mcc .

the extent to which ftf capitalizes on the expertise and budgetary resources of different u.s. government agencies is difficult to measure .

according to one analyst: success will depend on the lead agency's ability to overcome inherent problems , and that often depends on the nature of the lead agency's political position within the administration .

collaborating is time consuming particularly in the beginning when time must be spent defining interagency roles and responsibilities .

every agency within a whole of government construct has its own structure , culture , and decision making process that may not be compatible in terms of budgeting , transparency or accountability .

each agency's congressional oversight and appropriations panels may be unevenly committed to the effort .

the programs of various agencies do not always lend themselves to common frames of evaluation , monitoring , and correlating adjustments .

each of these challenges is mirrored and often amplified within u.s. embassy country teams .

similarly , in a september 2013 report , gao found that administration of ftf has remained dominated by usaid: usaid leads the whole - of - government approach by better coordinating and integrating partner agencies' knowledge and expertise at three levels: at headquarters in washington , d.c. ; in each of the 19 ftf focus countries ; and between the countries and headquarters .

in headquarters , usaid and ftf partner agencies established joint strategies and new data management systems to track funding and results across the u.s. government .

at the country level , in gao's survey of u.s. ftf partner agency representatives in 19 ftf focus countries , 93 percent reported coordinating with usaid .

the ftf 2010 guide characterizes "country - led planning" of ftf activities as a key process for ensuring country ownership , program relevance , and sustainability of impacts over time .

in the past , some members of congress have voiced concern over country - led planning because it diminishes donor control and oversight , specifically with respect to relative alignment with broad , global donor development and foreign policy objectives .

others have voiced concern that some developing countries lack the capacity to develop robust strategic plans , and may have a limited capacity to carry out accountability and transparency measures required by donors .

still others within civil society have voiced concerns over the possibility that country - led planning processes may privilege government - led strategies and not adequately include the inputs and perspectives of civil society and nongovernmental organizations ( csos and ngos ) , or private sector actors , or citizens .

while the ftf guide emphasizes partnering across a range of civil society organizations within focus countries , the actual measurement of their level of effective participation is likely subjective .

gao , in its september 2013 report , found that ( at that time ) usaid had facilitated a country - led approach but had not systematically assessed risks associated with this approach .

it reported that usaid has facilitated the approach by providing assistance to the host governments in developing country plans and coordinating on ftf with country stakeholders , including nonprofit and for - profit organizations .

u.s. ftf partner agency representatives answering gao's survey reported working with multiple country stakeholders on ftf .

in its march 2010 report , gao found that the country - led approach was vulnerable to a number of risks , including insufficient capacity of host governments to meet funding commitments for agriculture .

usaid has since made some progress in monitoring these risks , including tracking the number of focus countries that increase public expenditure for agriculture .

however , gao's current study found that usaid's ftf multiyear country strategies did not systematically assess risks to the country - led approach .

although usaid country guidance documents indicate that country teams must assess risks associated with usaid's development objectives , the agency does not require country teams or ftf programs to systematically respond to and mitigate such risks , potentially raising opportunity cost losses associated with not doing so .

under the ftf whole - of - government approach , food for peace ( ffp ) development food aid programs are considered to be part of the ftf initiative , at least to the extent that they are coordinated with ftf goals and monitoring and evaluation strategies .

ffp development programs include non - emergency title ii activities .

the funding for ffp development programs derives primarily from non - ftf appropriations .

for example , ffp title ii and mcgovern - dole ( food for education ) funding derives from annual agricultural appropriations .

food for progress receives mandatory funding through usda's commodity credit corporation .

ffp title ii food aid ( historically referred to as p.l .

480 ) is arguably a larger component of u.s. food security assistance than ftf .

the administration's fy2016 request includes $1.4 billion for ffp title ii food aid compared with an ftf budget request of $0.9 billion .

the majority of ffp funds , however , must be used to purchase and deliver emergency food supplies rather than address long - term food security .

the independent nature of such appropriations , as well as the dedicated authorities under which these programs operate , may mean that they are not well suited or structured for integration with ftf or other complementary programs .

this likely does not pose major challenges to the goals set out under ftf .

in practice , there has long been at least some coordination and complementarity between these programs .

in some cases , usaid has played a key or lead role in their administration .

usaid , for instance , is the implementing agency for both ffp title ii and ftf .

the broad application of ftf guidelines to ffp programs closely dovetails with the preexisting objectives of ffp .

this may ensure more effective joint coordination , monitoring , and reporting on progress toward common , measurable goals .

in some countries ftf community development funds are programmed jointly by ftf and ffp .

a separate concern is the ffp program's continued use of in - kind donations , the use of which may conflict with ftf goals of improving agricultural productivity and enhancing rural incomes in focus countries that receive both donations under ffp and investments under ftf .

the united states continues to rely primarily on in - kind transfers of domestically purchased commodities ( acquired by usda and transferred to usaid for shipment ) , shipped primarily on u.s. - flag vessels , as the basis for international food aid ( referred to as "tied food aid" ) .

ffp programs are , by law , restricted to in - kind transfers of u.s. - sourced commodities , even though multiple studies and gao reports over the past decade have provided evidence of economic inefficiencies and potential market distortions associated with in - kind food aid compared with cash - based assistance .

in particular , monetization of in - kind food aid — in which imported food aid is sold on local markets to generate funds for development programs — has the potential to depress local market prices , as well as small farmer revenues and production incentives .

both the george w. bush and obama administrations ( via their annual budget requests ) , as well as certain members of congress , via bills in the 113 th ( h.r .

5656 and s. 2909 ) and 114 th ( s. 525 ) congresses , have proposed making changes to the structure and intent of u.s. food aid programs .

proposed changes include , among others , expanding flexibility in the use of cash - based forms of assistance and eliminating both cargo preference and monetization .

the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 ) provided some additional flexibility , increasing the maximum amount of allowable cash assistance for administrative costs for usaid's food assistance programs from 13% to 20% , with the purpose of limiting monetization .

however , other proposed changes have yet to be approved by congress .

since 2010 , usaid's office of food for peace has managed funds appropriated through the international disaster assistance ( ida ) account in addition to p.l .

480 ffp program funds .

these funds complement usaid's in - kind food aid and may be used where cash assistance is most appropriate due to local market conditions or when in - kind food aid cannot arrive in time .

in fy2014 , the office of food for peace contributed approximately $865 million in ida funds ( both base and overseas contingency operations funds ) to support local and regional food procurement as well as cash transfers and vouchers to address emergency food security needs .

adjusting the relative funding levels for p.l .

480 and non - p.l .

480 humanitarian accounts , such as ida , is one way in which congress may address the limitations of the ffp program .

another issue related to ffp title ii food aid concerns whether its substantial emergency donations are purely humanitarian in nature , rather than substantially related to ftf development goals , and to the extent , if any , to which they are subject to ftf monitoring and evaluation .

usaid may use ffp title ii in - kind donations for both emergency and non - emergency ( or development ) assistance .

since 2003 nearly 75% of title ii food aid has consisted of emergency food aid .

despite the emphasis on coordination of u.s. food aid programs , little mention is made of whether and how u.s. emergency food aid fits into the overall ftf strategy .

key questions relating to ffp food aid programs may include the following: do emergency food aid activities effectively reinforce the objectives of ftf ? .

conversely , could there be adverse effects for ftf activities from in - kind food aid projects ? .

finally , to what extent are ftf guidelines being applied to mcgovern - dole and food for progress programs when they are implemented in non - focus countries ? .

program evaluation involves the use of measurable criteria described and measured by a performance indicator to assess program efficacy .

examples of evaluation tracking indicators include improvements in a child's physical growth , expanded crop area under a new technology or management practice , output per unit of an agricultural production activity , or the percent of national budget allocated to nutrition or agriculture .

ftf currently uses 53 indicators to measure progress toward each result in the four levels of the results framework ( rf ) ( table a - 1 ) .

to prioritize ftf investments , each focus country determines which section of the rf is most applicable in its country context and which linkages will have the greatest potential for change .

all countries must seek to achieve the overall rf goal and objectives .

they then select from among eight potential intermediate results those that are most likely to help them meet their particular needs .

under the second level — the objectives — the rf posits six indicators ( three for each objective ) for measuring results with respect to achieving the objective .

accelerating inclusive agricultural growth is assessed by ( 1 ) agriculture sector gdp ; ( 2 ) per capita expenditures of rural households ; and ( 3 ) the women's empowerment in agriculture index ( weai , discussed earlier ) .

similarly , to measure progress toward the objective of improving nutritional status , especially of women and children , the rf lists three nutrition - oriented indicators: ( 1 ) prevalence of stunted children , ( 2 ) prevalence of wasted children , and ( 3 ) prevalence of underweight women .

the third rf level of eight intermediate results ( irs ) is specified under the two objectives .

for example , irs for agricultural sector growth are measures of improved agricultural productivity and expanding markets and trade .

irs for the nutrition objective include improved use of maternal and child health and nutrition services and improved access to diverse and quality foods .

the fourth level of the rf — specific sub - irs — varies by country and region .

each focus country selects project - level indicators from the set of 53 indicators to best measure progress against the chosen sections of the rf .

a baseline for each indicator assesses initial need and provides a reference for measuring progress .

for each indicator selected , countries set targets and routinely track progress toward them .

while countries monitor performance against applicable output and outcome indicators for their projects and programs , an m&e contractor monitors higher - level impact indicators , such as "prevalence of poverty," to maintain consistency in reporting across focus countries and to reduce workload in the field .

ftf performance management plans ( pmps ) are developed by the ftf mission ( i.e. , the whole - of - government u.s. team ) for each country .

in addition , ftf implementing partners will develop pmps for all projects supported by the mission .

of the 53 ftf performance indicators , 8 are required , and 21 are required , if applicable , to enable ftf missions to ensure comprehensive reporting on ftf objectives .

additional indicators , including custom indicators tailored to measure specific projects , can be used as needed .

usaid identifies 9 indicators as whole - of - government indicators ( table a - 2 ) .

these are indicators that other u.s. government agencies supporting food security programs and services with non - ftf funding ( eg , mcc , usda , etc. ) .

have pledged to use .

usaid encourages use of as many of the 53 indicators as applicable to their work .

