the federal reserve's ( fed's ) responsibilities as the nation's central bank fall into four main categories: monetary policy , provision of emergency liquidity through the lender of last resort function , supervision of certain types of banks and other financial firms for safety and soundness , and provision of payment system services to financial firms and the government .

the 114 th congress is considering a number of bills that would affect the fed's monetary policy , lender of last resort , and regulatory responsibilities .

although these bills contain a number of wide - ranging provisions , most provisions can be grouped into four broad categories: changes to fed g overnance .

some proposals would change the fed's institutional structure — how officials are selected , how policy decisions are reached , and so on .

changes to oversight and disclosure .

some proposals aim to make the fed more accountable to congress by increasing congressional oversight or requiring the fed to disclose more information to congress and the public .

changes i nvolving policy rules ( i.e. , the taylor rule ) .

some proposals would require the fed to compare its monetary policy decisions to those prescribed by a taylor rule ( described below ) and report those findings to congress .

changes to the fed's emergency lending powers .

some proposals would reduce the fed's discretion to provide emergency assistance under section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act .

this report analyzes these provisions and the policy debate surrounding them .

it does not cover legislation that would change regulations administered by the fed ; for more information on those proposals , see crs report r44035 , "regulatory relief" for banking: selected legislation in the 114th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

the following bills affecting the federal reserve have seen committee or floor action in the 114 th congress .

the fed oversight reform and modernization act ( form act ; h.r .

3189 ) and the centennial monetary commission act , h.r .

2912 , were ordered to be reported by the house financial services committee on july 29 , 2015 .

after h.r .

2912 and h.r .

3189 were reported , h.r .

2912 was added to h.r .

3189 before the latter passed the house on november 19 , 2015 .

many of the provisions of h.r .

3189 as passed were then included in the financial choice act ( h.r .

5983 ) , which was ordered to be reported by the house financial services committee on september 13 , 2016 .

the financial regulatory improvement act ( s. 1484 ) was reported by the senate banking committee on june 2 , 2015 .

title 5 includes provisions related to the fed .

s. 1484 was then included , along with other provisions related to financial regulation , in the fy2016 financial services and general government appropriations act ( s. 1910 ) , which was reported by the senate appropriations committee on july 30 , 2015 .

on january 12 , 2016 , the senate voted not to invoke cloture on a motion to proceed to debate on the federal reserve transparency act ( s. 2232 ) .

in the house , a similar bill , the federal reserve transparency act ( h.r .

24 ) , was ordered to be reported by the house oversight and government reform committee on may 17 , 2016 .

provisions that modify the fed were also included in two unrelated bills that became law: the terrorism risk insurance program reauthorization act ( h.r .

26 / p.l .

114-1 ) , which was signed into law on january 12 , 2015 , and the fixing america's surface transportation act ( h.r .

22 / p.l .

114-94 ) , which was signed into law on december 4 , 2015 .

the following table summarizes the provisions of these bills according to the four categories above .

the remainder of the report analyzes the provisions in these bills affecting the fed .

the various proposals reviewed in this report are wide ranging and diverse ; many are united by the goals of increasing the fed's accountability to congress and decreasing fed discretion .

whereas some provisions make very minor changes , taken together the proposals would arguably somewhat reduce the fed's independence from congress .

there is a long - standing policy debate about how independent regulatory agencies should be from congress and the administration , with proponents of independence arguing that it will lead to more technocratic decisionmaking and opponents arguing it leads to opaque , undemocratic , and unresponsive decisionmaking .

for decades , the fed has enjoyed an unusual degree of independence from congress and the president compared with other government agencies , which has typically been justified in terms of insulating its monetary policy decisions from political pressures .

to some extent , a tradeoff between independence and accountability is unavoidable .

besides the taylor rule , few of the provisions reviewed here directly relate to monetary policy , but may indirectly influence monetary policy through changes in how decisions are made , who makes decisions , and congress's oversight of those decisions .

