this report provides an overview of fy2016 appropriations actions for accounts traditionally funded in the appropriations bill for the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( lhhs ) .

this bill provides discretionary and mandatory appropriations to three federal departments: the department of labor ( dol ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the department of education ( ed ) .

in addition , the bill provides annual appropriations for more than a dozen related agencies , including the social security administration ( ssa ) .

discretionary funds represent less than one - quarter of the total funds appropriated in the lhhs bill .

nevertheless , the lhhs bill is typically the largest single source of discretionary funds for domestic non - defense federal programs among the various appropriations bills ( the department of defense bill is the largest source of discretionary funds among all federal programs ) .

the bulk of this report is focused on discretionary appropriations because these funds receive the most attention during the appropriations process .

the lhhs bill typically is one of the more controversial of the regular appropriations bills because of the size of its funding total and the scope of its programs , as well as various related policy issues addressed in the bill such as restrictions on the use of federal funds for abortion and for research on human embryos and stem cells .

congressional clients may consult the lhhs experts list in crs report r42638 , appropriations: crs experts for information on which analysts to contact at the congressional research service ( crs ) with questions on specific agencies and programs funded in the lhhs bill .

this report is divided into several sections .

the opening section provides an explanation of the scope of the lhhs bill ( and hence , the scope of this report ) , as well as an introduction to important terminology and concepts that carry throughout the report .

next is a series of sections describing major congressional actions on fy2016 appropriations and ( for context ) a review of the conclusion of the fy2015 appropriations process .

this is followed by a high - level summary and analysis of proposed and enacted appropriations for fy2016 , compared to fy2015 enacted funding levels .

the body of the report concludes with overview sections for each of the major titles of the bill: dol , hhs , ed , and related agencies .

these sections provide selected highlights from fy2016 proposed and enacted funding levels , compared to fy2015 enacted funding levels .

finally , an appendix provides a summary of budget enforcement activities for fy2016 .

this includes information on the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) , the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) , and sequestration , as well as efforts related to the budget resolution , subcommittee spending allocations , and the final enacted levels for fy2016 .

 table 1 provides a timeline of major legislative actions toward full - year fy2016 lhhs appropriations .

the remainder of this section provides additional detail on these and other steps toward full - year lhhs appropriations .

it also provides a summary of the supplemental appropriations for hhs that were enacted as part of the zika response and preparedness appropriations act , 2016 .

 table 2 displays fy2016 discretionary and mandatory lhhs budget authority provided or proposed , by bill title , along with fy2015 enacted levels .

the amounts shown in this table reflect total budget authority provided in the bill ( i.e. , all funds appropriated in the current bill , regardless of the fiscal year in which the funds become available ) , not total budget authority available for the current fiscal year .

 ( for a comparable table showing current - year budget authority , see table a - 2 in the appendix . ) .

figure 2 displays the fy2016 enacted discretionary and mandatory lhhs funding levels , by bill title .

as this figure demonstrates , hhs accounts for the largest share of total fy2016 lhhs appropriations: $732 billion , or 82% of total lhhs appropriations .

this is due to the large amount of mandatory funding included in the hhs appropriation , the majority of which is for medicaid grants to states and payments to health care trust funds .

after hhs , ed and the related agencies represent the next - largest shares of total lhhs funding , accounting for about 8% apiece .

the majority of the ed appropriations are discretionary , while the bulk of funding for the related agencies goes toward mandatory payments and administrative costs of the supplemental security income program at the social security administration .

finally , dol accounts for the smallest share of total lhhs funds: roughly 2% .

when looking only at discretionary appropriations , however , the overall composition of lhhs funding is noticeably different .

hhs accounts for a comparatively smaller share of total discretionary appropriations ( 44% ) , while ed accounts for a relatively larger share ( 40% ) .

together , these two departments represent the majority ( 84% ) of discretionary lhhs appropriations .

meanwhile , dol and related agencies combine to account for a roughly even split of the remaining 16% of discretionary lhhs funds .

note that all amounts in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only .

amounts in this section do not include mandatory funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for unemployment insurance benefits payments ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable , nor do they reflect transfers or reprogramming of funds pursuant to executive authorities .

note that all figures in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only ; they do not include funds for hhs agencies provided through other appropriations bills ( eg , funding for the food and drug administration ) or outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for medicare or pre - appropriated mandatory funds provided by authorizing laws , such as the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes discussed in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts generally do not reflect sequestration ( except in the case of transfers from the prevention and public health fund , as discussed below ) or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable , nor do they reflect transfers or reprogramming of funds pursuant to executive authorities .

amounts in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only .

they do not include mandatory funds provided outside of the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for federal direct student loans and pell grants ) .

amounts are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar and percentage changes discussed are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable , nor do they reflect transfers or reprogramming of funds pursuant to executive authorities .

note that figures in this section are based on regular lhhs appropriations only ; they do not include funds provided outside the annual appropriations process ( eg , direct appropriations for old - age , survivors , and disability insurance benefit payments by the social security administration ) .

all amounts in this section are rounded to the nearest million or billion ( as labeled ) .

the dollar changes and percentage changes in the text are based on unrounded amounts .

for consistency with source materials , amounts do not reflect sequestration or re - estimates of mandatory spending programs , where applicable , nor do they reflect transfers or reprogramming of funds pursuant to executive authorities .

the fy2016 omnibus provided roughly $70.8 billion in combined mandatory and discretionary appropriations for related agencies funded through this bill .

this is about $740 million ( +1% ) more than the fy2015 enacted level and $476 million ( - 0.7% ) less than the fy2016 president's request .

 ( see table 10 . ) .

of the total provided for related agencies in the fy2016 omnibus , roughly $14.6 billion ( 21% ) is discretionary .

the largest share of funding appropriated to related agencies in the lhhs bill consistently goes to the social security administration ( ssa ) .

when taking into account both mandatory and discretionary funding , ssa accounts for 97% of the entire related agencies appropriation in the lhhs title of the fy2016 omnibus .

the bulk of mandatory ssa funding from the lhhs bill supports the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program , which provides means - tested cash benefits to disabled children and adults and to persons age 65 and older .

when looking exclusively at discretionary funding , ssa remains the largest component of the related agencies appropriation , constituting 84% of discretionary funds fy2016 .

the majority of discretionary ssa funding covers administrative expenses for social security , ssi , and medicare .

after ssa , the next - largest agency of the related agencies appropriation is the corporation for national and community service ( cncs ) , which accounts for less than 2% of the entire related agencies appropriation in the fy2016 omnibus .

typically , each of the remaining related agencies receives less than $1 billion from the annual lhhs appropriations bill .

for more information , see table 11 .

the fy2016 omnibus appropriated nearly $12.2 billion for the ssa limitation on administrative expenses ( lae ) account , which provides the administrative funding for all ssa programs and operations except the office of the inspector general ( oig ) .

the fy2016 appropriation of $12.2 billion for all lae activities is more than the fy2015 enacted level ( +3% ) , as well as the house ( +3% ) , and senate ( +5% ) committee bills for fy2016 , but it is less than the fy2016 president's request ( - 3% ) .

out of the total amounts appropriated to the lae account , the omnibus reserves $1.4 billion for program integrity activities , such as continuing disability reviews and ssi non - medical redeterminations of eligibility .

the majority of program integrity funding ( nearly $1.2 billion ) was provided as spending that is effectively exempt from the budget caps , as authorized by the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 , as amended .

the fy2016 omnibus maintained funding at $274 million for the national labor relations board ( nlrb ) , an independent board that enforces provisions in the national labor relations act .

this is the same amount the nlrb received in fy2015 , but is more than the nlrb would have received in the fy2016 house ( +37% ) or senate ( +11% ) committee bills .

the omnibus retained one existing administrative provision related to the nlrb , but did not include any of the new nlrb provisions proposed in the fy2016 house and senate committee bills .

specifically , the fy2016 omnibus retained a provision from the fy2015 omnibus that prohibits any funds appropriated to the nlrb in the bill , or any prior appropriations act , from being used to issue a directive or regulation to provide employees a means of voting through any electronic means in an election determining representation for collective bargaining ; did not include a new provision proposed in both the house and senate committee bills that would have prohibited any funds made available by the bill from being used to implement or enforce any rule that amends current regulations related to filing and processing petitions in collective bargaining procedures ; did not include a new provision that would have prohibited certain funds from being used to investigate , issue , enforce , or litigate any administrative action related to changing the interpretation or application of the "joint employer" standard in effect as of january 1 , 2014 ; and did not include a new provision that would have prohibited any funds made available by the bill from being used in any way to change the standard for initial bargaining unit determination that differs from the standard set in a recent court decision .

the framework for budget enforcement under the congressional budget process has both statutory and procedural elements .

the statutory elements include the discretionary spending limits and mandatory spending sequester derived from the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) and the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca ; p.l .

99-177 ) .

the procedural elements are primarily associated with the budget resolution and limit both total discretionary spending and spending under the jurisdiction of each appropriations subcommittee .

readers should note that budget enforcement requirements for fy2016 have been affected by the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) , which was signed into law on november 2 , 2015 .

among other things , this law increased the statutory discretionary spending limits for fy2016 and fy2017 , and extended the mandatory sequester to fy2025 .

the discussion below reflects these changes .

budget control act and sequestration the bca provides budget process mechanisms to reduce mandatory spending and further reduce discretionary spending over an extended period .

for mandatory spending , reductions are to occur through sequestration in each of fiscal years between fy2013-fy2025 .

for discretionary spending , reductions occurred through sequestration in fy2013 , but are to be achieved through lower discretionary spending limits for each of the fiscal years between fy2014-fy2021 .

the bca does not call for sequestration of discretionary spending in fy2014-fy2021 unless one or both of the statutory discretionary spending limits ( defense and nondefense ) is breached .

the lhhs bill only includes funding in the nondefense category .

fy2016 on february 2 , 2015 , concurrent with the release of the president's budget , president obama issued the required fy2016 sequestration order , calling for nonexempt mandatory spending to be reduced on october 1 , 2015 .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) estimated that the fy2016 sequestration percentages would equal 2% of nonexempt medicare spending and 6.8% of other nonexempt nondefense mandatory spending , for a total reduction of $18 billion in fy2016 .

 ( omb also estimated a 9.3% reduction , totaling $758 million , in nonexempt defense mandatory spending , but this is not applicable to lhhs funds. ) .

the bca does not require sequestration of discretionary spending in fy2016 , unless one or both of the statutory discretionary spending limits is breached .

as amended by the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) , the fy2016 statutory spending limits are $548.091 billion for defense spending and $518.491 billion for nondefense spending , for a combined total of $1.067 trillion .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 increased the defense and nondefense discretionary limits by $25 billion apiece , compared to the previous fy2016 statutory limits .

according to omb , after making allowable adjustments to the statutory discretionary spending limits , the fy2016 omnibus did not violate either the defense or the nondefense limit .

cap adjustments , exemptions , and special rules the bca allows for certain adjustments to the discretionary spending limits for fy2012-fy2021 .

for lhhs , the most notable of these is for increases to the nondefense limit ( up to a point ) to accommodate new budget authority for specified program integrity initiatives at hhs and the social security administration ( ssa ) .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 amended the list of ssa activities that may be covered by this "cap adjustment" to include costs associated with work - related continuing disability reviews , cooperative disability investigations , and fraud prosecutions by u.s .

attorneys .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 also revised the amount of the allowable ssa adjustment amounts to be more generous in fy2017-fy2019 , but less generous in fy2021 .

in addition , although sequestration largely consists of automatic , across - the - board spending reductions , the law exempts a limited number of programs from sequestration and subjects others to special rules .

the lhhs bill contains several programs that are exempt from sequestration , including medicaid , payments to health care trust funds , supplemental security income , special benefits for disabled coal miners , retirement pay and medical benefits for commissioned public health service officers , foster care and adoption assistance , and certain family support payments .

the lhhs bill also contains several programs that are subject to special rules under sequestration , such as unemployment compensation , certain student loans , health centers , and portions of medicare .

budget resolution and 302 ( b ) suballocations the procedural elements of budget enforcement generally stem from requirements under the congressional budget act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-44 ) that are associated with the adoption of an annual budget resolution .

through this process , the appropriations committee in each chamber receives a procedural limit on the total amount of discretionary budget authority for the upcoming fiscal year , referred to as a 302 ( a ) allocation .

the appropriations committee subsequently divides this allocation among its 12 subcommittees .

these subcommittee - level spending limits are referred to as 302 ( b ) suballocations .

the 302 ( b ) suballocations restrict the amount of budget authority available to each subcommittee for the agencies , projects , and activities under its jurisdiction , effectively acting as a cap on each of the 12 regular appropriations bills .

enforcement of the 302 ( a ) allocation and 302 ( b ) suballocations occurs through points of order .

final action on the fy2016 budget resolution ( s.con.res .

11 ) occurred on may 5 , 2015 .

the joint explanatory statement associated with the budget resolution provided 302 ( a ) allocations for the house and senate appropriations committees that were consistent with the fy2016 statutory discretionary spending limits in place at that time , though these limits were subsequently amended by the bipartisan budget act of 2015 .

the house and senate appropriations committees reported initial fy2016 302 ( b ) suballocations based on the overall levels provided by the budget resolution .

suballocations are commonly revised throughout the year to reflect changes in the distribution of funds due across bills resulting from the latest appropriations action and changes in congressional priorities .

the formal suballocations are not always publically updated to reflect changes to the distribution across bills .

the senate most recently reported revised suballocations on december 18 , which was after the increases made to the statutory discretionary spending limits by the bipartisan budget act of 2015 .

the house most recently reported revised fy2016 suballocations on july 10 , which was prior to the increases to those limits .

table a - 1 shows the most recently reported fy2016 house and senate 302 ( b ) suballocations for lhhs of discretionary spending subject to the statutory discretionary spending limits , along with comparable fy2015 and fy2016 enacted levels .

note that compliance with discretionary spending allocations is evaluated based on budget authority available in the current fiscal year , adjusted for scorekeeping by the congressional budget office .

as such , totals shown in this table may not be comparable to other totals shown in this report .

current - year budget authority totals exclude advance appropriations for future years , but include advance appropriations from prior years that become available in the current year .

advance appropriations are provided to selected lhhs accounts , generally in order to manage specific planning concerns and ensure continuity of operations at the start of a new fiscal year .

current - year budget authority table a - 2 displays the total lhhs current - year budget authority , by title , as provided in the fy2015 enacted , fy2016 house and senate proposals , and fy2016 enacted .

the amounts shown in this table reflect total budget authority available for obligation in the fiscal year , regardless of the year in which it was first appropriated .

 ( for a comparable table showing total budget authority in the bill , rather than current - year budget authority , see table 2 in the body of this report. ) .

as mentioned above , it is current - year budget authority ( adjusted for scorekeeping by cbo ) that is used to determine compliance with discretionary spending allocations .

