u.s. pharmaceutical manufacturers spend billions of dollars annually on special assistance programs to defray the consumer cost of prescription drugs .

many manufacturers offer prescription drug discount coupons that reduce or eliminate required out - of - pocket payments for consumers , including insurance deductibles , co - payments , and coinsurance .

likewise , pharmaceutical manufacturers , along with some state governments and independent charities , operate patient assistance programs ( paps ) that provide free drugs or financial aid to help eligible individuals pay for prescription drugs based on factors including income , medical necessity , and health insurance status .

many paps are set up as 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) nonprofit foundations or charities .

pharmaceutical companies may qualify for federal tax deductions for the donation of inventory through their own manufacturer paps or for making cash donations to independent charity paps .

prescription drug assistance programs have increased in value and scope in recent years , even as the number of consumers with drug coverage has expanded .

a study of retail pharmacy data found that enrollees in commercial insurance plans used co - payment coupons for one out of every five brand - name drug prescriptions in 2016 .

for some brands , coupon use was as high as two - thirds of filled prescriptions .

likewise , an analysis of internal revenue service ( irs ) data found that giving by 10 large manufacturer paps rose from $376 million in 2001 to $6.1 billion in 2014 , accounting for 85% of all pharmaceutical giving and one - sixth of all u.s. corporate charity deductions in 2014 .

giving by five of the main independent charity paps increased from $2 million in 2001 to $868 million in 2014 , according to the study .

pharmaceutical manufacturers say their assistance programs are evidence of their commitment to ensure that prescription drugs remain affordable .

they note that although more people have insurance , a growing number of insured consumers have difficulty meeting required prescription co - payments , deductibles , and other out - of - pocket costs .

that is especially true for people prescribed high - cost specialty drugs .

manufacturers and drug marketers also view paps as a tool for creating brand loyalty and developing markets for new drugs .

there is some evidence that coupons may be a useful tool in improving enrollee adherence to expensive prescriptions , thereby improving health outcomes .

a 2014 health affair s study using data from prime therapeutics , a pharmacy benefit manager ( pbm ) owned by a group of blue cross and blue shield plans , found that coupons helped consumers save $6 of every $10 in out - of - pocket costs for specialty drugs , making the high - cost products more affordable for more patients and potentially improving adherence .

however , the authors added that the increased use of coupons could increase costs for other beneficiaries in a health care plan if a payer decided to raise plan premiums , deductibles , or cost sharing to offset some of the expenses of the higher drug utilization .

health payers note that discount coupons can actually increase their costs by inducing individuals to use more expensive brand - name drugs in cases where generics or other lower - cost substitutes are available .

other studies by industry analysts and the department of health and human services' office of inspector general ( hhs oig ) have found that although the assistance programs expand access to drugs , they also bolster prices of prescription products .

a drug discount coupon may reduce the amount an insured consumer has to pay out of pocket for a drug , but it generally does not reduce the price an insurer or government program is charged for the drug .

the same is true with cost - sharing assistance offered through certain paps .

more broadly , when consumers are relieved of cost - sharing obligations , there may be less market constraint on drug prices .

a recent study of coupons for brand - name drugs for which generics were available found the coupons reduced the rate of generic substitution .

the brand - name drugs with coupon offers had 12% - 13% annual price growth , compared to 7% - 8% price growth for those without coupons .

there are restrictions on the use of pharmaceutical assistance .

drug coupons may not be used in conjunction with federal programs such as the medicare part d prescription drug benefit because the coupons may implicate federal anti - kickback law .

manufacturer - sponsored paps may not offer cost - sharing assistance to enrollees in medicare part d and other federal programs .

however , paps operated by independent charities ( which are allowed to receive cash donations from drug companies ) may assist federal beneficiaries , if the paps comply with certain conditions .

in the private sector , some health care payers and pbms have barred enrollees from redeeming manufacturer coupons for certain drugs .

others have decided not to include certain pharmaceuticals on their formulary , or list of covered drugs , if the products have coupon discounts .

this report provides an overview of consumer spending on prescription drugs ; explains the difference between drug coupons and paps ; and outlines federal laws and regulations and private - sector policies relating to coupons and paps .

pharmaceutical assistance programs , in their current form , developed in the 1990s in response to public concern about high drug price inflation .

the programs grew substantially in following decades despite a broad expansion of health insurance drug coverage and the widespread adoption of low - cost generic drugs .

millions of consumers gained prescription drug coverage through medicare part d ( medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ; p.l .

108-173 ) and the 2010 patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

the aca , among other things , caps total annual out - of - pocket spending in many commercial health plans , including drug spending ; eliminates cost sharing for contraceptives in many health plans ; and reduces annual cost sharing for part d enrollees .

generic drug use now accounts for about 89% of filled prescriptions and 27% of total drug spending , according to the generic pharmaceutical association .

largely as a result of these trends , consumer out - of - pocket spending — cash payments , health plan deductibles , coinsurance , and co - payments — declined from 57% of u.s. retail drug spending in 1990 to 14% in 2015 .

spending by commercial payers and taxpayer - financed health programs rose from 43% to 86% of u.s. retail drug expenditures during this same period .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

likewise , per capita out - of - pocket spending declined from 56% of total out - of - pocket drug spending in 1990 to 14% in 2015 .

looking forward , the national health expenditure ( nhe ) expects per capita out - of - pocket spending to rise by about 4% a year from 2016 through 2025 .

however , because cost sharing is not projected to increase as fast as total drug spending , out - of - pocket expenditures are expected to drop to 11% of per capita drug spending by 2025 .

 ( see figure 2 . ) .

it may seem paradoxical that manufacturer assistance has increased while out - of - pocket spending has moderated .

there appear to be several reasons for continued growth of manufacturer aid .

individual consumers can face significant drug costs depending on the design of their health plan and their specific diagnosis .

a small but rapidly growing share of individuals face high out - of - pocket spending for specialty drugs for hepatitis c , cancer , rheumatoid arthritis , and other serious ailments .

pharmaceutical deductibles have become more prevalent .

 ( see " distribution of prescription drug cost sharing . ) .

the development of independent charity paps in the early 2000s created a way for manufacturers to aid consumers enrolled in medicare part d without violating federal anti - kickback statutes .

part d enrollees with high drug costs can have difficulty affording their medications when they are in the deductible phase of the benefit and when they reach the coverage gap — the period in which they are required to pay a larger share of total drug costs .

 ( see " restrictions on coupon use ." ) .

manufacturers and drug marketers often view paps and discount coupons as important tools for creating brand loyalty and developing markets for new drugs .

 ( see " financial impact of coupons and paps ." ) .

pharmaceutical firms offer co - payment coupons or cards to help consumers reduce out - of - pocket costs .

the coupons benefit consumers who otherwise might not be able to afford certain drugs .

coupons also benefit drugmakers by helping to create demand for newly introduced drugs , increase consumer adherence to existing prescriptions , and bolster the market for brand - name drugs that have lost patent exclusivity and face competition from lower - priced generics or other substitutes .

for a sense of how a coupon works , consider a pharmaceutical manufacturer that sells a brand - name drug to a commercial payer for $1,000 for a 30-day supply .

the payer places the drug on a price tier that imposes 25% enrollee coinsurance up to the plan's annual out - of - pocket maximum .

to support sales of the drug , the manufacturer offers a coupon that limits out - of - pocket costs to $100 per 30-day refill for a 12-month period .

in the absence of the manufacturer coupon , an enrollee would pay $250 out of pocket each time he or she went to a pharmacy to buy a 30-day supply of the drug ( 25% of the $1,000 price ) , until the annual out - of - pocket maximum was reached .

with a coupon , the consumer would pay $100 per fill and the manufacturer would cover the remaining $150 of the required coinsurance up to the maximum subsidy amount .

many co - payment coupons include disclaimers stating that they cannot be used by individuals enrolled in federal health programs , including medicare , medicaid , and the veterans health administration .

 ( see " restrictions on coupon use ." ) .

manufacturers build the cost of co - payment coupons into their budget and pricing strategies and use analytics to target the offers .

pharmaceutical manufacturers , state governments , and independent charities operate paps to help uninsured or underinsured individuals pay for prescription drugs .

many nongovernmental paps are set up as 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) nonprofit organizations to provide prescription drugs or financial subsidies to qualified patients .

501 ( c ) ( 3 ) entities are exempt from federal income taxes and qualify to receive tax - deductible contributions .

as such , pharmaceutical companies and other donors can deduct donations of inventory or cash to paps .

different types of paps include the following: pharmaceutical manufacturer paps .

many pharmaceutical makers distribute prescription drugs to individuals through their own 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations , which often are set up as private foundations .

according to the nonprofit foundation center , as of 2015 , pharmaceutical paps accounted for 7 of the 10 largest u.s grant - making foundations , as ranked by annual giving .

manufacturer paps provide drugs to uninsured individuals and to people enrolled in private insurance and public health programs .

drug manufacturers may contract with outside companies in administering their paps .

independent charity paps .

independent charities operate paps that offer aid such as financial assistance to uninsured consumers or underinsured consumers who cannot meet their health plans' premiums or cost sharing , such as co - payments , coinsurance , and deductibles .

one such pap , the patient access network foundation , ranks 21 st among the largest 100 u.s. charities .

other large , independent charity paps include the healthwell foundation , the caring voice coalition , the patient advocate foundation , patient services , inc. , and good days from the chronic disease fund .

some of the independent charity paps were established by health care consulting firms that work with drug manufacturers .

state paps ( spaps ) .

as of 2014 , 19 state governments operated spaps that met certain cms criteria .

the spaps generally serve uninsured residents or fill in the gaps in medicare , medicaid , and private insurance coverage .

spaps are aimed at lower - income individuals and usually are the payer of last resort , meaning the spap will pay for drugs only after federal programs or any private insurance already has been billed .

spap rules and coverage vary by state — some are targeted at seniors and some at specific disease groups , such as people with hiv / aids .

this report mainly focuses on the other two types of paps and will refer to the state programs as spaps rather than paps for clarity .

a number of studies have looked at the impact of coupons on drug pricing and utilization , but relatively few studies have detailed the impact of paps .

regarding coupons , a targeted study of consumers using statins to control cholesterol levels found that the use of manufacturer coupons increased enrollee prescription adherence , but at the cost of higher out - of - pocket spending for consumers and higher costs to their insurance plans than for those using generic drugs or brand - name drugs that did not offer coupons .

as noted , the 2014 health affair s study using data from prime therapeutics , a pbm owned by a group of blue cross and blue shield plans , found that coupons helped consumers save $6 of every $10 in out - of - pocket costs for specialty drugs .

likewise , a recent study found that co - payment coupons increased retail sales for brand - name drugs solely by reducing sales of lower - cost generics .

according to the study , the co - payment coupons increased retail spending from 1.2% to 4.6% in the five years following the introduction of a generic , which corresponded to increased spending of $30-$120 million for the average drug studied .

other studies have examined whether coupons are targeted at drugs for which lower - cost substitutes are available , thus inducing beneficiaries to use higher - priced drugs .

a 2013 study looked at whether widely advertised coupons were being offered for drugs for which either a generic substitute or a therapeutically equivalent product was available .

according to that study , which was based on 374 coupons for brand - name prescription drugs advertised on the website www.internetdrugcoupons.com , about 60% of the offers were for products with generic alternatives in the same drug class .

regarding paps , health care consultants tout their benefits in improving consumer loyalty to brand - name drugs , and increasing drug utilization and sales .

it is not possible to independently assess their claims .

in market materials , sonexus health , a division of health care consulting and service firm cardinal health , calls manufacturer investment in paps a "key strategy for improving patient uptake" of drugs .

market research firm kantar , in an article on optimizing brand performance , noted that an "oncologist will engage in more positive behaviors ( i.e .

write more prescriptions ) if a company has a high pap image ... it is important for marketing departments to ensure that professional guidelines permit sales representatives to talk about the programs. .

some independent charity paps point to the potential financial returns from their operations when soliciting donations from drug manufacturers and other funders .

the chronic disease fund ( before it revamped operations and was renamed good days ) developed a formula to determine the return on investment from pap donations .

the healthwell foundation says in its literature that manufacturer donations to an independent charity pap can have significant advantages over other strategies , including direct - to - patient manufacturer discounts or rebates .

