medicare is a federal insurance program that pays for covered health care services of most individuals aged 65 and older and certain disabled persons .

in 2015 , the program is expected to cover about 55 million persons ( 46 million aged and 9 million disabled ) at a total cost of $649 billion .

most individuals ( or their spouses ) aged 65 and older who have worked in covered employment and paid medicare payroll taxes for 40 quarters receive premium - free medicare part a ( hospital insurance ) .

those entitled to medicare part a have the option of enrolling in medicare part b , which provides coverage for physicians' services , outpatient hospital services , durable medical equipment , outpatient dialysis , and other medical services .

most beneficiaries ( about 92% ) with part a also enroll in part b .

beneficiaries who choose to receive coverage through a medicare advantage ( ma ) plan ( part c ) must enroll in both medicare part a and medicare part b .

part d provides optional outpatient prescription drug coverage .

whereas part a is financed primarily by payroll taxes paid by current workers , part b is financed through a combination of beneficiary premiums and funds transferred from the general fund of the u.s. treasury .

the medicare trustees estimate that in 2015 , part b spending will reach $281 billion .

about $70 billion of that amount is expected to be paid for by beneficiary premiums , and most of the rest is expected to be paid from general revenues .

in addition to premiums , part b beneficiaries must pay other out - of - pocket costs when they use services .

in 2015 , the annual deductible for part b services is $147 .

after the annual deductible is met , beneficiaries are responsible for coinsurance costs , which are generally 20% of medicare - approved part b expenses .

most medicare beneficiaries have some coverage in addition to medicare that helps to pay for deductibles and coinsurance .

this additional coverage can include coverage through medicaid , private insurance policies that supplement medicare ( medigap ) , or retiree coverage through a former employer .

by statute , part b premiums , which are deducted automatically from social security checks for those who receive social security , must cover 25% of projected annual part b per capita costs for aged beneficiaries .

the social security act ( ssa ) includes a provision that holds most social security and railroad retirement board beneficiaries harmless for increases in their medicare part b premiums that exceed the dollar amount of the increase in their social security checks .

affected beneficiaries' part b premiums are reduced to ensure that their social security benefit checks do not decline from one year to the next .

in a typical year , this hold - harmless provision affects a small fraction of beneficiaries and has a limited impact on program finances .

however , in a year in which medicare part b premiums increase but social security benefits do not , the effects of the hold - harmless provision are larger and more complex .

this report provides an overview of medicare part b premiums , the relationship between the social security cost - of - living increase ( cola ) and part b premiums , and the potential impact of a projected 0% social security cola in 2016 on medicare premiums , based on recent projections by the medicare trustees .

most people who elect to participate in the medicare part b program pay the part b premium .

the standard part b premium is a single national amount that does not vary with a beneficiary's age , health status , or place of residence .

premiums may be adjusted , however , for late enrollment and for beneficiaries with high incomes .

in 2015 , the standard medicare part b premium is $104.90 per month .

under normal circumstances , the standard premium is set to cover about 25% of the average per enrollee cost of part b benefits .

therefore , changes in the part b premium over time generally reflect the growth in total part b expenditures .

part b costs not covered by premiums are paid for through transfers from the general fund of the treasury .

in other words , medicare beneficiaries receive a 75% subsidy for part b — every $1 in part b premiums ( for aged enrollees ) is matched by $3 in general revenues .

all income for part b is credited to the part b account of the supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) trust fund .

while both aged and disabled medicare beneficiaries pay the same part b premium , the statute provides that part b premiums are to be based only on the expected program costs — that is , the monthly actuarial rate — for the aged ( those 65 years of age and older ) .

 ( the actuarial rate for the aged is defined as one - half of the expected average monthly per capita program costs for the aged. ) .

the monthly actuarial rates for both aged and disabled enrollees , however , are used to determine the needed amount of matching general revenue funding .

each year , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) actuaries estimate total per capita part b costs for beneficiaries aged 65 and older for the following year and set the part b premium to cover 25% of these expected expenditures .

because prospective estimates may differ from actual spending for the year , contingency margin adjustments are made to ensure sufficient income to accommodate potential variation in actual expenditures during the year .

once the premium has been set for a given year , it will not be changed during that year .

part b premiums may be paid in a variety of ways .

if an enrollee is receiving social security or railroad retirement benefits , the part b premiums must , by law , be deducted from these benefits .

automatic deduction from the social security benefit check also applies to ma participants who are enrolled in private health care plans in lieu of traditional medicare .

additionally , part b premiums are deducted from the benefits of those receiving a federal civil service retirement annuity .

the purpose of collecting premiums by deducting them from benefits is to keep premium collection costs at minimum .

this withholding from benefits does not apply to those beneficiaries receiving state public assistance through an msp because their premiums are paid by their state medicaid programs .

additionally , premium payments may be made on behalf of medicare beneficiaries by an employee , union , lodge , or other organization , or by an entity of a state or local government if it enters into a group - billing arrangement with cms .

those approved as group billers include such entities as city and county governments , state teacher retirement systems , and certain religious orders .

any part b enrollees whose premiums are not deducted from social security , railroad retirement , or civil service retirement monthly benefits ; paid by medicaid ; or paid under an approved group - billing arrangement by a private organization must pay premiums directly to cms .

for example , certain persons who spent their careers in employment that was not covered by social security — including some federal , state , or local government workers — and certain other categories of workers do not receive social security benefits but may still qualify for medicare .

additionally , some individuals aged 65 and older may have deferred signing up for social security for various reasons , such as if they have not yet reached their full social security retirement age or are still working .

for these enrollees , medicare will bill directly for their premiums every three months .

the enrollee who is being billed does not necessarily have to pay his or her own premiums ; premiums may be paid by the enrollee , a relative , friend , organization , or anyone else .

nonpayment of premiums results in termination of enrollment in the part b program , although a grace period is allowed for beneficiaries who are billed and pay directly .

after a person becomes eligible to receive social security benefits , his or her monthly benefit amount is adjusted annually to compensate for increases in the prices of goods and services over time .

during the last quarter of each year , the social security administration announces the cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) payable in january of the following year .

the amount of the cola is based on inflation as measured by the consumer price index — urban wage earners and clerical workers ( cpi - w ) .

the cpi - w measures price changes in food , housing , gas , and other goods and services .

the social security cola reflects the percentage change in the average cpi - w from the third calendar quarter of the last year a cola was determined to the third calendar quarter of the current year .

if the cpi - w rises , social security benefits for the next year increase proportionately .

if the cpi - w falls , social security benefits stay the same — social security benefits do not decline if the cpi - w falls from one year to the next .

automatic colas began in 1975 ( p.l .

92-336 ) .

since the social security cola was linked to the cpi - w in 1975 , the lowest implemented cola has been 1.3% , which occurred in both 1987 and 1999 .

no cola was implemented in 2010 or 2011 .

for 2012 through 2015 , retirees received colas of 3.6% , 1.7% , 1.5% , and 1.7% , respectively .

however , the average cpi - w for july and august of 2015 is lower than that for the third quarter average in 2014 .

the social security administration therefore expects that there will be no cola in 2016 .

the final numbers used to determine the social security cola for 2016 ( i.e. , the cpi - w for september 2015 ) are expected to be released on october 15 , 2015 .

because of projected part b spending increases and the need to build up an adequate level of contingency reserves , the medicare trustees estimate that monthly beneficiary premiums , under normal circumstances , would need to increase from $104.90 in 2015 to about $120.70 in 2016 , an increase of $15.80 per month .

 ( however , as described below , under the hold - harmless provision , premiums for some beneficiaries may be lower than this amount , while premiums for other beneficiaries may be higher. ) .

specifically , the medicare trustees estimate that 2015 part b expenditures will be higher than originally projected in 2014 .

their 2015 report noted that " ( l ) egislation enacted at the end of 2014 and the beginning of 2015 raised part b physician expenditures substantially compared to the law in effect in the fall of 2014 when the 2015 financing was established. .

higher - than - expected utilization of part b services also contributed to this increase .

while the medicare trustees estimate that the financing established for 2015 should be adequate to cover expected expenditures , they also note that the funding "would need to be increased in future years in order to restore the financial status of the part b account to a satisfactory level. .

the higher - than - expected 2015 spending means that 1 ) future estimates will be calculated using a higher baseline number and 2 ) 2015 expenditures are expected to exceed income for that year .

as a result , because premiums are based on 25% of expected per capita costs for the aged , 25% of expected spending for 2016 will be out of a higher expected number .

additionally , the medicare trustees are required to maintain an adequate reserve fund in the part b account of the smi trust fund to cover potential variations in projected and actual costs .

the trustees consider a ratio of asset reserves to expected expenditures of between 15% and 20% to be adequate , and they have aimed for reserves of 17% when determining part b financing for the upcoming year .

unexpected expenditures in 2015 are expected to draw down on this reserve .

by the end of the year , reserves are projected to represent about 12% of expected 2016 costs .

financing for 2016 ( premiums and general revenue ) will need to be adjusted to build the reserves back up to 17% of expected costs .

premiums may be adjusted to cover financing shortfalls in a prior year , ( i.e. , if premiums were set too low in one year , the next year's premiums may be adjusted to make up for some of that shortfall to maintain an adequate reserve ) .

future part b spending is also expected to accelerate .

although part b expenditure growth has slowed in recent years and premiums have remained level for the past three , the medicare trustees project faster benefit spending growth over the next five years ( a 6.7% part b average annual growth rate , compared with a 5.3% growth rate over the last five years ) .

the cms actuaries estimate that medicare spending growth will increase due to "greater utilization of care , and higher payment rates driven by improved economic conditions which increase growth in the costs of input goods and services used to treat medicare patients. .

when the annual social security cola is not sufficient to cover the standard medicare part b premium increase , most beneficiaries are protected by the hold - harmless provision in the ssa .

specifically , if in a given year the increase in the standard part b premium would cause a beneficiary's social security check to be less , in dollar terms , than it was the year before , then the part b premium is reduced to ensure that the amount of the individual's social security check does not decline .

the hold - harmless provision was originally created by the deficit reduction act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-369 , §2302 ) .

it was extended by subsequent legislation and made permanent by the catastrophic coverage act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-360 , §211 ( b ) ) .

for most years prior to 1984 , increases in the part b premium were tied to increases in the social security cola .

in the early 1980s , congress regularly voted to set part b premiums at a level to cover 25% of program costs , in effect overriding the cola limitation .

the 25% provisions first became effective in 1984 .

the hold - harmless provision was added that year to retain some limitation on the impact of increases in part b premiums on social security benefits .

to be held harmless in a given year , a social security beneficiary must have received social security benefit checks in both december of the previous year and january of the current year .

in addition , part b premiums must have been deducted from both those social security benefit checks .

the hold - harmless provision operates by comparing the net dollar amounts of the two monthly benefit payments ; if a beneficiary's social security benefit net of medicare premiums for january of the current year is lower than it was in december of the previous year , then the hold - harmless provision applies to that person .

premiums of those held harmless are then reduced to an amount that would not cause their social security benefits to decline in the next year .

the premium paid by those held harmless is called the variable supplementary medical insurance premium .

those not held harmless pay the standard premium as determined for that year .

typically , the hold - harmless provision has affected a relatively small number of beneficiaries and has had minimal impact on part b financing .

in most years , this rule primarily protects those with relatively low social security payments .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

however , in years in which there is no social security cola , such as in 2010 and 2011 , a large number of beneficiaries may be protected by this provision .

 ( see " application of the hold - harmless provision in 2010 and 2011 ." ) .

if there were to be a 0% social security cola and an increase in medicare part b premiums in a given year , as in 2010 and 2011 , the majority of medicare beneficiaries would be protected by the hold - harmless provision .

in this case , the premiums of those not held harmless would be higher than they would have been had the hold - harmless provision not been in effect because the part b premium increase would be spread out among fewer enrollees .

because of projected part b spending increases and the need to build up an adequate level of contingency reserves , the medicare trustees estimate that beneficiary premiums will need to increase to about $120.70 per month in 2016 .

but , as previously noted , the trustees also expect that there will be no social security cola in 2016 and that the hold - harmless provision will apply to most beneficiaries .

because most beneficiaries would be held harmless in this situation and their premiums would remain at the 2015 amount ( $104.90 per month ) , the premiums of the 30% of beneficiaries not held harmless would need to cover all of the expected increased costs so that 25% of part b costs would still be covered by beneficiary premiums .

in other words , if the hold - harmless provision were not in effect in 2016 , everyone who pays the standard premium would pay about $120.70 per month ; however , if it goes into effect , those not held harmless are expected to pay standard premiums of close to $160 per month ( $159.30 ) , while those who are held harmless would continue to pay $104.90 per month .

the medicare trustees estimate that , in 2017 , the hold - harmless provision will no longer be in effect and the standard premium will decrease to about $120.70 .

 ( see figure a - 1 . ) .

the ssa does not specify how medicare premiums are to be set in years in which there is an increase in medicare part b premiums but no social security cola .

although the hold - harmless provision protects beneficiaries who receive social security benefits against increases in their medicare premiums , aside from those paying the high - income premiums , the law is silent with respect to those who would not be held harmless under these circumstances .

however , given that the ssa also requires that income from beneficiary premiums be set at 25% of expected per capita costs and that income to the smi trust fund from general revenues be based on the aggregate dollar amount of beneficiary premiums , cms has determined that substantially increasing the premiums on those not held harmless is the only way to make up for the revenue shortfalls caused by the hold - harmless provision .

as the medicare trustees noted in their 2009 report , " ( t ) his method of addressing the revenue shortfalls caused by the hold - harmless provision is the only one available under current law .

from a policy perspective , other approaches might be preferable but would require legislation to implement. .

the interaction between social security benefits and medicare premiums is complex and raises a number of issues .

these issues include the impact of having no social security cola on seniors who are projected to face higher deductibles ; the impact of the hold - harmless provision on the part b premiums paid by beneficiaries who are not held harmless ; and other concerns .

numerous bills introduced in the 111 th congress would have addressed one or more of these issues by making changes to social security and / or medicare .

some of these bills were directly related to the hold - harmless provision in effect in 2010 and 2011 , while others focused on year - to - year increases in social security benefits .

for example , a number of bills introduced in the 111 th congress would have provided a cola for social security benefits in either 2010 or 2011 .

a positive cola increase would have resulted in fewer beneficiaries being held harmless from medicare part b premium increases in those years .

several other bills would have provided one - time additional social security payments .

most of those bills did not directly address the issue of part b premiums but rather focused on payments to social security beneficiaries , veterans , and retired railroad workers .

more recently , in the 114 th congress , bills have been introduced that would create a new inflation index , a consumer price index for the elderly ( cpi - e ) .

this proposed index is intended to better reflect the prices of goods and services used by seniors , such as costs associated with housing and health care .

h.r .

3351 , the cpi - e act , would index the social security cola to this new measure .

several bills considered during the 111 th congress contained provisions to specifically address the impact of the hold - harmless provision on medicare premiums as a result of having no cola in social security benefits .

for example , h.r .

3631 , the medicare premium fairness act , would have frozen the 2010 monthly medicare part b premium at the 2009 level for all part b enrollees .

another bill , h.r .

1832 , the medicare prescription drug affordability act of 2009 , would have , among other things , expanded the hold - harmless provision to premiums paid for medicare part d. in addressing the potential application of the hold - harmless provision in 2016 , the 114 th congress may consider reducing the expected premium levels for some or all of those not be protected by the hold - harmless provision and / or reducing the deductible .

for example , s. 2148 , the protecting medicare beneficiaries act of 2015 , and h.r .

3696 , the medicare premium fairness act , both introduced on october 7 , 2015 , would keep the 2016 part b premiums at the 2015 level for all beneficiaries , including those with high incomes .

late - enrollment surcharges would also be based on the 2015 standard premium , and the deductible would remain at the 2015 rate .

the loss of income from holding premiums flat in 2016 would be offset by increased general revenue contributions .

medicare part b premium trend .

