the federal executive branch controls an extensive real property portfolio that includes more than a quarter of a million owned and leased buildings .

these buildings have been acquired over a period of decades to help federal agencies fulfill their unique missions .

agencies hold buildings with a range of uses , including offices , warehouses , barracks , laboratories , and hospitals .

the cost of operating and maintaining these diverse properties , which total more than 2.8 billion square feet , exceeded $21 billion in fy2014 .

oversight of the federal real property portfolio has been a priority for oversight committees in recent congresses , with committees in both the house and the senate holding hearings and introducing legislation to improve , in particular , the management of federal buildings .

congressional oversight has focused in large part on four building management issues identified by the government accountability office ( gao ) , which has put real property on its annual "high - risk list" since 2003 .

in recent testimony before the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , david wise , the director of physical infrastructure issues for gao , identified three key challenges that agencies face when managing their real property portfolios: maintaining more real property than it needs ( including unutilized and underutilized buildings ) ; relying on leasing when ownership of new space would be more cost efficient ; and making real property management decisions using unreliable data .

this report focuses on the challenges to effective oversight posed by the lack of accurate and reliable real property data , particularly as it relates to the disposal of unneeded buildings and the government's overreliance on costly leases .

the balance of this report consists of three sections .

the first section analyzes potential weaknesses in the data available to congress on unutilized and underutilized buildings .

the second section examines the nature of the government's reliance on costly leases and discusses which data elements might enhance oversight of leased building space .

the final section of the report discusses options for policymakers to consider should they seek to address these data issues .

as noted , the federal executive branch agencies hold more than 250,000 buildings with a range of purposes , suited to the unique mission of each agency .

as agencies' missions change over time , so do their real property needs , thereby rendering some assets less useful or unneeded altogether .

healthcare provided by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , for example , has shifted in recent decades from predominately hospital - based inpatient care to a greater reliance on clinics and outpatient care , with a resulting change in space needs .

similarly , the department of defense ( dod ) decreased its force by 36% after the cold war ended , and has engaged in several rounds of base realignments and installation closures .

in response to these changes , agencies have housed fewer employees in certain facilities , and have shifted other personnel into new space , leaving behind thousands of buildings that are vacant ( unutilized ) or only partially occupied ( underutilized ) .

an issue that has gained increased attention from lawmakers in recent years is the government's growing reliance on leased space .

the total amount of square feet leased by the government grew from 334 million square feet in fy2003 , to 556 million square feet in fy2011 , an increase of 67% .

one of the driving forces of this trend is the way in which leases are scored .

when an agency wishes to enter into an operating lease — a lease that will not result in the government owning the building — only the amount needed to cover the first year's lease payments plus cancellation costs must be recorded in the budget .

for gsa , which self - insures its leases , only the first year's lease payment must be recorded .

when an agency wishes to construct or purchase a building , however , the full cost of the project must be recorded in the budget in the year in which the budget authority is to be made available .

under these rules , agencies have found it more feasible to obtain funding for one year of rent than for the entire cost of a building .

the increased reliance on leased space generally brings with it increased operating costs .

leased space is generally less cost efficient than owned space , both measured in terms of current market rates and over the long - term .

this finding is reinforced by data in the frpr , which shows that leased space , on average , costs more than four times as much per square foot as owned space .

in fy2014 , a square foot of owned space cost the government $5.77 , while a square foot of leased space cost $24.04 .

this means even a relatively small amount of leased space can consume a substantial amount of real property resources .

to return to fy2014 , the executive branch owned 2.51 billion square feet that year , at a cost of $14 billion , and it leased another 294 million square feet of building space at a cost of $7 billion .

leased space thus represented about 10% of total building space that year , but consumed about 33% of the total funding congress appropriated for operating costs .

as discussed below , however , the data used for these calculations is of questionable quality .

throughout this report , several potential limitations to congressional oversight of agency real property portfolios have been discussed .

this section provides additional thoughts on those issues and how they might be addressed by congress .

expanding the data reported might enhance oversight and policymaking .

as discussed , gsa's annual summary report omits data that congress might find valuable .

the frpr no longer contains , for example , the annual operating costs of unutilized and underutilized buildings — it only provides the annual operating costs of disposed assets , thereby providing the "good news" of future costs avoided through disposition while omitting the "bad news" of the ongoing operating costs associated with unneeded properties the government maintains .

similarly , agencies estimate a dollar amount for the repair needs of their buildings and structures as part of their frpp reporting , but the estimate is then folded into a formula for calculating a "condition index" for each building , which is not reported .

given that repair needs are an obstacle to disposing of some properties , congress may find it useful to have agency repair estimates reported separately to help inform funding decisions .

finally , congress may wish to have data on leases included in the frpr , including the cost and number of long - term leases .

addressing real property data quality at gsa might also improve oversight .

an audit by gao , for example , could assess the impact of the change in the definitions of utilized and underutilized buildings , and could include a recommendation of the most appropriate definitions going forward .

gao might also be able to assess the validity of gsa's revision of prior year lease data , which resulted in a significant decline in the total amount of leased space reported in the frpr .

obtaining direct access to the frpp might enhance congressional oversight of agency real property activities .

the frpp contains data such as the number of excess and surplus properties held by major landholding agencies , the annual costs of maintaining those properties , and agency disposition actions .

gsa , however , maintains tight control over access to the frpp , and does not permit direct access to the public and most federal employees , including congressional staff .

gsa does consider requests for real property data from congressional offices , but gsa staff query the database and provide the results to the requestor .

some frpp data are made public through the annual frpr , but these summary reports are of limited use for several reasons .

most of the data are highly aggregated ( eg , the total number of unutilized and underutilized buildings held by executive branch agencies ) , and limited information is provided on an agency - by - agency basis .

it is not possible , therefore , for congress to monitor the performance of individual agencies through the summary reports .

nor is it possible to compare the performance of various agencies , which in turn limits the ability of congress to study the policies and practices at the most successful agencies and hold poorly performing agencies accountable .

without access to agency - level data , congress cannot answer basic questions , such as whether the aggregate amount of unneeded space is spread out across agencies , or concentrated with a few ? .

this , in turn , limits the ability of policymakers to ask further questions that drill down deeper into the root causes of the problem .

do the agencies with the most unneeded space share any similarities , such as a change in mission , which might have caused the problem ? .

or should policymakers look at cumbersome regulations or ineffective management practices at individual agencies as a root cause ? .

the frpp also provides data on individual properties that might be useful to policymakers .

for example , the database can pull up a "profile" of an underutilized building that includes its annual operating costs , the condition it is in , and the cost of needed repairs , among other information .

information comparing the cost of leasing to the cost of building or buying space might enhance oversight of long - term operating leases .

as discussed earlier in this report , one of the primary reasons gao has listed federal real property management as a high - risk area since 2003 is that the government increasingly acquires space through leases rather than by constructing or purchasing buildings .

the prospectus approval process provides congress with an opportunity to exercise oversight of gsa's lease decisions .

given the size of its portfolio , and its role as the procurer of space for numerous other agencies , congressional oversight of gsa's prospectus - level lease proposals has broad implications .

the usefulness of the prospectus approval process as an oversight tool , however , may be limited by the fact that gsa is not required to present data that directly compare the cost of leasing versus owning space .

this means that congress is unable to determine whether it is being asked to approve the most cost - effective option for meeting an agency's real property needs .

one option for improving oversight of gsa leases would be to mandate that gsa include comparative cost data in its prospectuses .

this would not be a completely new step for gsa to take: in the 1980s and throughout the early part of the 1990s , gsa's lease prospectuses included a comparison of the costs of leasing space to constructing or buying it .

gsa discontinued reporting comparative cost data in the mid - 1990s , it said , because funding for construction and purchase alternatives was so limited that they were not considered realistic alternatives .

legislation requiring gsa to resume reporting comparative cost data would not , therefore , necessarily result in a significant administrative burden for the agency .

