the u.s. energy pipeline network is integral to the nation's energy supply and provides vital links to other critical infrastructure , such as power plants , airports , and military bases .

these pipelines are geographically widespread , running alternately through remote and densely populated regions — from arctic alaska to the gulf of mexico and nearly everywhere in between .

because these pipelines carry volatile , flammable , or toxic materials , they have the potential to injure the public , destroy pr operty , and damage the environment .

although they are generally an efficient and comparatively safe means of transport , pipeline systems are nonetheless vulnerable to accidents , operational failure , and malicious attacks .

a series of accidents in california , pennsylvania , and massachusetts , among other places , have demonstrated this vulnerability and have heightened congressional concern about u.s. pipeline safety .

the department of energy's first quadrennial energy review ( qer ) , released in 2015 , also highlighted pipeline safety as a growing concern for the nation's energy infrastructure .

the federal pipeline safety program resides primarily within the department of transportation's ( dot's ) pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration ( phmsa ) , although its inspection and enforcement activities rely heavily upon partnerships with the states .

together , the federal and state pipeline safety agencies administer a comprehensive set of regulatory authorities which has changed significantly over the last decade and continues to do so .

the federal pipeline safety program is authorized through the fiscal year ending september 30 , 2019 , under the protecting our infrastructure of pipelines and enhancing safety act of 2016 ( pipes act ; p.l .

114-183 ) signed by president obama on june 22 , 2016 .

this report reviews the history of federal programs for pipeline safety , discusses significant safety concerns , and summarizes recent developments focusing on key policy issues .

it discusses the roles of other federal agencies involved in pipeline safety and security , including their relationship with phmsa .

although pipeline security is not mainly under phmsa's jurisdiction , the report examines the agency's past role in pipeline security and its recent activities working on security - related issues with other agencies .

uncontrolled pipeline releases can result from a variety of causes , including third - party excavation , corrosion , mechanical failure , control system failure , operator error , and malicious acts .

natural forces , such as floods and earthquakes , can also damage pipelines .

taken as a whole , releases from pipelines cause few annual injuries or fatalities compared to other product transportation modes .

according to phmsa statistics , there were , on average , 12 deaths and 66 injuries annually caused by 32 pipeline incidents in all u.s. pipeline systems from 2009 through 2018 .

after steady decline between 2009 and 2013 , the average incident count increased and recently shows no clear trend ( figure 1 ) .

a total of 40 serious pipeline incidents was reported for 2018 .

apart from injury to people , some accidents may cause environmental damage or other physical impacts , which may be significant , particularly in the case of oil spills or fires .

phmsa requires the reporting of such incidents involving $50,000 or more in total costs , measured in 1984 dollars , highly volatile liquid releases of 5 barrels or more or other liquid releases of 50 barrels or more , or liquid releases resulting in an unintentional fire or explosion .

on average there were 260 such "significant" incidents ( not involving injury or fatality ) per year from 2009 through 2018 .

as with serious incidents , there is no clear trend for pipeline incidents affecting only the environment or property over the last five years ( figure 2 ) .

it should be noted that federally regulated pipeline mileage overall rose approximately 7% over this period ; neither the annual statistics for injury nor environmental incidents are adjusted on a per - mile basis .

although pipeline releases have caused relatively few fatalities in absolute numbers , a single pipeline accident can be catastrophic in terms of public safety and environmental damage .

notable pipeline and pipeline - related incidents over the last decade include the following: 2010 ―a pipeline spill in marshall , mi , released 19,500 barrels of crude oil into a tributary of the kalamazoo river .

2010 — an explosion caused by a natural gas pipeline in san bruno , ca , killed 8 people , injured 60 others , and destroyed 37 homes .

2011― an explosion caused by a natural gas pipeline in allentown , pa , killed 5 people , damaged 50 buildings , and caused 500 people to be evacuated .

2011 ―a pipeline spill near laurel , mt , released an estimated 1,000 barrels of crude oil into the yellowstone river .

2012 — an explosion caused by a natural gas pipeline in springfield , ma , injured 21 people and damaged over a dozen buildings .

2013 — an oil pipeline spill in mayflower , ak , spilled 5,000 barrels of crude oil in a residential community causing 22 homes to be evacuated .

2014 — an explosion caused by a natural gas distribution pipeline in new york city killed 8 people , injured 50 others , and destroyed two 5-story buildings .

2015 — a pipeline in santa barbara county , ca , spilled 3,400 barrels of crude oil , including 500 barrels reaching refugio state beach on the pacific ocean .

2015 — the aliso canyon underground natural gas storage facility in los angeles county , ca , released 5.4 billion cubic feet of gas , causing the temporary relocation of over 2,000 households and two schools in porter ranch .

2016 — an explosion caused by a natural gas distribution pipeline in canton , oh , killed one person , injured 11 others , and damaged over 50 buildings .

201 8 — explosions and fires caused by natural gas distribution pipelines in the merrimack valley , ma , killed one person , injured 21 others , damaged 131 structures , and required 30,000 residents to evacuate .

such incidents have generated persistent scrutiny of pipeline regulation and have increased state and community activity related to pipeline safety .

three federal agencies play the most significant roles in the formulation , administration , and oversight of pipeline safety regulations in the united states .

as stated above , phmsa has the primary responsibility for the promulgation and enforcement of federal pipeline safety standards .

the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) is not operationally involved in pipeline safety but examines safety issues under its siting authority for interstate natural gas pipelines .

the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) investigates transportation accidents — including pipeline accidents — and issues associated safety recommendations .

these agency roles are discussed in the following sections .

pipeline safety and security are distinct issues involving different threats , statutory authorities , and regulatory frameworks .

nonetheless , pipeline safety and security are intertwined in some respects — and phmsa is involved in both .

the department of transportation played the leading role in pipeline security through the late 1990s .

presidential decision directive 63 ( pdd - 63 ) , issued during the clinton administration , assigned lead responsibility for pipeline security to dot .

these responsibilities fell to the office of pipeline safety , at that time a part of dot's research and special programs administration , because the agency was already addressing some elements of pipeline security in its role as safety regulator .

the dot's pipeline ( and lng ) safety regulations already included provisions related to physical security , such as requirements to protect surface facilities ( eg , pumping stations ) from vandalism and unauthorized entry .

other regulations required continuing surveillance , patrolling pipeline rights - of - way , damage prevention , and emergency procedures .

in the early 2000s , ops conducted a vulnerability assessment to identify critical pipeline facilities and worked with industry groups and state pipeline safety organizations "to assess the industry's readiness to prepare for , withstand and respond to a terrorist attack.... " together with doe and state pipeline agencies , ops promoted the development of consensus standards for security measures tiered to correspond with the five levels of threat warnings issued by the office of homeland security .

ops also developed protocols for inspections of critical facilities to ensure that operators implemented appropriate security practices .

to convey emergency information and warnings , ops established a variety of communication links to key staff at the most critical pipeline facilities throughout the country .

ops also began identifying near - term technology to enhance deterrence , detection , response , and recovery , and began seeking to advance public and private sector planning for response and recovery .

on september 5 , 2002 , ops circulated formal guidance developed in cooperation with the pipeline industry associations defining the agency's security program recommendations and implementation expectations .

this guidance recommended that operators identify critical facilities , develop security plans consistent with prior trade association security guidance , implement these plans , and review them annually .

while the guidance was voluntary , ops expected compliance and informed operators of its intent to begin reviewing security programs and to test their effectiveness .

the 116 th congress may focus on several key issues in its continuing oversight of federal pipeline safety and as it considers phmsa's reauthorization , including incomplete statutory mandates , adequacy of phmsa staffing , state program oversight , aging pipeline infrastructure , and phmsa's role in pipeline security .

these issues are discussed in the following sections .

both government and industry have taken numerous steps to improve pipeline safety over the last 10 years .

in 2016 , the association of oil pipe lines stated that "the oil and natural gas industry is committed to achieving zero incidents throughout our operations. .

likewise , the american gas association , which represents investor - owned natural gas distribution companies , recently stated that "safety is the core value for america's natural gas utilities. .

nonetheless , major oil and natural gas pipeline accidents continue to occur .

both congress and the ntsb have called for additional regulatory measures to reduce the likelihood of future pipeline accidents .

past phmsa reauthorizations included expansive pipeline safety mandates , such as requirements for the agency to impose integrity management programs , significantly increase inspector staffing , or regulate underground natural storage .

in light of the most recent pipeline accidents or security incidents , congress may consider new regulatory mandates on phmsa or may impose new requirements directly on the pipeline industry .

however , a number of broad pipeline safety rulemakings and many ntsb recommendations remain outstanding , and others have not been in place for long , so their effectiveness in improving pipeline safety have yet to be determined .

as congress continues its oversight of the federal pipeline safety program , an important focus may be the practical effects of the many changes being made to particular aspects of phmsa's pipeline safety regulations .

in addition to the specific issues highlighted in this report , congress may assess how the various elements of u.s. pipeline safety activity fit together in the nation's overall strategy to protect the public and the environment .

pipeline safety necessarily involves various groups: federal and state agencies , pipeline associations , large and small pipeline operators , and local communities .

reviewing how these groups work together to achieve common goals could be an overarching concern for congress .

