the family and medical leave act of 1993 ( fmla ; p.l .

103-3 , as amended ) entitles eligible employees to unpaid , job - protected leave for certain family and medical needs , with continuation of group health plan benefits .

through the act , congress sought to strike a balance between workplace responsibilities and workers' growing need to take leave for significant family and medical events .

the act as passed in 1993 focused on providing an entitlement to leave for the arrival of a newborn or newly - placed child , serious health conditions in the family , and the employee's own serious health condition that interferes with his or her ability to perform essential job functions .

in passing the act , congress cited an increase in dual - earner and single - parent households that reduced the share of families with a caregiver at home .

this , alongside an aging population , increased workers' needs for workplace flexibility to attend to significant family and medical events .

in 2008 and 2009 , congress responded to a heightened need for leave among military families ( connected to large - scale deployments ) by adding new categories of leave that allow eligible employees to address certain military exigencies stemming from the deployment of a close family member to a foreign country , and to care for a servicemember with a serious injury or illness who is a close family member .

congress recognized the potential for the fmla leave entitlement to complicate scheduling for employers and otherwise disrupt business activity .

it addressed business interests by placing clear parameters around the types of leave covered by the act , linking employer coverage and employee eligibility to the size of the employer's workforce , conditioning employee eligibility on job tenure and hours - worked requirements , and giving employers the right to advance notice of need for leave and to request medical documentation in certain circumstances .

fmla applies to covered employers and eligible employees in the private and public sectors .

title i of the act applies to eligible employees working in the private sector , state and local governments , and a small set of federal employees , and is administered by the department of labor ( dol ) .

congressional offices , the government accountability office , and the library of congress are also covered by title i , but its provisions are administered by the u.s. congress office of compliance , the comptroller general of the united states , and the librarian of congress , respectively .

most federal civil service employees are covered by title ii of the act , which is administered by the office of personnel management .

title ii's statutory language is — with a few exceptions — closely similar in substance to title i's , but there are some differences .

this report describes the major provision of title i of the fmla as administered by the secretary of labor .

it covers the fmla leave entitlement and its characteristics , employer coverage , employee eligibility criteria , employer and employee responsibilities , and enforcement .

an appendix provides the legislative history of the act .

fmla entitles eligible employees to 12 workweeks of leave in a 12-month period for certain family and medical needs and up to 26 workweeks in a single 12-month period for the care of a covered servicemember with a serious injury of illness .

in general , fmla applies to private - sector employers that are engaged in commerce or in an industry affecting commerce , and have at least 50 employees who are employed for each working day during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the current or preceding calendar year .

all public agencies ( i.e. , federal , state , and local governments ) covered by the act are covered employers regardless of employment levels .

title i provisions and accompanying dol regulations apply to covered employers in the private sector , state and local governments , and some federal government agencies .

the congressional accountability act of 1995 extended fmla title i provisions to many congressional employees , and it is enforced by the u.s. congress office of compliance .

the government accountability office and the library of congress are also covered by title i , but its provisions are administered by the u.s. comptroller general of the united states and the librarian of congress , respectively .

most federal civil service employees are covered by title ii of the act , which is administered by opm .

however , title i as administered by dol applies to the following federal agencies and employees: u.s .

postal service and the u.s .

postal regulatory commission ; part - time federal executive branch employees who do not have an established regular tour of duty during the administrative workweek ; federal executive branch employees serving under intermittent appointments or temporary appointments with a time limitation of one year or less ; federal executive branch employees who are not covered by title ii of fmla ; and ; federal judicial branch employees who are employed in a unit that has employees in the competitive service ( eg , u.s. tax court employees ) .

fmla eligibility is defined in terms of an employee's work history with a specific employer , and the size of the employer's workforce employed in or around the employee's worksite .

in general , to be eligible to take fmla leave , an employee must work for a covered employer ( see " employer coverage " ) ; have 1,250 hours of service in the 12 months prior to the start of leave ; have worked for the employer for 12 months ( months need not be consecutive , but months that precede a break in service of 7 years or more are generally not counted ) ; and work at a location where the employer has 50 or more employees within 75 miles .

in practice , these requirements mean that fmla eligibility is not transferable across employers .

they also mean that eligibility is not permanent: an employee may lose eligibility while working for a given employer if his or her hours dip below the 1,250 hours required in the 12 months before leave commences requirement , if the employers' workforce within 75-miles of the worksite falls below 50 employees , or if the employer is no longer covered by the law .

special rules concerning the hours - of - service requirement apply to airline flight crew employees .

see appendix a for more information .

the act provides rules concerning employer and employee notification requirements , employee's responsibilities for scheduling of leave , employer rights to certification , and employer recordkeeping requirements .

fmla prohibits the interference , restraint , or denial of rights provided through the act , and the dismissal of or discrimination against those who protests a prohibited act .

for example , employers cannot take adverse employment actions ( eg , refuse to promote , institute disciplinary action ) against employees for taking fmla leave .

efforts to disqualify an employee from fmla leave eligibility ( eg , by manipulating work hours or moving employees to another worksite to avoid employing 50 workers within 75 miles of a worksite ) may be interpreted as interference with employee rights under fmla .

interference with proceedings or inquires is further prohibited .

employees cannot waive , nor may employers induce employees to waive , their prospective rights under fmla .

employees who believe their rights under the fmla have been violated have two courses of action .

employees may ( 1 ) file a complaint with the dol wage and hour division or ( 2 ) bring a private civil action against an employer for violations .

legal action must be taken within two years from the date of the last violation , or within three years for a willful violation .

fmla provides two remedy categories for violations .

employees may be awarded 1. damages equal to lost compensation or actual monetary losses sustained as a direct result of violation ( eg , the cost of hiring a nurse to care for a spouse with a serious health conditions ) , interest on damages , and liquidated damages for willful violations , and 2. equitable relief , as appropriate , including employment , reinstatement , and promotion .

in addition , an employee may recoup reasonable court fees and expenses from an employer who violates the act .

special rules for airline flight crew employees the airline flight crew technical correction act ( afctca ) of 2009 ( p.l .

111-119 ) amended fmla to establish special rules regarding the "hours of service" eligibility criterion for airline flight crew employees , and authorized the secretary of labor provide a method for calculating the leave entitlement for airline flight crews .

employers of airline flight crew also have additional recordkeeping requirements .

congress passed the afctca to address unique scheduling and timekeeping practices for airline flight crew that effectively curtailed access to fmla protections for this group of workers .

the act was viewed as a technical correction to extend eligibility to airline flight crew employees .

hours of service rule for airline flight crew a two - part test determines whether an airline flight crew employee meets the hours - of - service requirement for fmla eligibility .

a crewmember meets this requirement if , in the previous 12 months , he or she worked or was paid by the employer for ( 1 ) at least 60% of the applicable total monthly guarantee and ( 2 ) at least 504 hours ( not counting personal commute time , vacation leave , medical leave , or sick leave ) .

calculation of leave entitlement dol adopted a uniform leave entitlement for airline flight crew employees that is based on the assumption of a six - day workweek .

as such , an eligible airline flight crew employee is entitled to 72 days of leave ( =12 workweeks x 6 days / workweek ) during a 12-month period: for the birth and care of the employee's child , provided leave is taken within 12 months of the child's birth ; for the placement of an adopted or fostered child with the employee , provided leave is taken within 12 months of the child's placement ; to care for a spouse , child , or parent with a serious health condition ; for the employee's own serious health condition that renders the employee unable to perform at least one essential functions of his or her job ; and for qualified military exigencies related to the covered active duty status of the employee's spouse , son , daughter , or parent who is a covered military member .

in addition , dol regulations provide 156 days of leave ( = 26 workweeks x 6 days / workweek ) in a single 12-month period to eligible airline flight crew employees for the care of a covered military servicemember with a serious injury or illness .

maximum increment of leave for intermittent or reduced schedule leave employers may record fmla leave for airline flight crew employees in one - day increments , even if the employee's need for leave is less than one day .

this means that an eligible airline flight crew employee who has a need for two hours of fmla - qualifying leave can be required to use one full day of leave , which would then be counted against the employee's fmla leave entitlement .

following intermittent or reduced schedule leave , the airline flight crew employee must be permitted to return to work in the same or equivalent position , unless it is physically impossible to do so ( eg , the flight is in air ) ; in such an event the full period of physically impossibility would be counted as fmla leave and deducted from the employee's entitlement .

additional record keeping requirements in addition to standard recording keeping requirements , covered employers of airline flight crew employees must maintain records on the applicable monthly guarantee ( including relevant collective bargaining agreements and employer policy materials ) , and a record of hours worked and hours paid for each employee .

special rules for local educational agency employees fmla applies special rules to employees of local educational agencies ( eg , local school boards , and public and private elementary and secondary schools ) regarding job restoration ; a sub - group of these employees — instructional employees — have special rules concerning the use of intermittent leave and reduced leave schedules , and the timing of fmla leave use .

through these provisions , congress sought to recognize the "unique educational mission of ... elementary and secondary schools ... [and] balance the educational needs of children with the family leave needs of teachers. .

job restoration local educational agencies may use established policies and practices , or collective bargaining agreements to determine how to restore an employee to an equivalent position .

these policies must be available in writing , be made known to the employee prior to the start of fmla leave , explain clearly the employee's restoration rights , and provide substantially the same protections as provided in the a ct for reinstated employees .

instructional employees' use of intermittent leave or reduced leave schedules under certain conditions , local educational agencies may require instructional employees with a foreseeable need for intermittent leave or a reduced leave schedule to instead take a block ( or blocks ) of leave or accept a temporary reassignment to an alternate position .

if the employee elects to take a block of leave ( i.e. , instead of temporary reassignment ) the entire period of leave will count as fmla leave and be deducted from the employee's fmla entitlement .

local educational agencies may apply this restriction on intermittent leave or reduced leave schedules if the need for fmla is based on a serious health condition or serious injury or illness that is foreseeable based on planned medical treatment and the employee would be on leave for more than 20% of the total number of working days in the leave period .

instructional employee's use of leave near the end of an academic term in some circumstances , local educational agencies may require instructional employees returning from fmla leave near the end of an academic term to continue leave until the term concludes .

if the agency elects to continue leave , only the leave actually used for an fmla qualifying reason may be deducted from the employee's leave entitlement .

however , the employee receives the same protections as those provided under fmla concerning the continuation of group health insurance and job restoration for the entire leave period .

a local educational agency may require an instructional employee to continue leave through the end of an academic term when: leave begins more than five weeks before the end of term , lasts at least three weeks , and concludes during the three - week period before the end of term .

leave is taken to bond with a newborn or newly - placed child , to care for a family member with a serious health condition , or to care for a seriously injured or ill covered servicemember ; begins during the five - week period before the end of term ; lasts more than two weeks ; and concludes during the two - week period before the end of term .

leave is taken to bond with a newborn or newly - placed child , to care for a family member with a serious health condition , or to care for a seriously injured or ill covered servicemember ; begins during the three - week period before the end of term ; and lasts more than five working days .

legislative histor .

