some tax proposals have focused on broadening the tax base and lowering the rates of both individual and corporate income taxes .

in some cases , these proposals have advanced a revenue - neutral tax reform .

in other instances , they have proposed revenue increases .

an example of a broad - based revenue - neutral income tax reform is h.r .

1 introduced in the 113 th congress by then ways and means chairma n dave camp .

the bill proposed lowering both individual and corporate rates , while increasing the tax base through revising both business - related tax benefits ( such as accelerated depreciation ) and individual benefits ( such as itemized deductions ) .

given the challenges of adopting a broad income tax reform , some proposals have focused on business - only tax reform .

the obama administration has proposed such a reform , which would be revenue neutral and include cutting the corporate rate , reducing business - related tax expenditures , reducing taxes on manufacturing , simplifying taxes for small business , and reforming the international tax system .

a challenge to confining tax reform to businesses is that many provisions that expand the tax base may affect pass - through businesses .

unlike income in regular corporations , which is subject to the corporate income tax rate , income in pass - through businesses passes through to the individual owners and is taxed at the individual income tax rate .

the effects on pass - throughs of broadening the tax base most likely could not be offset by generally lowering individual tax rates because the vast majority of those individual rates apply to labor or passive income .

the cost of lowering the individual rates on this labor or passive income would probably be prohibitive .

as a result , a revenue - neutral tax reform composed solely of corporate rate reductions and base - broadening provisions would likely increase the tax burden on pass - through businesses in the absence of other revisions .

note that a narrower business reform is to limit changes to the international tax system .

major changes to the international tax rules have been included in both h.r .

1 and the administration's proposal .

these changes could be considered in a stand - alone proposal and , since their effects are largely confined to the corporate sector , pass - through businesses would be largely unaffected .

how , or whether , to offset the potential increase in tax burden on pass - through businesses arising from base broadening is an issue in a business - only tax reform .

the administration reform proposal included special provisions benefitting small business which was reported to lead to a net tax cut for small businesses ( although not for all pass - through businesses ) .

this report discusses issues and options that might be considered in a business - only tax reform , including the approach of the administration's reform as well as other potential options to consider .

it first outlines how firms operate as incorporated or unincorporated businesses for tax purposes and discusses the share of assets and income in the unincorporated sector .

the next section examines corporate tax expenditures and the extent to which those tax expenditures affect pass - through firms .

the final section discusses a number of options and issues that might be considered for business - only tax reform .

businesses operate in several different forms: c corporations , proprietorships , partnerships , and s corporations ( sometimes referred to as subchapter s corporations following the section of the internal revenue code that defines them ) .

s corporations elect to be taxed as proprietorships or partnerships .

individuals may also hold rental property without engaging in business activity .

income from rental property may also be received through shares in real estate investment trusts ( reits ) .

regular ( c ) corporations' income is subject to the corporate income tax and to the individual income tax income when it is distributed to shareholders through dividends and capital gains taxes when stock is sold .

the other business forms are called pass - throughs , because the income passes through to the individual owners and is taxed under the individual income tax ( although in the case of partnerships , c corporations can be partners and are subject to corporate tax ) .

sole proprietorships are businesses owned by a single individual , whereas partnerships are businesses owned by multiple individuals and entities .

partners can be corporations , individuals , other partnerships , and tax exempt organizations .

therefore , partnership income may be reported multiple times in the internal revenue service data on entities .

s corporations are corporations with no more than 100 shareholders who elect to be taxed as pass - throughs ( i.e. , as either sole proprietorships or partnerships ) .

although subchapter s firms are legally incorporated , for tax purposes they are treated as unincorporated businesses and will be referred to as unincorporated or noncorporate businesses in this report .

the analysis continues by examining the potential base - broadening provisions that might be used to finance corporate rate reductions in a business - only tax reform .

broadening the tax base could be achieved by eliminating various tax expenditures , such as exemptions , credits , or deductions .

this section discusses a variety of options that might be considered for a tax reform confined to businesses .

a combination of approaches might also be considered .

one approach to the issue of business - only tax reform is to accept the potential spillovers from base broadening for unincorporated businesses and pursue the goal of overall revenue neutrality for business investment .

an argument for this view is that increasing overall taxes on pass - through and decreasing taxes on corporations might be desirable for efficiency reasons .

in the case of efficiency , the current tax system favors the noncorporate sector overall .

the corporate statutory tax rate of 35% tends to be higher than the average marginal statutory rate for noncorporate business , estimated to average around 27% .

although effective tax rates are lower than statutory rates , and this reduction is more pronounced for corporations ( because they have a larger share of tax - favored investments ) , corporate effective tax rates are still higher in most cases and for most assets .

table 4 shows the effective tax rates for a range of assets ( excluding land and inventories ) .

in addition , these rates reflect firm - level taxes and do not account for taxes on stockholders .

tax rates including stockholder taxes are estimated at an additional 2.3 percentage points .

these effects reflect tax rates on capital gains and dividends and the fraction that is excluded because the assets are held in pension and retirement accounts and by nonprofits .

for equipment and structures , in which a choice between corporate investment and noncorporate investment is likely more important , the effective tax rates also differ substantially .

thus , at least up to a point , a business - neutral tax reform that lowered taxes on corporate investment and raised them on noncorporate investment would appear to increase efficiency by bringing effective tax rates closer together .

in addition , a corporate rate reduction , because the corporate statutory rate is higher , would reduce the more favorable treatment of debt finance , which is taxed at a low or negative rate because nominal interest is deducted at the statutory rate , but only the real return is taxed ( and at a lower rate ) .

as a result , the estimate of effective tax rate for debt - financed corporate investment is - 7% compared with 22.3% for equity .

moreover , it is difficult to make a fairness argument for making noncorporate equity investors whole since there will be numerous winners and losers in any tax reform .

as noted above , creditors may see higher effective tax rates as well .

similarly , depending on the type of reform , some industries will be affected differently than others .

for example , if accelerated depreciation for equipment is eliminated , manufacturing and construction firms would be affected more than firms engaged in trade and services .

noncorporate business investors may also have passive assets in corporate stock that could benefit from a business tax reform .

moreover , in the longer run , any flows of capital into the corporate sector would drive down the pre - tax return in that sector and increase it in the noncorporate sector , just as changes in the treatment of investments in different industries would lead to a reallocation and adjustment of pre - tax returns that brings after - tax returns , for distributional purposes , back together .

administrative and compliance costs would also be smaller when tax provisions , such as depreciation and inventory accounts , are conformed across organizational form .

in sum , there are efficiency and administrative arguments to be made for allowing a business - only tax reform that does not reduce individual tax rates but uses base - broadening provisions associated with unincorporated businesses to finance corporate rate cuts .

there is not a clear fairness argument against this approach .

note also that if the corporate tax rate cut were generous enough , many pass - through businesses might recoup some of the loss by incorporating .

another approach is to target base - broadening provisions that are primarily corporate .

for example , one base - broadening provision is to slow the depreciation for buildings and equipment to correspond with the alternative depreciation schedule .

referring to the rates in table 4 , this change would increase the tax rate from 22.3% to 26.7% for corporate investment and from 20.8% to 23.7% for noncorporate businesses .

the rate change of 4.4 percentage points for corporations is larger than the 2.9 percentage points change for the noncorporate sector .

however , if buildings were excluded from the depreciation change and only equipment ( including public utility structures treated as equipment ) had the change in depreciation , the corporate rate would increase to 26.5% ( 4.2 percentage points ) while the rate for structures would increase to 22.5% ( or 1.7 percentage points ) .

thus , while both tax rates go up , the effective tax rate change for noncorporate firms would be just over a third of the size of the change for corporations .

other provisions might exhibit similar or more pronounced effects .

for example , estimates suggest that eliminating the production activities deduction would increase the overall statutory corporate tax rate from 0.3414 to 0.35 ( or - 0.85 percentage points ) ; it is estimated to increase the noncorporate rate from 0.2683 to 0.27 ( or 0.17 percentage points ) .

although a larger share of the production activities deduction than implied by these rate changes accrues to unincorporated businesses in the tax expenditures , some of that benefit presumably falls on labor rather than capital income .

other provisions that are largely corporate include provisions associated with international taxes , research , advertising , and lifo ( last in , first out inventories ) .

however , one of the problems with focusing on base broadening provisions that are primarily corporate is such an approach may interfere with other objectives of tax reform .

for example , implementing the depreciation choices discussed above may minimize the effects on unincorporated businesses , but will leave rental housing favored relative to other business assets ( although not as favored as owner - occupied housing ) .

international provisions may be subsumed into an overall international tax reform .

moreover , tax benefits for r&d may be desirable due to the positive externalities research creates for the economy .

this approach would limit base broadening to the corporate sector by restricting provisions only for corporations .

as noted above , excluding deferral leaves only a few relatively small provisions that are predominantly or completely corporate .

predominantly or completely corporate provisions include , for example , include research subsidies , insurance provisions , energy provisions and lower tax rates for small corporations .

some of the provisions , such as expensing research and development expenditures , may be desirable provisions .

a reform , however , could also implement corporate - only changes for provisions that affect pass - through businesses .

for example , the existing depreciation system could be preserved for unincorporated businesses .

similarly , provisions such as the production activities deduction , like - kind exchanges , nondealer installment sales , and interest deductions could be disallowed only for corporations .

as noted earlier , there are two objections to this approach: first , it adds to complexity to the tax code and second , it will create incentives to shift out of the corporate form for certain businesses .

business tax expenditures that are used by corporations only to a limited degree , such as accelerated depreciation on rental housing , could be avoided entirely , although such a choice would lead to their continued favorable treatment .

because unincorporated businesses are smaller on average than incorporated business , provisions that allow benefits based on dollar amounts can target these businesses and offset other base - broadening changes .

this approach was used in the administration's business - only tax reform proposal .

perhaps the most important example is the section 179 expensing provision , which has been part of the extenders ( i.e. , provisions that have been enacted on a temporary basis ) .

section 179 allows firms to expense ( deduct immediately ) , with dollar limits , the cost of investment in equipment .

in 2014 , this amount was $500,000 .

once a firm's investment reached at least $2 million , the amount eligible is reduced one dollar for each dollar of investment in excess of $2 million .

thus once a firm's investment reached $2.5 million , no deduction is allowed .

while unincorporated firms own about 30% of equipment according to table 1 , table 3 indicates that they receive almost 70% of the benefit of the section 179 expensing provision .

the obama administration has proposed a permanent increase in the limit to $1 million .

this treatment would not only provide an additional benefit but would make most smaller businesses unaffected by changes in accelerated depreciation of equipment , the second largest corporate tax expenditure , and the largest one that affects pass - throughs .

smaller businesses would also benefit from another set of provisions to expand eligibility for cash accounting ( in which costs are deducted when paid and revenues included when received ) .

most business accounting is on an accrual basis in which revenues and expenses are recorded when incurred ( rather than when paid ) and inventory costs not deducted until sold .

uniform capitalization rules require indirect overhead costs to be capitalized .

current tax law contains exemptions from requirements of accrual accounting and capitalization rules for small firms and for firms participating in certain activities .

firms with inventory have smaller size limits .

the administration has proposed to expand some of the limits and requirements for eligibility for cash accounting for small business and this approach may be considered to compensate for the loss of tax benefits in a business - only tax reform .

an alternative approach is to lower the individual rates only for business income .

precedents exist in current tax law .

separate tax rates are applied to dividends and capital gains .

alternatively , the production activities deduction , because it is a deduction from taxable income , also reduces the statutory tax rate .

given the graduated individual rate structure , following the model of a separate rate structure ( as for capital gains and dividends ) would be complex .

the rate imposed for capital gains and dividends is determined with reference to the rate structure , and applies three different rates , which requires two rounds of calculation .

if a lower business income structure were to have a different business tax rate for each ordinary tax rate , six rounds of calculations would be required .

a simpler approach would be to reduce effective statutory rates for unincorporated businesses by allowing a deduction from taxable income for pass - through businesses following the model of the production activities deduction .

this approach would result in the same percentage reduction for all ordinary tax rates but would apply at the marginal tax rate .

an analysis by sullivan points out , however , that an across - the - board deduction would not necessarily benefit small businesses primarily , because a large share of earnings of partnerships and s corporations is from larger entities .

it might also be possible to direct the deduction to certain industries to more closely target firms affected by the tax revision .

for example , if equipment depreciation and the production activities deduction were the principal base - broadening provisions , a deduction aimed at manufacturing and construction business incomes might be more appropriate .

a proposal of this nature was included in the tax reform bill introduced by then - chairman of the ways and means committee dave camp ( h.r .

1 , 113 th congress ) .

a narrower reform might concentrate on the international sector .

recently , tax reform has been motivated by interest in revising the current international tax system , in which income of subsidiaries incorporated abroad is taxed , but not until repatriated ( i.e. , paid by the foreign subsidiary to the u.s. parent ) .

this deferral of tax on foreign source income is the single largest corporate tax expenditure .

 ( when tax is paid , the firm can take a credit against the u.s tax paid for foreign income taxes. ) .

the current system creates a number of distortions , one of them being an incentive to retain earnings abroad .

this incentive could be removed by eliminating deferral ( and freeing up revenue that could be used for rate reduction ) or simply not taxing foreign source income at all ( which would lose revenue ) .

this latter approach would move to what is termed a territorial tax .

there are middle roads between these positions , which include adopting a territorial tax but enacting strong anti - abuse provisions , or imposing a minimum tax on foreign source income that would be due immediately .

the details of potential international tax reforms are beyond the scope of this report .

a reform confined to international changes would have negligible effects on pass - through businesses because almost all multinational business income is in the corporate sector .

such a reform , however , might not produce adequate revenue to cut the corporate rate and remain revenue - neutral .

this appendix provides the methodology and data for calculating the effective tax rates in table 4 and the changes of base - broadening provisions that affect savings and investment .

the basic formula for calculating the effective firm - level tax rate is ( r - r ) / r , where r is the pre - tax return , or internal discount rate for an investment with no taxes , and r is the after - tax discount rate that discounts all flows to the cost of the investment with taxes .

for a corporate depreciable investment , the relationship between r and r , with r the firm's real discount rate , derived from an investment with geometric depreciation and continuous time , is from the standard user cost formula: ( 1 ) r = ( r+d ) ( 1-uz ) / ( 1-u ) - d where u is the corporate tax rate , d is the economic depreciation rate , and z is the present discounted value of tax depreciation deductions ( discounted at the nominal rate , that is , the real rate plus the inflation rate ) .

for an unincorporated business taxed at an effective statutory tax rate t , the pre - tax return is: ( 2 ) r = ( r ( 1-v ) +d ) ( 1-tz ) / ( 1-t ) - d in this formula , v is the effective tax rate on capital gains and dividends in the corporate sector .

the discount rates differ between corporate and noncorporate firms given the assumption that the noncorporate investor's opportunity cost is investment in the corporate sector , net of shareholder taxes .

thus the r for the noncorporate sector is the corporate discount rate reduced by the taxes on capital gains and dividends .

these shares are subject to special tax rates and are adjusted for the extent of earnings that are not subject to tax in an overall economy - wide portfolio because some capital gains are not realized and some earnings on corporate stock are exempt because they are held in pension funds and retirement accounts and by nonprofits .

the effective tax rate is determined in part by the effective statutory rate and in part by how quickly costs are recovered ( the value of z ) and any credits .

without the production activities deduction , the tax rate is equal to the statutory rate when z equals the present value of economic depreciation ( d / ( r+d ) ) .

more rapid depreciation decreases the effective tax rate .

the formula is applied to obtain firm - level tax rates in table 4 and subsequent calculations in the text .

to calculate the effect on debt - financed investment , including creditor taxes paid , the firm's discount rate used in equation ( 1 ) is adjusted to include debt finance: ( 3 ) r d = ( i ( 1-u ) - p ) with r d the after - tax real interest rate ( i ( 1-u ) - p ) where i is the nominal interest rate and p is the inflation rate .

the tax rate is calculated using that r as ( r - r i ) / r , where r i is the final after - tax return to creditors: ( 4 ) r i = ( i ( 1-ati ) - p ) where t i is the tax rate of creditors , a is the share subject to tax , and v is the effective tax rate on corporate equity .

data on assets and depreciation to provide overall effective tax rates that cover a broad category of investments , the pre - tax returns estimated for each of 32 different types of assets are weighted by asset share to provide an overall pre - tax return .

the estimates reflect equipment , structures , and intangible assets used in business .

they exclude land ( which is relatively fixed in quantity and where taxes tend to be capitalized in prices ) and inventories , which are small and relatively unresponsive to taxes on the return .

assets are assigned to the corporate or the noncorporate sector .

table a - 1 lists the asset values and economic depreciation rates for the assets , including 22 types of equipment assets , 7 types of structures , and 3 types of intangibles .

the value of z depends on how quickly costs are recovered for tax purposes , which is a function of the tax life and whether the recovery is straight - line ( equal amounts in each year ) or accelerated ( larger amounts in earlier years ) .

for tax lives , depreciation methods and depreciation formulas , see [author name scrubbed] , the economic effects of taxing capital income , cambridge , ma , mit press , 1994 .

the alternative lives simulated in the report are available on request .

for mining structures , largely oil and gas , based on data from the independent petroleum association of america , 57.7% of costs are expensed either through intangible drilling costs of dry holes , 16.7% recovered through depletion , 1.9% over seven years , and the remainder over five years .

values used in addition to the data used above , data are needed for the rates of return ( r and i ) , the inflation rate , and the tax rates .

the equity rate of return based on historical trends is after corporate tax but before individual tax is set at 7% .

the nominal interest rate is set at 7.5% , and the inflation rate at 2% , reflecting recent experience with the baa bond rate and the gross domestic product ( gdp ) deflator prior to the recession ( for a real interest rate of 5.5% ) .

note that while effective tax rates are sensitive to the inflation rate , they are not very sensitive to the assumed real rate of return .

the statutory corporate tax rate is 35% , but it is reduced slightly by the production activities deduction .

based on claims as a percentage of taxable income by manufacturing and non - manufacturing on corporate income tax returns and the distribution of equipment , structures , and assets between those categories in the national income and product accounts , the estimated rate for the three categories of assets , respectively , is 34.12% , 34.29% , and 33.83% , with an overall rate of 34.14% .

that is , the production activities deduction appears to reduce statutory tax rates by slightly under 1 percentage point .

the estimated statutory tax rate for unincorporated business income , using the public use file data , is 27% .

using the aggregate for individual returns and distributing it in the same proportions , the estimated tax rates for the three categories , including the production activities deduction , are 26.74% , 26.87% , and 26.56% , for an overall rate of 26.83% , a reduction of less than 0.2 percentage points .

this estimate is based on the production activities deduction compared to business income reported in individual tax return .

the marginal rates for interest , dividends , and capital gains , respectively , are 22% , 14.6% and 15.4% .

a large fraction of interest and dividends paid do not appear on individual income tax returns , according to tables 7.1 and 7.2 of the national income and product accounts and irs statistics of income .

in previous years a direct reconciliation had been prepared , and the current amounts included , 19% and 25% , are slightly lower than in the past , but similar .

this same share for dividends is used for capital gains .

the small share reported is largely due to the large share of assets in pension , retirement , and insurance plans .

in addition , half of capital gains held privately is assumed to be untaxed because it is held until death .

