reports of "waste , fraud , and abuse" in federal contracting often prompt questions about what the government can do to hold its vendors accountable for failure to perform as required under their contracts , or for legal violations or other misconduct unrelated to contract performance .

because agencies rely extensively on contractors in their operations , it is important that contractors perform on time and in conformity with the contract's requirements .

failure to do so can negatively affect the services that the agency provides to taxpayers , as well as the conditions under which federal personnel work .

relatedly , there is a widespread ( although not universal ) view that contracting with the government is a "privilege," and contractors should be exemplary in all aspects of their operations , including in performing legal responsibilities and duties unrelated to their obligations under a federal contract .

when a contractor is implicated in wrongdoing , its suitability for doing business with the government may be publicly questioned .

this report provides an overview of selected legal mechanisms that the federal government could rely upon in holding contractors accountable for deficiencies in their performance under the contract , or for other misconduct .

not all of these mechanisms involve "penalties" as that term is generally understood .

in some cases , the controlling legal authority expressly provides that the government may take certain actions only to protect the government's interest , and "not for purposes of punishment. .

however , in all cases , the government's action represents a consequence of and response to the contractor's delinquencies , and could be perceived as punitive by the contractor or other parties .

the government generally has discretion as to whether to employ any of these mechanisms in particular circumstances , and could employ multiple mechanisms in a given case .

in some cases , though , the government must choose between particular mechanisms .

for ease of discussion , the various mechanisms discussed in this report are broadly divided into two categories .

the first category includes rights provided to the government as terms of its contracts , which the government may exercise without resort to judicial proceedings .

the second category includes other actions , not necessarily provided for by contract .

in some cases , the government may take these actions on its own behalf , without resort to judicial proceedings .

in other cases , the government must seek sanctions or damages through the courts .

individual mechanisms are listed alphabetically within the first of these sections , and grouped by topic in the second .

within each of these sections , the discussion of individual mechanisms explains the underlying legal authority , the mechanism's basic operation , and key issues the government may encounter when exercising contractual rights or taking other actions .

recent developments regarding particular mechanisms are highlighted in accompanying text boxes , where relevant .

the report does not address prosecution of government contractors , although it is important to note that contractors could be subject to criminal penalties for misconduct related to contract performance or otherwise .

also , the discussion of the government's potential mechanisms for holding contractors accountable in this report should not be taken to mean that contractors and contractor employees are more likely to fail to perform or engage in misconduct than government employees .

that is a separate debate , outside the scope of this report .

the standard terms of government contracts grant the government certain rights that the government could exercise on its own , without the permission of a court or board of contract appeals , in response to a contractor's failure to perform as required under the contract .

examples include the assessment of liquidated damages , termination for default , and withholding of award or incentive fees .

a specific right must generally be expressly provided for in the contract for the government to exercise it , although the government's right to terminate contracts for default may be "read into" ( or treated as a constructive term of ) certain federal procurement contracts that do not expressly provide for it .

the government's exercise of the right must also generally be in conformity with the contract ( eg , providing any required notice of the government's intent to exercise the right ) .

in addition , depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case , a contractor could challenge the government's exercise of a contractual right by bringing suit before a court or board of contract appeals , alleging that the contractor's deficient or delinquent performance must be excused because it was caused by an event that is beyond the contractor's control and without its fault or negligence .

alternatively , a contractor could assert that the government has waived particular contractual rights in specific cases .

a waiver is an intentional or voluntary relinquishment of a legal right , or conduct that warrants an inference that the right has been relinquished .

the government could be bound by a waiver if the contractor relies upon the waiver to its detriment .

federal statutes and regulations also require or authorize the government to take certain actions in response to contractors' failure to perform or other misconduct that are not expressly provided for as terms of a federal contract .

in some cases , the government may take these actions on its own behalf , without resort to judicial proceedings , as is the case with debarment and suspension and consideration of agency evaluations of past performance in source - selection decisions .

in other cases , the government must seek sanctions or damages through the courts , as is the case with suits under the civil provisions of the false claims act .

in either case , the government's recourse is generally limited by the controlling legal authority ( eg , suspension under the far must be on one of the grounds specified in the far ) .

agency actions could also be challenged on the grounds that the action deprives the contractor of certain contractual or other rights , or is arbitrary and capricious .

in addition , in some cases , contractors are entitled to due process in the form of notice and an opportunity for a hearing before being subjected to agency action or sanctions .

the far generally requires agencies to evaluate and document contractors' performance on all contracts or orders whose value exceeds the simplified acquisition threshold ( typically $150,000 ) "at least annually and at the time the work under a contract or order is completed. .

the far also generally requires agencies to consider contractors' past performance when making source - selection decisions in negotiated procurements whose value exceeds the simplified acquisition threshold .

taken together , these two requirements make negative past performance evaluations one mechanism for holding contractors accountable for poor performance , because deficiencies in performing past or current contracts could put the contractor at a disadvantage in future awards .

the far prescribes how agencies are to compile and post evaluations of contractors' performance , including the timing of evaluations , the factors to be evaluated , and the terms to be used in describing performance ( eg , exceptional , satisfactory , marginal ) .

broadly speaking , the far contemplates contracting officers ( or other agency personnel who have been delegated this responsibility ) evaluating performance as to ( 1 ) technical factors / quality ; ( 2 ) cost control ; ( 3 ) timeliness ; ( 4 ) business relations ; ( 5 ) subcontracting with small businesses ; and ( 6 ) other applicable factors ( eg , tax delinquency ) .

once the evaluation is complete , it is furnished to the contractor , who has "up to 14 calendar days ... to submit comments , rebutting statements , or additional information. .

disagreements between the contractor and the contracting officer as to the evaluation are reviewed "at a level above the contracting officer. .

however , the "ultimate conclusion on the performance evaluation is a decision of the contracting agency," and contractors' ability to challenge allegedly erroneous or biased evaluations outside the agency is limited .

the u.s. court of federal claims and the boards of contract appeals now generally exercise jurisdiction over claims under the cda as to contractors' performance evaluations , but the court , in particular , has taken the view that it lacks the authority to order an agency to rescind a poor evaluation or to revise its evaluation .

the far similarly prescribes agencies' consideration of contractors' past performance in "negotiated procurements," or procurements wherein the agency selects the vendor that represents the "best value" for the government after discussions with offerors .

in addition to requiring that past performance generally be considered in negotiated procurements whose value exceeds the simplified acquisition threshold , the far requires that agencies' evaluation of past performance be in accordance with the terms of the solicitation , and that contractors' performance in subcontracting with "small disadvantaged businesses" be considered .

however , beyond these requirements , the far gives agencies broad discretion in their use of the past performance evaluation factor .

in particular , agencies may determine ( 1 ) what constitutes "past performance" for purposes of the procurement ; ( 2 ) what performances qualify as recent and relevant for purposes of the procurement ; ( 3 ) whose performances are considered when past performance is evaluated ; ( 4 ) what role the past - performance factor plays in relation to other evaluation factors ; and ( 5 ) the sources the agency consults when assessing past performance .

while contractors may protest a procuring activity's evaluation of their own past performance or that of the winning offeror in making source - selection decisions , the agency's determination will typically be afforded substantial deference .

this generally means that , to succeed , the protester must show that the evaluation was unreasonable , inadequately documented , or not in accordance with the law or the terms of the solicitation .

the far generally requires agencies to determine that a prospective vendor is "affirmatively responsible" prior to the award of a contract .

as used here , "responsible" is a term of art , indicating that the contractor meets certain "general standards" which apply regardless of whether they are expressly incorporated into the solicitation .

these standards require that contractors ( 1 ) have adequate financial resources ; ( 2 ) are able to comply with the delivery or performance schedule ; ( 3 ) have a satisfactory performance record ; ( 4 ) have a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics ; ( 5 ) have the necessary management , experience , and technical skills ; ( 6 ) have the necessary equipment and facilities ; and ( 7 ) are "otherwise qualified and eligible" to receive an award under applicable laws and regulations .

several of these standards serve to hold contractors accountable for failure to perform under prior contracts , as well as other misconduct .

for example , performance under prior contracts is generally considered in assessing whether vendors have a satisfactory performance record , and criminal violations may be considered when assessing whether they have a satisfactory record of integrity and business ethics .

responsibility determinations are made just before a vendor is awarded a contract .

in making these determinations , contracting officers are required to consider information in the federal awardee performance and integrity information system ( fapiis ) , "including information that is linked to fapiis such as from the excluded parties list system ( epls ) and the past performance information retrieval system ( ppirs ) ," and other relevant past performance information .

contracting officers are also encouraged to consider other sources of information , including "verifiable knowledge of personnel within the contracting office , audit offices , contract administration offices , and other contracting offices. .

however , contracting officers generally have broad discretion as to the conclusions they draw based on the information they consider .

a determination is not unreasonable merely because another contracting officer made a different determination after considering the same information .

contractors are generally not entitled to notice or an opportunity for a hearing prior to being determined nonresponsible .

if challenged , contracting officers' determinations as to vendors' responsibility are generally afforded substantial deference on the grounds that these determinations are committed to agency discretion by law , and the procuring agencies "must bear the brunt of any difficulties experienced during performance. .

this generally means that the party challenging a responsibility determination must show that the determination lacked "any reasonable basis," or was arbitrary or made in bad faith .

however , a contractor could have more success in its challenge if the contractor can show that the agency has used the responsibility determination process to effectively exclude the vendor without the procedural protections associated with suspension and debarment .

this could result if an agency based a nonresponsibility determination solely upon an earlier nonresponsibility determination ; made repeated determinations of nonresponsibility based on the same grounds ; or made statements or engaged in other conduct evidencing a refusal to do business with the vendor .

multiple provisions of federal law provide for the debarment or suspension ( collectively known as exclusion ) of federal contractors .

debarment lasts for a prescribed period of time ( often three years ) , while suspension is temporary , pending an investigation of the vendor's conduct or legal proceedings .

contractors that are excluded are generally barred from receiving new contracts — or new orders or other work under existing contracts — from an executive agency for the duration of the exclusion .

they are also barred from serving as individual sureties , or as subcontractors on subcontracts to which the government must consent .

exclusions may encompass "affiliates" of the principal contractor , and exclusion - worthy conduct may be imputed from a contractor's employees or other associates to the contractor , and vice versa .

various statutes require or authorize debarment for specified violations of the statute ( depending on the statute involved , covered violations may pertain to contract performance or other matters ) .

examples include ( 1 ) convictions for certain violations of the clean air act or clean water act ; ( 2 ) failures to pay locally prevailing wages under the davis - bacon act , service contract act , or walsh - healy act ; ( 3 ) misrepresentations of size or status for purposes of small business contracting preferences ; and ( 4 ) convictions or other findings of fault for intentionally affixing a "made in america" designation to an ineligible product .

such statutory exclusions are generally punitive in nature .

the far similarly provides for exclusion on specified grounds , which can encompass both failure to perform as required under a contract and other misconduct .

examples include ( 1 ) the commission of fraud or a criminal offense in obtaining or performing under a government contract ; ( 2 ) delinquent federal taxes in an amount that exceeds $3,000 ; ( 3 ) willful failure to perform in accordance with the terms of a contract ; and ( 4 ) "any other cause of so serious or compelling a nature that it affects the present responsibility" of a vendor .

exclusion under the far differs from exclusion under the statutes previously noted in that it may be imposed only "for the government's protection," and not "for purposes of punishment. .

the far also requires that agency suspending and debarring officials ( who are not the contracting officers ) consider mitigating factors or remedial measures undertaken by the contractor in debarment determinations , in particular .

however , while not punitive in the usual sense of the term , exclusion under the far serves to hold contractors accountable for delinquencies , and may be perceived as penal in nature by those excluded .

the determination to exclude a contractor is made after an administrative proceeding , not a judicial one .

contractors are generally entitled to due process in the form of notice and an opportunity for a hearing when excluded , although the nature of that process can vary depending upon the type and grounds of exclusion .

for example , notice and an opportunity for a hearing must generally be provided prior to debarment , although it could potentially be provided after suspension .

particularly under the far , exclusion is always discretionary ; it is not automatically imposed given the existence of potential grounds for exclusion .

also , a vendor's current contracts are not automatically terminated when the vendor is excluded .

instead , the agency would have to take action to terminate those contracts , as previously discussed ( see " termination for default " ) .

in addition , the vendor's exclusion could be waived to permit the government to do business with a contractor in particular cases .

the far permits the waiver of far - based exclusions when there is a "compelling reason," and certain statutes similarly permit waivers of statutory exclusions in the "paramount interest of the united states. .

the civil provisions of the false claims act ( fca ) are one of the primary tools available to the federal government to address and deter contractor fraud , and , in recent years , have enabled the government to recover billions of dollars per year for procurement and other fraud .

there are seven types of conduct that can lead to civil liability under the fca .

of these , the two that are arguably most relevant in the procurement context include "knowingly present[ing] , or caus[ing] to be presented , a false or fraudulent claim for payment or approval" and "knowingly mak[ing] , us[ing] , or cau[sing] to be made or used , a false record or statement material to a false or fraudulent claim. .

in short , these provisions penalize contractors who knowingly and fraudulently try to get the government to pay money on federal contracts , among other things .

however , the government must show that the contractor's false or fraudulent claim , statement , or record was material in order for a contractor to be held liable under the fca .

this generally means that the government must establish that the false statement or claim has a "natural tendency to influence" or be "capable of influencing" the contracting agency's decision as to whether or not to pay the claim .

federal contractors can face liability under the fca for a range of misconduct .

this includes ( 1 ) submitting a claim for payment when the contractor has not provided the government with the supplies or services in question .

or has provided supplies or services that were not as described in the contract ; ( 2 ) falsely certifying compliance with a required contract provision or law ; or ( 3 ) making false representations to the government during the contract formation process that cause the government to enter a contract that it would not have but for the false representations .

civil actions can be brought against contractors who are alleged to have violated the fca by the attorney general , or by private persons — called relators — on behalf of the federal government in what are known as qui tam actions .

such actions must be brought within the later of six years from the date of the misconduct or three years from when the misconduct was known or should have been known to the government .

no fca action can be brought more than ten years after the occurrence of the misconduct .

additionally , qui tam lawsuits cannot be brought by relators when: ( 1 ) the relator was convicted of criminal conduct stemming from their role in the fca action ; ( 2 ) another qui tam action is pending concerning the same conduct ( "first - to - file bar" ) ; ( 3 ) the same allegations are the subject of a civil suit or penalty in a proceeding wherein the government is a party ; or ( 4 ) the qui tam action results from misconduct that has already been disclosed to the public ( "public disclosure bar" ) .

if a relator brings a qui tam action under the fca , the government must receive a copy of the complaint , and the complaint remains sealed and unserved upon the defendant for 60 days .

within this 60-day period , the government has the right to "intervene and proceed with the action," although it can ( and frequently does ) request an extension of this period .

if the government intervenes in the action , the relator has the right to continue as a party to the action , but generally cedes control over the action to the government ( eg , the government can settle or dismiss the action notwithstanding the private party's objections ) .

if the government declines to intervene , the relator can proceed with the qui tam lawsuit .

if a contractor is found to have violated the fca , it can face a civil penalty of $5,500 to $11,000 , plus treble the amount of damages that the fca violation caused the government .

in qui tam lawsuits , if the government intervenes in the action , the relator is generally entitled to receive between 15 and 25 percent of the amount recovered by the government .

if the government declines to intervene , the relator is generally entitled to receive between 25 and 30 percent of the amount recovered .

the program fraud civil remedies act ( pfcra ) provides a mechanism through which contracting agencies can seek civil penalties against contractors that submit false or fraudulent claims for payment under a federal contract .

unlike the civil provisions of the fca , discussed above ( see " civil provisions of the false claims act " ) , which provide contracting agencies with a judicial remedy for dealing with false or fraudulent payment submissions , the pfcra offers contracting agencies an administrative one .

more specifically , the pfcra outlines processes for agency investigations and administrative hearings through which contractors can be found civilly liable for defrauding the government .

additionally , unlike the fca , the pfcra applies only to false or fraudulent claims for payment that do not exceed $150,000 in value .

thus , the pfcra could seemingly only be used to address false or fraudulent contractor claims in connection with relatively small procurements , or fraud involving small claims on larger contracts .

the fca , in contrast , contains no such dollar cap , and can be used by the government to hold contractors accountable for false or fraudulent payment submissions in connection with larger contracts or claims .

under the pfcra , a contractor cannot , among other things , submit or cause to be submitted to an agency a claim that the contractor knows to be false or fraudulent .

when a contractor is suspected of violating pfcra , the matter is referred to the agency's investigating official , who investigates the allegations and reports all findings to the agency's designated reviewing official .

if , after considering the investigating official's findings , the reviewing official determines that there is adequate evidence that a contractor violated the pfcra , the matter is referred to the attorney general .

the attorney general , or designated assistant attorney general , then informs the reviewing official of whether the referral is approved .

if the referral is approved , the matter then goes to the contractor , who can attempt to settle or can request a hearing before an administrative law judge ( alj ) within the contracting agency .

upon finding that a contractor violated pfcra , an alj can issue a civil penalty against the contractor of up to $5,500 , and can require that the contractor pay up to twice the amount of the false or fraudulent claim if the government paid the claim .

if an alj finds a contractor liable under the pfcra , the contractor can appeal the determination to the agency head or his or her designee .

if the agency head affirms the alj's decision , the contractor can then appeal to the appropriate federal district court .

significantly , the pfcra provides that any civil penalties issued under it are "in addition to any other remedy that may be prescribed by law. .

thus , as has been observed by the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit , the pfcra is not an exclusive remedy .

a contractor that submits false or fraudulent claims for payment to the government can therefore face pfcra penalties in addition to those otherwise permitted by law .

