on october 23 , 2015 , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) released the final version of its regulations to reduce greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from existing power plants ( also referred to as electric generating units or egus ) .

since carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) from fossil fuel combustion is the primary source of ghg emissions , and fossil fuels are used for the majority of electric power generation , reducing co 2 emissions from power plants plays a key role in the administration's climate change policy .

co 2 emissions are linked to anthropogenic climate change , and the epa cites the obama administration's intent to address climate change concerns .

under the provisions of the clean power plan ( cpp ) , most existing fossil fuel - fired electric power generation plants will be subject to state - specific targets to reduce carbon emissions .

the combined state targets are expected to result in reducing co 2 emissions from power generation in the united states approximately 32% by 2030 as compared to 2005 levels .

to meet cpp goals , epa has established a national co 2 emissions performance rate for fossil fuel - fired electric steam generating units ( generally , coal - and oil - fired power plants ) , and for stationary combustion turbines ( generally , natural gas - fired combined cycle generating units ) .

epa is also giving each state a specific co 2 emissions rate based on these national performance rates and the state's existing power generation portfolio .

epa believes that the cpp will "protect human health and the environment by reducing co 2 emissions from fossil fuel - fired power plants in the u.s." mandatory compliance with the cpp begins in 2022 , with final compliance with state co 2 emissions or emission rate targets set for 2030 .

this report presents an analysis of epa's clean power plan in the context of the electric power sector .

the full implications of implementing the cpp are unlikely to be known until after the states file their compliance plans , which are due by september 6 , 2016 ( although an extension to 2018 is available to allow for the completion of stakeholder and administrative processes ) .

the discussion of issues for congress in this report will be focused on the implications of the cpp on electric power system reliability , the costs of electric power to customers , and the future structure of the electric utility industry which could result from implementation of state compliance plans .

burning fossil fuels to produce electricity results in the release of co 2 , and represents the largest source of ghg emissions in the united states .

as shown in figure 1 , fossil fuel combustion was responsible for approximately 68% of electric power generation as of 2012 .

coal was the fuel most used .

coal is also the fossil fuel which emits the most carbon dioxide per unit of electric power produced , averaging 216 pounds of carbon dioxide per million british thermal units ( mmbtus ) of energy produced .

by comparison , natural gas combustion releases about half the carbon emissions at 117 pounds of carbon dioxide per mmbtu of energy produced .

in a 2007 decision , the supreme court found in massachusetts vs. epa that ghg emissions were air pollutants which could be regulated under the clean air act ( caa ) .

epa then moved in 2009 to declare that ghgs were a threat to public health and welfare in an "endangerment" finding , which served as a basis for subsequent actions from the agency .

with regard to stationary sources of ghgs , epa proposed new source performance standards ( nsps ) in september 2013 for the control of co 2 emissions from new electric power plants burning fossil fuels under caa section 111 ( b ) regulations .

these standards were finalized in october 2015 .

with the nsps promulgated in october 2015 , epa issued guidelines under caa section 111 ( d ) for the control of co 2 emissions from existing power plants burning fossil fuels .

the standard of performance for existing sources is to reflect the degree of emissions limitation achievable through the application of the best system of emission reductions ( bser ) that is "adequately demonstrated" and available to reduce pollution .

the provisions under caa 111 ( d ) allow epa to set goals , and gives states the responsibility for creating compliance plans which meet epa's guidelines .

epa's clean power plan establishes interim and final co 2 emission performance rates for fossil fuel - fired steam electric generating units and natural gas - fired combined cycle electric generating units .

based on these performance rates , epa calculated for each state a rate - based co 2 emissions goal ( measured in pounds of co 2 per megawatt - hour ( lbs co 2 / mwh ) ) and a mass - based state goal ( measured in total short tons of co 2 ) .

a state must implement an epa - approved plan to ensure that power plants individually , in aggregate , or in combination with other measures undertaken by the state , achieve the equivalent of the interim co 2 emissions performance rates ( over the "glide path" period of 2022 to 2029 ) , and the final co 2 performance rates , rate - based goals or mass - based goals by 2030 .

epa outlines goals in the cpp for co 2 reduction by establishing its best system of emissions reduction .

the bser is based upon three "building blocks" which epa says are available to all affected egus , either through direct investment or operational shifts or through emissions trading .

building block 1 : improving the heat rate at affected coal - fired steam egus .

building block 2 : substituting increased generation from lower - emitting existing natural gas combined cycle ( ngcc ) units for reduced generation from higher - emitting ( primarily coal - fired ) affected steam generating units .

building block 3 : substituting increased generation from new zero - emitting renewable energy generating capacity for reduced generation from affected fossil fuel - fired generating units .

all three building blocks are based on "inside the fence line" ( i.e. , egu - focused ) actions to reduce co 2 emissions or emissions rates .

epa used the building blocks to create national performance rates for two subcategories of affected egus: fossil fuel - fired electric utility steam generating units and stationary combustion turbines .

for fossil fuel - fired ( i.e. , mostly coal - and oil - fueled ) steam generating units , an emission performance rate of 1,305 pounds of co 2 per megawatt - hour ( lbs co 2 / mwh ) is established .

for stationary combustion turbines ( identified by epa as ngcc units ) , the performance rate is 771 lbs co 2 / mwh .

epa believes that a transition period from 2022 to 2029 will allow for states to achieve these final performance rates by 2030 .

in turn , epa used the national performance rates to establish specific co 2 reduction targets for each state based on each state's "historical blend" of fossil - fueled steam and ngcc generation .

epa believes that the ranges of co 2 emissions reduction at coal , oil , and gas power plants can be achieved at a "reasonable cost" by application of the building blocks to a state's power generation portfolio .

epa is allowing states to choose how to meet their co 2 emissions compliance goals , using rate - based goals ( measured in lbs co 2 / mwh ) or mass - based goals ( measured in total short tons of co 2 ) .

in addition , states can meet their goals using an emission standard plan or a state measures plan .

the "emissions standard approach" is based on the egu - specific requirements so that all affected egus will meet their emission performance rates or equivalent mass - based goals .

states can also choose a "state measures approach" using a mixture of state - enforceable measures ( such as a renewable electricity standard and programs for improvement of energy efficiency ) to achieve ( on aggregate ) equivalent emissions or emission rate reductions .

if a state measures approach is chosen , the plan must also include a "contingent backstop of federally enforceable emission standards for affected egus that fully meet the emission guidelines and that would be triggered if the plan failed to achieve the required emission reductions on schedule. .

states will also be able to formulate their own plans to reduce co 2 emissions ( as opposed to using the bser ) , and can use an integrated resource plan ( irp ) or other method .

however , if they choose to implement their own plan they will have to include a timeline and process for reporting to ensure that the state's affected egus achieve the equivalent of the interim and final co 2 emission performance rates between 2022 and 2029 and by 2030 .

states can also join existing or form new regional emission trading programs with other states for compliance purposes .

epa has promulgated each state's goal as a specific co 2 mass goal as a way for states to implement mass - based trading .

some states have expressed a view that mass - based trading has significant advantages over rate - based trading .

states must decide whether to allow emissions trading , or require egus to meet specific co 2 emission performance rates or a state "portfolio" measure , which can be rate - or mass - based .

depending on what the state plan allows , the owners of egus may be responsible for deciding how these requirements will be met ( i.e. , by application of the bser or purchase of emission allowances ) .

epa encourages investments in renewable electricity projects and demand - side energy efficiency ( dsee ) in lower - income communities in 2020 and 2021 .

under the clean energy incentive program ( ceip ) , established in the cpp final rule , epa can award ( a limited number of ) matching allowances for renewable electricity projects that begin construction after participating states submit their final implementation plans .

energy efficiency projects in low - income communities are also eligible under the ceip for double credits .

through this program ... states will have the opportunity to award allowances and [emissions rate credits ( ercs ) ] to qualified providers that make early investments in [renewable energy ( re ) ] , as well as in demand - side [energy efficiency ( ee ) ] programs implemented in low - income communities .

those states that take advantage of this option will be eligible to receive from the epa matching allowances or ercs , up to a total for all states that represents the equivalent of 300 million short tons of co 2 emissions .

participation in the ceip must be a part of the initial state cpp compliance submitted to epa by september 6 , 2016 .

this submission must outline all of the programmatic milestone steps necessary to achieve a state's compliance goals .

the final state cpp implementation plan must be filed by september 6 , 2018 , with compliance with epa - approved plans beginning in 2022 .

epa has the authority to prescribe an implementation plan for any state that does not submit a plan or if epa disapproves a state plan .

electric power generation in the united states differs regionally , and largely reflects local resources , fuel costs , and availability of fuel supplies .

epa recognizes that it will take time to implement compliance solutions to meet its proposed carbon pollution reduction plan .

epa is attempting to provide flexibility for state compliance with the cpp .

states will have the flexibility to choose from a range of plan approaches and measures , including numerous measures beyond those considered in setting the co 2 emission performance rates , and this final rule allows and encourages states to adopt the most effective set of solutions for their circumstances , taking account of cost and other considerations .

while 2005 has been mentioned in broader u.s. policy terms for reductions in ghg emissions to 2030 , it is not the year that epa has used in its emissions reduction calculation .

epa chose 2012 as the year from which to establish a baseline for emissions reduction since that was the year for which it has the most complete state emissions , net generation , and capacity data for all affected egus .

some regard this as beneficial for many states since u.s. ghg emissions from egus have dropped 15% between 2005 and 2012 , while others think it is not beneficial as early actors on clean energy do not get credit for co 2 reductions in the timeframe from 2005 to 2012 .

key elements of the cpp's approach and the potential implications for the electric grid are discussed in the following sections .

epa recognizes that renewable energy and nuclear generating capacity , as sources of lower - or zero - co2 emission power , can potentially replace more carbon - intensive generation from affected egus .

therefore , epa had originally considered including nuclear generation ( from nuclear units under construction ) in the cpp , and considered incentives to help existing nuclear generation which may be at risk of early retirement due to electricity market prices .

but , in the final cpp , epa chose not to include generation from units under construction in the bser because such generation does not actually reduce existing levels of co 2 emissions from affected egus .

epa has also chosen not to include a bser component in the final cpp to help preserve existing at - risk nuclear generation .

epa acknowledges that while existing generation helps make current co 2 emissions lower , existing generation "will not further lower co 2 emissions below current levels. .

epa points to the potential for other options to reduce co 2 emissions from affected egus .

there are numerous other measures that are available to at least some affected egus to help assure that they can achieve their emission limits , even though the epa is not identifying these measures as part of the bser .

these measures include demand - side [energy efficiency] implementable by affected egus ; new or uprated nuclear generation ; renewable measures other than those that are part of building block 3 , including distributed generation solar power and off - shore wind ; combined heat and power and waste heat power ; and transmission and distribution improvements .

epa concludes that , in comparison to renewable electricity generating technologies , "investments in new nuclear units tend to be individually much larger and to require longer lead times. .

epa will , however , allow "emission reductions attributable to generation from the units to be used for [cpp] compliance. .

epa conceived of national uniform standards for existing egus , in part , to facilitate emissions trading as a cpp compliance choice .

epa views emissions trading as a cost - effective means of compliance with the cpp , and while rate - based trading is possible , it has designed mass - based state goals specifically to facilitate trading .

in general , while in some cases it may be cheaper to build new units than buy emissions credits , economic studies indicate that emissions trading can potentially create a financial incentive to reduce emissions by affording owners of affected egus the opportunity to buy or sell emissions products ( eg , rate - based emission credits or mass - based emission allowances ) to or from other affected egus .

with emissions trading , an affected egu whose access to heat rate improvement opportunities , incremental generation from existing ngcc units , or generation from new re generating capacity is relatively favorable can overcomply with its own standard of performance and sell rate - based emission credits or mass - based emission allowances to other affected egus .

purchase of the credits or allowances by the other egus represents cross - investment in the emission reduction opportunities , and such cross - investment can be carried out on as wide a geographic scale as trading rules allow .

the regions we have determined to be appropriate for the regionalized approach in the final rule are the eastern , western , and texas interconnections .

with the cpp , epa provides support for a regional ( or possibly a national ) comprehensive co 2 market to develop with these new credits and allowances , alongside or including other commodities such as renewable energy credits ( which result from prior investments in co 2 reduction technologies ) .

in particular , in its federal plan proposal , epa included "model rules" for both rate - and mass - based programs so that states have the option to adopt a consistent approach to emissions trading .

epa affirms that it will support states in tracking emissions ( and allowance and credit programs ) in order to ensure the validity of co 2 emission reduction strategies .

emissions trading was originally developed in the 1970s to address sulfur dioxide emissions , and a program to address climate change is already active in the nine states that comprise the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) .

as the nation's first mandatory cap - and - trade program for ghg emissions , the rggi cap - and - trade system applies only to co 2 emissions from electric power plants with capacities to generate 25 mw or more .

the rggi emissions cap took effect january 1 , 2009 , based on an agreement signed by the governors of states participating in rggi in 2005 , and is generally considered to be an effective program .

those that favor a cap - and - trade system argue that , among other features , it is preferable to a carbon tax or other means of regulation , because of the potential flexibility of the system and the certainty of the amount of pollution that is avoided .

others have criticized cap - and - trade programs because some features may limit the fairness or effectiveness of the program , such as the issuance of free emissions permits to large emitters , or the use of emissions offsets to allowances for pollution reduction projects in developing countries .

in the cpp , epa presents potential answers to questions on co 2 reduction the electric power sector might ask with respect to timeframe , timeline , and choices that are available for compliance by egus .

the cpp thus sets out a vision for a greater proportion of electric power production coming from natural gas and renewable energy generation , and less from coal - fired power plants , with specific goals for carbon emissions reduction proposed for 2030 .

however , some outstanding issues remain with regard to potential implementation of the cpp .

there are potential implementation issues associated with the cpp .

for example , state - specific compliance plans geared to individual state needs may complicate the interstate coordination necessary for reliability purposes .

the individual state compliance plans required by epa's cpp may have to be submitted to multiple entities and jurisdictions ( i.e. , state public utility commissions , regional transmission organizations , the north american electric reliability corporation , and ferc ) at a number of deliberative levels before a compliance plan can be finalized .

this may result in delays to compliance filings .

implementation may also be affected by egu retirements .

many fossil - fueled power plants do more than just generate electricity .

many coal power plants likely to face retirement decisions provide ancillary services such as voltage support and frequency regulation to the grid .

epa recognizes that some renewable energy technologies are capable of filling this gap , with the assistance of appropriate regulatory measures .

however , additional retirements of coal - fired capacity may also affect reserve margins , potentially impacting reliability during weather - related outages or periods of temperature extremes .

some renewable electricity technologies face performance challenges in periods of sub - optimal weather , but when employed in a distributed generation configuration , they may add a measure of resiliency to the grid .

another concern may be inclement weather .

incidents of more extreme weather appear to be occurring , and will need to be planned for when considering the types of future generation which may need to be built to assure electric system reliability .

eia recently estimated that a total of 60 gigawatts of coal capacity would retire by 2020 , with 90% of these retirements taking place by 2016 "coinciding with the first year of enforcement for the mercury and air toxics standards. .

much of this capacity scheduled for retirement was dispatched during the recent polar vortex , adding concern from some on how the grid will meet power demands in future weather extremes .

yet another concern may be the ability of states and electric utilities to acquire the levels of ( utility - scale ) renewable electricity in epa's projections .

epa's cpp proposal arguably relies on state - implemented renewable portfolio standards and energy efficiency resource standards going forward .

however , many state renewable portfolio standards and goals are scheduled to expire in the 2015 to 2020 timeframe , with more expired by 2025 .

and many state rps policies with mandatory requirements have cost caps to ensure that the targets can be met cost - effectively .

similarly , many state energy efficiency resource standards are expiring by 2020 , and may need to be revisited by state authorities to harmonize goals with state cpp plans .

several bills have recently been introduced in congress specifically addressing the epa's clean power plan or ghg restrictions from coal - fired power plants in general .

h.r .

3056 , the "stop the epa act of 2015," would , among other actions , amend the congressional review act ( p.l .

104-121 ) to require congressional approval of major rules issued by epa .

the bill would also nullify epa's existing major rules unless epa resubmits them for congressional approval , and would lower the annual economic threshold from $100 million to $50 million for a rule to be deemed a major rule .

the government accountability office would be required to estimate the economic cost imposed by epa's rules .

h.r .

2637 , the "coal country protection act" or the "protecting jobs , families , and the economy from epa overreach act," would , among other actions , prevent the epa from promulgating any regulation limiting or prohibiting co 2 emissions from a new or existing power plant , and would prevent any such regulation or guidance from having any force or effect until the u.s. labor department has certified the event will not result in job losses ; the congressional budget office has certified no loss in the u.s. gross domestic product will result ; the eia has certified there will not be a resultant increase in electricity rates ; and , ferc and north american electric reliability corporation will certify the reliability of electricity delivery under the regulation or guidance .

h.r .

2042 , the "ratepayer protection act of 2015," would , among other actions , relieve states from requirements to adopt or submit a state plan , and shield states from becoming subject to a federal plan that addresses co 2 emissions from fossil fuel - fired electric utility generating units .

the governor would be required to notify epa that implementing such a plan would have a "significant adverse effect" on the state's residential , commercial , or industrial electricity ratepayers , or have a " significant adverse effect" on the reliability of the state's electricity system .

any deadlines for mandatory compliance with such provisions would be subject to an extension period beginning 60 days after the notice of promulgation of a final rule in the federal register , ending after the date any judicial review or judgment becomes final and is no longer subject to further appeal or review in all actions .

the bill passed in the house on june 26 , 2015 .

h.j.res .

71 , a resolution of congressional disapproval under the congressional review act ( cra ) , was advanced by the house committee on energy and commerce , energy and power subcommittee on november 3 , 2015 , regarding the epa's nsps ( published at 80 federal register 64510 on october 23 , 2015 ) stating that "such rule shall have no force or effect. .

h.j.res .

72 , a resolution of congressional disapproval under the cra , was advanced by the house committee on energy and commerce , energy and power subcommittee on november 3 , 2015 , regarding the epa's cpp ( published at 80 federal register 64662 on october 23 , 2015 ) stating that "such rule shall have no force or effect. .

s. 1324 , the "affordable reliable electricity now act of 2015," would , among other actions , require the epa to establish separate standards of performance for ghg emissions from coal - fired and natural gas - fired electric utility power plants .

such standards of performance must have been achieved by commercially operating plants , on average , for at least one continuous 12-month period ( excluding planned power outages ) by "each of at least 6 units within that category" ( exclusive of results from demonstration units ) .

before epa could issue , implement , or enforce any proposed or final rule for co 2 emissions from existing fossil fuel - fired electric utility generating units , epa would be required to issue state - specific model plans demonstrating "with specificity" how each state can meet the required ghg emissions reductions under the rule .

states would not be required to adopt or submit a state plan , or become subject to a federal plan for any such proposed or final co 2 emissions reduction plan from fossil fuel - fired electric utility generating units , if the governor of a state notifies the epa that implementing such a plan would have a "negative effect" on the state's electricity ratepayers , on the reliability of the state's electricity system or on the "economic growth , competitiveness , and jobs in the state. .

the bill was reported in the senate by the environment and public works committee on october 29 , 2015 .

s.j.res .

24 , a resolution of congressional disapproval under the cra , was introduced and referred to the senate committee on the environment and public works on october 26 , 2015 , regarding the epa's cpp ( published at 80 federal register 64662 ) stating that "such rule shall have no force or effect. .

epa declares in the cpp that states and affected egus can use whatever methods they choose to meet the applicable co 2 emissions or emission rate reductions in the timeframes proposed .

in so doing , epa creates a plan that , according to epa , allows most states and affected egus to be able to comply within the timeframe allowed .

states and electric utilities already using integrated resource planning may choose to stay with this methodology .

larger , vertically integrated utilities generally have options within all three bser building blocks .

they tend to have large and , as a general matter , somewhat diverse generation fleets .

for their higher - emitting units , they have opportunities to use measures which reduce unit co 2 emission rates via heat rate improvements , co - firing , or fuel switching .

epa's modeling results suggest that fuel diversity can be maintained under the ria scenario analysis while increasing the amount of power generation from zero - emission renewable electricity technologies .

while the cpp could further diversify the national fuel generation mix by increasing generation from renewable electricity ( including hydro ) to 28% of capacity , epa recognizes that even companies that have traditionally depended upon coal to supply the majority of their generation are already diversifying their fleets , increasing their opportunities for re - dispatch .

going forward , epa co 2 regulations may provide a basis for the evolution of the u.s. electric power sector .

epa recognizes that the grid and many of its fossil - fueled power plants are aging and provides input via the cpp as to how a future national system focused on cleaner energy choices could be powered .

further technologies may emerge in the cpp compliance timeframe to increase power generation options , and some of these technologies may have the potential to lower the costs of producing and delivering electricity .

meeting the goals of epa's cpp may , in effect , require less power generation from coal - fired power plants , or perhaps outright retirements of coal - fired generation .

considering the average age of the coal - fired power plant fleet , more retirements are likely when the costs of efficiency improvements or upgrades are weighed against other options in compliance plans .

in its final rule , epa has largely calculated the cpp compliance obligations based on increasing renewable generation as the technology of choice for new power generation , emphasizing less fossil - fueled generation ( including generation fueled by natural gas ) .

this focus on renewables may , by its nature , eventually lead to a grid composed of distributed generation "cells" functioning in a cellular , interconnected manner with traditional transmission lines as its backbone .

such a design may be inherently more reliable than today's power plant - to - transmission - to - distribution model , as it focuses on serving smaller service areas whose characteristics can be designed for , and minimizes large - scale outages .

implementing compliance plans will not come without real costs or making hard choices for the states and electric utilities who will have to work together to find an acceptable compromise .

some states and electric utilities may potentially face challenges in complying with cpp goals .

the potential implications for reliability and the ultimate financial costs of the cpp will become clearer as state compliance plans are filed , and implementation plans become known .

