within a week of each other , senator grassley and representative goodlatte , chairmen of the senate and house judiciary committees , introduced parallel sentencing reform bills with bipartisan cosponsors .

by and large in identical language , the two would amend existing mandatory minimum sentence provisions found in federal drug and firearms laws , by and large in identical language .

the most obvious difference is that the senate proposal , s. 2123 , the sentencing reform and corrections act of 2015 , features an extensive corrections title , which the house proposal , h.r .

3713 , the sentencing reform act of 2015 , lacks .

h.r .

3713 would create no new mandatory minimum sentencing provisions .

s. 2123 , on the other hand , would establish two: one for interstate domestic violence offenses and another for certain violations of the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) .

existing federal law criminalizes interstate domestic violence and interstate stalking , and penalizes them equally .

s. 2123 would establish a mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment for not less than 10 years when death resulted from interstate domestic violence .

in addition , it would increase the maximum penalties for interstate domestic violence from imprisonment for not more than 20 years to not more than 25 years when life - threatening or permanent disfigurement resulted and from imprisonment for not more than 10 years to not more than 15 years when a dangerous weapon was used or serious bodily injury resulted .

otherwise , the senate proposal would leave the penalties for interstate domestic violence and interstate stalking unchanged .

ieepa authorizes the president to exercise various authorities to "deal with any unusual and extraordinary [overseas threat] ... to the national security , foreign policy or economy of the united states. .

presidents have used this authority to issue executive orders banning various unlicensed transactions with various countries , entities , and individuals .

ieepa violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years .

s. 2123 would create a separate mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment for not less than five years for three types of ieepa violations .

one prohibits ieepa violations that involve providing defense articles or services as defined by the arms export control act to countries under an arms embargo .

another prohibits ieepa violations that involve supplying goods or services for the foreign development of weapons of mass destruction .

the third prohibits ieepa violations that furnish certain foreign entities with goods and services that are subject to export restrictions .

s. 2123 alone would call for an inventory of federal crimes .

section 109 of the bill would direct the attorney general to prepare and provide the house and senate committees on the judiciary an inventory of federal statutory crimes and of federal regulatory offenses .

the compilation of federal statutory crimes would have to identify the penalties , mens rea , and frequency of prosecution of each offense .

the compilation of federal regulatory offenses would be organized by enforcing agency and note the penalties and frequency of prosecution for each .

the attorney general and pertinent agency head would also be responsible for the creation of a publicly available online index of such offenses .

