the european union ( eu ) is a political and economic partnership that represents a unique form of cooperation among sovereign states .

it is the latest stage in a process of european integration begun after world war ii , initially by six western european countries , to promote peace and economic recovery .

its founders hoped that by pooling sovereignty in certain sectors ( primarily economic ones at first ) , integration would foster interdependence and make another war in europe unthinkable .

the eu currently consists of 28 member states , including most of the formerly communist countries of central and eastern europe ( see map in the appendix ) .

the eu has been built through a series of binding treaties , and has characteristics of both a supranational entity ( in specified areas , sovereignty is shared and eu institutions hold executive authority ) and an intergovernmental organization ( in other areas , cooperation is based on consensus among the member state governments ) .

over the years , member states have sought to harmonize laws and adopt common policies on an increasing number of issues .

eu members share a customs union ; a single market in which goods , services , people , and capital move freely ( known as the "four freedoms" ) ; a common trade policy ; a common agricultural policy ; and a common currency ( the euro ) , which is used by 19 member states ( collectively referred to as the "eurozone" ) .

twenty - two eu members ( and four non - eu countries ) participate in the schengen area of free movement , which allows individuals to travel without passport checks .

 ( see table 1 for eurozone and schengen membership. ) .

in addition , the eu has taken steps to develop common foreign and security policies and has sought to build common internal security measures .

various european policymakers and analysts have likened the european integration project to a bicycle , which must keep going forward to avoid falling over .

currently , however , the eu faces a range of political and economic pressures — including successful populist , antiestablishment political parties in many eu countries — and multiple internal and external challenges , which have raised questions about the eu's future shape and character .

although many experts maintain that the eu will continue to pedal along , others worry that the eu bicycle appears wobbly .

perhaps the most prominent challenge for the eu is the united kingdom's ( uk's ) expected exit from the eu ( known as "brexit" ) .

in a public referendum in june 2016 , british voters favored leaving the eu by 52% to 48% .

the uk has been engaged in withdrawal negotiations with the eu but remains a member of the eu until it formally exits the bloc ( which is widely expected to occur in march 2019 ) .

in addition , the eu faces a number of other salient issues ; these issues include addressing concerns about democratic backsliding in some member states ( especially poland and hungary ) , managing migratory pressures and integration of newcomers , dealing with a resurgent russia , and combating a heightened terrorism threat .

despite brexit , the other 27 eu member states appear committed to sustaining the eu and are considering further eu reforms .

in the longer term , some analysts suggest the eu likely faces a fundamental choice between those supporting further integration as the solution to the bloc's woes and those contending that integration has gone too far and should be put on hold ( or possibly even reversed in certain areas ) .

whereas some experts argue that "more eu" is necessary to deliver robust economic growth and ensure security , others are skeptical that national governments will be inclined to cede more authority to a brussels bureaucracy viewed as opaque and out of touch with the problems of average citizens .

successive u.s .

administrations and many members of congress have strongly supported the european integration project as a key pillar of the transatlantic relationship .

in the aftermath of world war ii , the united states viewed european integration as a way to entrench democratic systems and free markets , and the creation of nato was meant to provide collective defense and security .

with the end of the cold war , the united states was a key advocate for eu enlargement to the countries of central and eastern europe , believing it would help to promote stability and prosperity in the region .

today , the united states and the eu share a dynamic political partnership and a huge trade and investment relationship .

although u.s. - eu relations have experienced numerous ups and downs in the past and political and economic tensions have arisen periodically , u.s. and eu policymakers have tended to view the overall partnership as mutually beneficial .

during the obama administration , the numerous challenges facing the eu worried many u.s. officials who feared that a politically divided , economically weak , and internally preoccupied eu would threaten european stability , jeopardize u.s. - eu economic relations , and make the eu a less robust and effective global partner .

in the 114 th congress , several hearings addressed some of the specific issues facing the eu , including the greek debt crisis , the conflict in ukraine , europe's migration and refugee crisis , and potential threats to europe posed by the islamic state terrorist organization .

some hearings also considered the eu's future development more broadly and its possible strategic and economic implications for the united states .

many in the eu are concerned about the future trajectory of u.s. - eu relations under the trump administration and about whether the united states will continue to be a reliable partner in the years ahead .

president trump's reported questioning of the eu's value and utility is largely unprecedented and in contrast to long - standing u.s. support for the european integration project .

eu leaders have been taken aback by what they regard as president trump's hostility toward the bloc .

u.s. - eu divisions have emerged on a growing number of issues , from trade to climate change to the 2015 nuclear deal with iran .

some analysts suggest that managing relations with the united states under the trump administration has emerged as another , somewhat unexpected , challenge for the eu .

at the same time , the eu hopes to preserve close u.s. - eu ties , and eu policymakers continue to seek to cooperate with the trump administration where possible on issues of common interest and concern .

congressional interest in the eu , its ongoing challenges , and the state of u.s. - eu relations has persisted in the 115 th congress .

various congressional hearings have focused on brexit , eu policy toward russia , and european efforts to address societal and security concerns posed by continued migration .

in the 115 th congress , some house and senate members also have sought to reassure eu officials and member state governments of continued u.s. support for the eu , in part through visits to brussels and key european capitals , the reestablishment of the eu caucus in the house , and the introduction of resolutions reaffirming the importance of a strong u.s. - eu partnership .

a number of political and economic factors are contributing to the current uncertainty surrounding the future of the eu .

to varying degrees , they are also challenging the legitimacy and structure of the eu and its institutions .

against this complex political and economic backdrop , the eu is grappling with several major challenges .

many observers contend that the breadth and difficulty of these multiple issues are unprecedented .

how the eu responds may have lasting implications not only for the eu itself , but also for its role as an international actor and as a key u.s. strategic and economic partner .

in light of the internal and external challenges facing the eu , the future shape and character of the bloc are being questioned .

considerable debate exists on whether more or less eu integration is necessary going forward .

although most experts consider a complete dissolution of the eu unlikely , advocates worry that for the first time in the eu's history , some aspects of integration could be stopped or reversed .

others contend that the multiple crises currently facing the eu could produce some beneficial reforms and ultimately transform the bloc into a more effective and cohesive entity .

possible scenarios for the eu in the years ahead include the following: muddling through .

the eu would largely continue to function as it currently does , without any significant treaty changes or decisionmaking reforms , and find some degree of common solutions to crises such as those posed by migration or terrorism .

the eu would continue to pursue integration and common policies where possible , although doing so could be increasingly difficult .

establishing a two - s peed or multispeed eu .

the eu would become a two - speed entity , consisting of a strongly integrated group of "core" countries and a group of "periphery" countries more free to select those eu policies in which they wish to participate .

a multispeed variant could see further integration pursued by some member states in selected fields , such as european defense or eurozone governance , and other eu members could choose to opt out .

some european policymakers and analysts suggest that such a multispeed eu already exists in practice , with varying membership on a range of eu initiatives — including the eurozone , schengen , justice and home affairs issues , and defense policy — and thus it is unclear how formalizing a multispeed eu would differ from existing practice .

a looser , more intergovernmental configuration .

further eu integration essentially would be put on hold , and possibly reversed in some areas , with sovereignty on certain issues reclaimed by national capitals .

this outcome may be most likely should reform - minded euroskeptic parties come to power in more eu countries .

a looser structure may make it easier for the eu to expand to include turkey , the remaining aspirants in the western balkans , and other countries such as georgia and ukraine .

a tighter , more integrated configuration .

the eu would emerge from its current challenges more united and integrated .

some suggest such an outcome could actually be more likely as a result of brexit , resulting in an eu of member states more aligned on the need for further political and economic integration .

this configuration likely would not encourage further eu enlargement .

following the uk's brexit referendum in june 2016 , eu leaders acknowledged that it could no longer be "business as usual" and announced that the other 27 member states would launch a "political reflection" to consider the eu's future .

in september 2016 , the eu - 27 leaders held an initial discussion in slovakia .

the resulting bratislava declaration asserted that "although one country has decided to leave , the eu remains indispensable for the rest of us. .

despite the attempt to demonstrate unity in bratislava , some eu officials and experts reportedly were disappointed that measures proposed were not bold enough , did not offer a future strategic vision for the eu , and mostly focused on implementing tactical responses to the various crises or recommitting support to existing initiatives .

the eu concluded its reflection process in march 2017 during its commemoration of the 60 th anniversary of the treaties of rome .

in the 60 th - anniversary rome declaration , the leaders of the eu - 27 renewed their commitment to the european integration project , acknowledged the challenges facing the eu , and pledged to "make the european union stronger and more resilient , through even greater unity and solidarity amongst us. .

ahead of the 60 th anniversary meeting , press reports indicated that some eu governments were in favor of developing a multispeed eu .

a reported german - led effort to commit to a multispeed eu in the rome declaration , however , ultimately was unsuccessful .

poland and other member states were concerned that making the multispeed concept central to the eu's identity would be divisive , undermine eu solidarity , and potentially lead to different classes of eu membership ( essentially , one for richer , more prosperous eu countries in the west and another for relatively poorer eu members in the east ) .

regardless of a formal decision to move toward a multispeed eu , the eu appears to be pursuing greater integration in certain areas , with varying degrees of success .

over the past two years , eu leaders have announced several new initiatives to bolster security and defense cooperation , including a new european defense fund to support joint defense research and development activities .

in late 2017 , 25 eu member states agreed on a new defense pact ( known officially as permanent structured cooperation , or pesco ) aimed at spending defense funds more efficiently , developing military capabilities jointly , and increasing interoperability .

french and german leaders also continue to discuss measures to bolster the eurozone's stability and improve its economic governance .

in june 2018 , french president macron and german chancellor merkel announced a proposed road map for eurozone reforms .

other eurozone members , however , subsequently voiced significant reservations about some aspects of the german - french plan .

a potential common eurozone budget remains particularly controversial .

many analysts note that such policy debates are common in the eu and to be expected , but suggest that implementing any significant eu reforms or restructuring likely will be a years - long endeavor subject to continuous debate and prolonged negotiations .

the united states has resolutely supported the european integration project since its inception in the 1950s as a way to help keep european nationalism in check , promote political reconciliation and economic interdependence , and encourage stability and security on the european continent .

successive administrations and many members of congress have long viewed the eu ( and its predecessors ) as fostering democratic allies and strong trading partners in europe .

during the cold war , u.s. policymakers considered the european integration project — and the peace and prosperity it helped to engender in western europe — as essential to helping deter the soviet threat and keeping western europe out of the soviet orbit .

since the end of the cold war , the united states has often looked to the eu for partnership on common foreign and security concerns worldwide .

many analysts assert that the united states and the eu have a strong track record of cooperation .

the united states and the eu have promoted peace and stability in various regions and countries ( including the balkans , ukraine , and afghanistan ) , enhanced law enforcement cooperation , worked together to counter terrorism , and sought to tackle cross - border challenges such as cybersecurity .

the united states and the eu also share an extensive and interdependent trade and investment relationship .

the eu accounts for about one - fifth of u.s. total trade in goods and services , and the united states and the eu are each other's largest source and destination for foreign direct investment .

despite some periodic disagreements on issues such as the 2003 u.s. - led war in iraq and a number of u.s. - eu trade disputes , u.s. officials and analysts mostly have regarded the u.s. - eu partnership as serving their respective political and economic interests .

over the years , some u.s. officials and analysts occasionally have suggested that a potentially stronger , more united eu could rival u.s. power and prestige .

such views , however , traditionally have not shaped broad u.s. policy toward the eu in any significant way .

some u.s. policymakers , analysts , and members of congress have expressed concern that the various challenges currently facing the eu could have negative implications for the eu's ability to be a robust , effective u.s. partner .

those of this view worry that internal preoccupations could prevent the eu from focusing on key u.s. priorities , such as russian aggression in ukraine , the conflicts in syria and iraq , and countering terrorism .

some observers also have suggested that a politically unstable and economically fragile eu could take u.s. attention and resources away from managing strategic challenges elsewhere , including the rise of china and continued instability in the middle east .

a number of analysts posit that brexit in particular could change u.s. - eu dynamics in the years ahead .

the united states has long valued the uk's role in the eu in light of the uk's political and economic clout , its atlanticist orientation , and the fact that u.s. and uk views traditionally align on most major foreign policy issues .

some observers suggest the united states is losing its best advocate within the eu for policies that bolster u.s. goals and protect u.s. interests .

those of this view are concerned that in the longer term , the uk's absence could lead to greater u.s. - eu divergence on issues such as managing russia or the centrality of nato to european security .

others contend that the united states has close bilateral ties with most eu countries and shares common political and economic preferences with many of them .

those of this view argue that the u.s. - eu partnership is broader than u.s. relations with any one member state and thus the uk's departure will not significantly alter u.s. - eu relations .

since the earliest days of the european integration project , european leaders have valued u.s. support and recognized the u.s. role in helping to ensure european security and prosperity .

eu and european officials widely view nato and the u.s. security guarantee as central to maintaining peace and stability on the european continent .

many consider u.s. - eu trade and investment ties , by virtue of their size and interdependence , as crucial to european economic well - being .

furthermore , as asserted in a september 2018 european parliament resolution , many eu policymakers regard a cooperative u.s. - eu partnership as "the fundamental guarantor for global stability" and as being in "the interest of both parties and of the world. .

u.s. - eu relations traditionally have been undergirded by shared common values and a commitment to the post - world war ii international order based on alliances and a rules - based , multilateral trading system .

given the long - standing u.s. backing for and partnership with the eu , president trump's largely critical views of the eu have surprised many europeans and raised concerns about what these views may portend for future u.s. - eu relations .

european council president donald tusk conveyed the anxiety of many in the eu when he stated in january 2017 that "the new administration [is] seeming to put into question the last 70 years of american foreign policy" and remarked that potential changes in the u.s. posture toward europe could pose further challenges to eu cohesion , stability , and security .

on the economic front , the eu is deeply concerned about what it regards as protectionist u.s. trade policies — including the imposition of tariffs on imports of steel and aluminum from the eu — and president trump's apparent view of eu trade practices as being detrimental to the united states .

in mid - july 2018 , president trump reportedly asserted that the eu was a u.s. "foe" for "what they do to us in trade," although he also noted , "that doesn't mean they are bad … it means that they are competitive. .

some european analysts speculate that contrary to past u.s. views , the trump administration might be indifferent to the collapse of the eu if this were to allow the united states to negotiate better bilateral trade deals with individual member states .

president trump has been vocal in his support for the uk's decision to leave the eu and for a future u.s. - uk free trade agreement following brexit .

many in the eu greeted the july 25 , 2018 , accord between president trump and european commission president juncker on renewing u.s. - eu economic cooperation as a positive first step toward de - escalating tensions on trade and tariff issues .

eu officials hope that u.s. - eu discussions will lead to an end to u.s. tariffs on steel and aluminum products and prevent potential new u.s. tariffs on autos and auto parts .

administration officials and supporters credit president trump's approach with compelling the eu to address u.s. trade concerns .

nevertheless , some eu policymakers and experts remain skeptical about the prospects for resolving trade differences with president trump .

u.s. - eu differences have surfaced about the extent and scope of the proposed new trade talks , especially related to whether agricultural products should be part of upcoming trade discussions .

meanwhile , u.s. officials have expressed frustration with what they perceive to be slow progress on the eu side .

u.s. - eu divisions have emerged on a growing number of other issues , as well .

many eu officials are uneasy with elements of the trump administration's "america first" foreign policy and with u.s. positions on a range of international challenges — including relations with russia and china , the nuclear deal with iran , the middle east peace process , migration , and climate change .

some in the eu have bristled at concerns voiced by several administration officials that eu defense efforts must not distract european countries from their nato commitments .

eu policymakers also express concerns about what they regard as the trump administration's ambivalence toward multilateral organizations such as the united nations and the world trade organization .

many in the eu are anxious about the degree to which the united states will continue to play a leading role in supporting the multilateral trading system .

various eu officials and european analysts increasingly question whether the united states will remain a credible and reliable partner in the years ahead .

the aforementioned european parliament resolution , for example , expresses concern that "the current one - sided 'america first' policy harms the interests of both the eu and the us , undermines mutual trust and may also have wider implications for global stability and prosperity. .

some europeans worry that there is a risk of u.s. global disengagement and argue that the eu must be better prepared to address both regional and international challenges on its own .

many observers view eu efforts over the last few years to conclude trade agreements with other countries and regions ( including canada , japan , and latin america ) and to enhance defense cooperation and as aimed , in part , at reducing european dependence on the united states .

some analysts suggest that recent calls by french president macron for a "european army" seek to underscore the need to boost european military capabilities in the face of growing uncertainty about the future u.s. role in the world .

german chancellor merkel subsequently supported macron's position on developing a european army , although she noted that it should seek to complement not compete with nato .

others maintain that despite u.s. - eu tensions on certain policy issues , the eu will seek to work with the trump administration on common interests — such as countering terrorism and promoting cybersecurity — and will aim to preserve political , security , and economic relations with the united states for the long term .

some observers point to european commission president juncker's efforts to reduce trade tensions with president trump as a clear indication that the eu remains committed to ensuring close u.s. - eu relations for the foreseeable future .

eu foreign policy chief federica mogherini has asserted , "i have no doubt that the european union and the united states are and will remain natural partners , natural friends , in spite of disagreements we may have with the u.s .

administration. .

many u.s. officials and analysts also contend that eu fears of a demise in relations are largely overblown , especially in light of recent statements of support for the eu from president trump and other administration officials .

following his july 2018 meeting with european commission president juncker , president trump tweeted that the united states and the eu "love each other," and he appeared to give a more upbeat assessment of u.s. - eu economic relations .

in september 2018 , new u.s .

ambassador to the eu gordon sondland observed that there have always been disagreements between the united states and the eu and that "one of the key strengths of the u.s. - eu relationship is our ability to talk candidly and freely about our differences .

that is not an advantage we enjoy with all our partners , and we should not lose sight of its importance. .

sondland further noted that on a multitude of strategic and economic concerns , the united states and the eu "work best when we work in tandem," and he pledged continued support for close u.s. - eu cooperation .

