d etermining whether aliens who enter or remain in the united states in violation of federal immigration law ( called unlawfully present aliens for purposes of this report ) are permitted to claim refundable tax credits under federal law requires answering two questions .

the first is whether these individuals may claim the credits under the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

the second is whether any refundable tax credits are "federal public benefits" under the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) , in which case it could be argued that any such credit should be disallowed to unlawfully present aliens regardless of whether the irc contains such a restriction .

this report first provides a list of refundable tax credits and then examines these two questions .

tax credits reduce a taxpayer's tax liability dollar - for - dollar , up to the value of the credit .

refundable credits , unlike nonrefundable credits , can be larger than a taxpayer's income tax liability , with the taxpayer receiving the difference as a cash payment from the irs in the form of a tax refund .

table 1 lists the current and recently expired refundable tax credits .

a list of crs reports that provide information on these credits can be found in the appendix to this report .

the first question in determining whether unlawfully present aliens may claim refundable tax credits is whether this is permitted under the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

there is no general rule in the irc that prohibits unlawfully present aliens from claiming refundable tax credits .

rather , the restrictions that exist are established on a credit - by - credit basis .

as discussed below , there are three types of restrictions: ( 1 ) prohibitions on nonresident aliens ( defined below ) from claiming a credit ; ( 2 ) requirements that taxpayers provide social security numbers ( ssns ) in order to claim a credit ; and ( 3 ) a restriction that only aliens who are "lawfully present" may claim a credit .

the second question is whether any refundable tax credits are subject to section 401 of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora ) , which generally bars unlawfully present aliens from receiving any "federal public benefit. .

if any refundable tax credit is such a benefit , it could be argued that aliens subject to section 401's restrictions may not claim the credit , regardless of whether the irc contains such a prohibition .

"federal public benefit" is defined in section 401 ( c ) ( 1 ) as , ( a ) any grant , contract , loan , professional license , or commercial license provided by an agency of the united states or by appropriated funds of the united states ; and ( b ) any retirement , welfare , health , disability , public or assisted housing , postsecondary education , food assistance , unemployment benefit , or any other similar benefit for which payments or assistance are provided to an individual , household , or family eligibility unit by an agency of the united states or by appropriated funds of the united states .

it appears the irs permits unlawfully present aliens to claim any refundable tax credit that is not restricted under the irc .

in other words , while the irs has not released a public statement or guidance on this issue , it appears the agency does not consider any refundable tax credits to be subject to section 401 .

no court has examined the issue of whether refundable tax credits are federal public benefits under prwora .

so long as the irs permits unlawfully present aliens to claim any credit without an irc restriction , there is a question as to whether that position could be challenged in court .

this is because it appears doubtful that anyone would be personally injured — a necessary prerequisite to have standing to sue — by the irs's decision to allow the credit .

thus , if the irs does not interpret section 401 to include refundable tax credits , this could be a de facto permissible interpretation by the agency , unless congress were to address the matter legislatively .

if the issue were to come before a court , there appears to be support for the irs's apparent determination that refundable credits are not federal public benefits .

for example , section 401 does not expressly include refundable tax credits , and it could therefore be argued that congress did not include them in the list of federal public benefits because it understood them to be excluded .

one could also argue that refundable tax credits are not federal public benefits because tax benefits are not traditionally thought of as the types of "grants" or qualifying "benefits" referred to in section 401 , and there is no clear evidence in the legislative history that congress intended such credits to be treated as such .

additional support could be found in prwora section 432 ( a ) , which directs the attorney general to consult with the secretary of health and human services when promulgating regulations for verifying the immigration status of applicants for federal benefits , but does not require consultation with the treasury department , thus arguably suggesting tax benefits were understood not to be affected .

support might also be found in other congressional action: congress included in prwora an ssn requirement for the eitc and subsequently enacted legislation to impose an ssn requirement for the 2008 stimulus and making work pay credits and to deny the premium assistance credit to unlawfully present aliens .

these actions would arguably be unnecessary had congress believed that prwora section 401 applied to refundable tax credits .

on the other hand , it might be argued that at least some refundable tax credits could be a "grant" under section 401 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( a ) or a "benefit" under section 401 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( b ) .

since the key terms are not defined statutorily nor do they appear to be terms of art ( i.e. , have a generally accepted meaning in law ) , a court might look to their customary and ordinary meanings .

in general , "grant" is defined as "a sum of money given by an organization , especially a government , for a particular purpose" ; "benefit" is "a payment made by the state or an insurance scheme to someone entitled to receive it" ; and "assistance" is "the provision of money , resources , or information to help someone. .

furthermore , in other contexts , courts have interpreted "other similar benefits" in prwora to mean services that "assist people with economic hardship" or could potentially "create [an] incentive for illegal immigration. .

these definitions might support the argument that some refundable tax credits could be federal public benefits due to their refundable nature and purpose .

such a determination would likely depend on the specific characteristics of each credit .

for example , in other contexts , courts have held the eitc to be public assistance for purposes of state law because of its refundable , grant - like nature and purpose of assisting low - income families .

however , some courts have held that the child tax credit is not such a benefit since , unlike the eitc , it is not limited to assisting low - income families .

as these cases illustrate , a court might not reach the same conclusion for each credit , concluding that some would meet the criteria while others would not , depending on the specific characteristics of each credit .

there appears to be justification for concluding that refundable tax credits are not federal public benefits under prwora section 401 , but there is also arguably support for determining that some might be , depending on their characteristics and purpose .

until the irs , a court , or congress addresses whether any refundable credits are federal public benefits , the only clear restrictions on the ability of aliens to claim them are those found in the irc ( see table 2 ) .

the following crs reports provide information on specific refundable tax credits: earned income tax credit: crs report r43805 , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) : an overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

additional child tax credit: crs report r41873 , the child tax credit: current law and legislative history , by [author name scrubbed] .

american opportunity tax credit: crs report r41967 , higher education tax benefits: brief overview and budgetary effects , by [author name scrubbed] .

health coverage tax credit: crs report rl32620 , health coverage tax credit , by [author name scrubbed] .

making work pay credit: crs report r40969 , withholding of income taxes and the making work pay tax credit , by [author name scrubbed] .

adoption tax credit: crs report rl33633 , tax benefits for families: adoption , by [author name scrubbed] first - time homebuyer tax credit: crs report rl34664 , the first - time homebuyer tax credit , by [author name scrubbed] .

