long - standing u.s. policy has treated the u.s. - flag international fleet as a naval auxiliary to be available in times of war or national emergency .

when the united states is involved in an extended military conflict overseas , 90% or more of military cargoes are typically carried by ship .

congress also has determined that for economic security reasons , the united states should have a commercial fleet active in international commerce .

to support the u.s. - flag international fleet , congress has required that "government - impelled" cargo sent overseas be carried on u.s. - flag ships .

government - impelled cargo is government - owned cargo such as military supplies , foreign aid such as food , and any privately owned cargo financed by the federal government , such as goods purchased with an export - import bank loan .

regulations suggested , but not formally proposed , by the u.s. maritime administration ( marad ) would also require that some u.s. - bound cargo financed by the government be carried on u.s. - flag ships .

cargo reserved for u.s. - flag vessels is referred to as "preference cargo. .

cargo preference requirements are highly controversial , particularly among shippers of civilian aid cargoes , because they significantly increase shipping costs and may delay shipments .

however , preference cargo is critical to some u.s. - flag ship lines , as u.s. - flag ships are not price - competitive with foreign - flag ships in carrying the overwhelming bulk of exports and imports transacted in the private sector .

this report explains the motivation behind cargo preference law , discusses issues concerning the cost - effectiveness of the program , and reviews attempts to apply cargo preference to the nation's oil trade .

the report also identifies several disparate bills reflecting wide disagreement on the future direction of cargo preference policy .

the united states has three separate u.s. - flag fleets capable of carrying commercial cargo .

the u.s. - flag domestic fleet comprises ships and barges that carry cargo and passengers between u.s. ports , including most u.s. island territories .

under a 1920 law , the jones act , such activity may be conducted only by vessels under u.s. ownership , built in the united states , and crewed by u.s. citizens .

the domestic fleet is often referred to as the "jones act" fleet .

these vessels do not receive direct government subsidies , but benefit by having exclusive access to cargoes such as oil shipments from texas to the northeast and goods moving by containership from california to hawaii .

jones act ships are not affected by cargo preferences , because the services they provide cannot be offered by foreign - flag ships .

the u.s. - flag international fleet comprises vessels registered under u.s. law that carry cargo and passengers between the united states and other countries .

u.s. - flag ships in foreign trade must be owned and crewed by u.s. citizens , but need not be built in the united states .

unlike the jones act fleet , the u.s. - flag international fleet faces competition from vessels registered in other countries .

the privately owned u.s. - flag international cargo fleet consists of roughly 80 ships , including 43 containerships and 18 ships with roll - on / roll - off ramps to transport vehicles , including military vehicles .

the fleet is owned by 19 different ocean carriers and is crewed by a pool of approximately 3,200 private - sector merchant mariners .

the military sealift command ( msc ) in the department of defense ( dod ) operates a fleet of about 120 ships .

many of these resupply navy combatant ships at sea ( an activity called "unrep," for underway replenishment ) or perform missions such as ocean surveillance and submarine tendering .

approximately 50 msc vessels carry military cargoes in port - to - port voyages similar to those undertaken by commercial ships .

the cargo component of the msc fleet includes oil tankers , containerships , and ships designed to carry oversize cargo , but the most prevalent type is roll - on / roll - off ships .

the msc fleet is mostly crewed by about 6,000 licensed mariners , who are federal civilian employees .

the vessels these civilian mariners ( known as "civmars" ) crew do not plan to sail in combat waters .

the msc does not receive a direct appropriation from congress .

it bills dod for the ocean transportation services it provides , and its budget is delineated in "working capital funds. .

the government - owned fleet of cargo ships also includes a reserve fleet of inactive vessels available for military deployment .

these vessels are on standby at various ports .

the ready reserve force ( rrf ) consists of 46 ships that can sail upon either five or 10 days' notice .

the rrf has a skeleton crew of 460 commercial mariners ( 10 per ship ) , but would require an additional 1,200 mariners to sustain its operation once activated .

the average age of the ships in the rrf is 40 years , about 20 years beyond the typical economic life of a foreign - flag commercial ship .

the rrf consists mostly of roll - on / roll - off ships , and is a subset of a larger national defense reserve fleet ( ndrf ) , which also comprises vessels not expected to be activated on short notice and ships that are ready for scrapping .

the ndrf is managed by marad , an agency of the u.s. department of transportation , in peacetime and the msc when activated for military deployment .

the reserve fleet is relevant to cargo preference because the u.s. - flag privately owned fleet provides employment for mariners who would be drawn upon to sail reserve fleet ships when activated .

the existence of both a privately owned deep - sea u.s. - flag fleet and a government - owned fleet capable of carrying similar types of military cargo overseas is a key motivation behind cargo preference laws .

in the military transportation act of 1904 ( p.l .

58-198 ) , congress required that all u.s. military supplies be transported on u.s. vessels but did not specify whether government - owned or privately owned u.s. - flag vessels had to be used .

in 1949 , the army's transport service , including 241 ships , was consolidated with the navy's cargo ( noncombatant ) fleet of 94 ships to form the military sea transportation service ( msts ) , with a total fleet of 335 ships .

the msts fleet carried not only strictly military personnel and cargo , but also significant amounts of military - related cargo such as the dependents and personal property of military personnel and employees of military contractors .

foreigners with government grants to study at u.s. universities , civilian employees of other federal agencies , and refugees and displaced persons also traveled aboard msts ships .

moreover , msts ships often sailed to and from busy ports that also were served by commercial carriers .

the msts found that it could transport passengers and cargo in government - owned vessels for 80% or less of the cost of using private u.s. - flag shipping space .

according to a 2004 study , the privately owned u.s. - flag carriers were not competitive vis - à - vis foreign - flag carriers in carrying commercial u.s. imports and exports after world war ii , and therefore "lobbied strenuously for the military's business. .

they sought to limit the size of the msts fleet , fearing that its expansion could ultimately result in the nationalization of the u.s. - flag fleet .

carriage of military cargoes was also important for private u.s. - flag operators as a basis for claiming political support , as it allowed them to point to their role in providing sealift in wartime .

in a 1950 senate hearing , the msts commander revealed that it was msts policy to maximize the use of its own ships before cargo was offered to commercial carriers .

in 1951 , the department of commerce , then the parent agency of marad , signed a memorandum of understanding with dod identifying the priority msts was to follow in obtaining additional shipping capacity .

first , it would purchase space on privately owned u.s. - flag liner services ; second , it would charter privately owned u.s. - flag vessels ; third , it would activate government - owned vessels held in the military reserve fleet .

only after all those options were exhausted would msts buy space on or charter foreign - flag ships .

in 1954 , the two departments signed another memorandum of understanding that severely restricted the size of the msts fleet to 151 ships and required approval of both secretaries for nonemergency expansion of the fleet .

the objective of restricting the size of the msts fleet was to commit more military cargo to the privately owned u.s. - flag fleet .

the "wilson - weeks" agreement , named after the two secretaries , remains substantively in effect today .

competition between the government - owned and privately owned fleets in carrying military - related cargo gave impetus to the cargo preference act of 1954 ( p.l .

83-644 ) .

as originally introduced , the act would have eliminated the msts entirely , requiring that 100% of government - impelled cargoes be carried in privately owned u.s. - flag vessels .

due to opposition from the eisenhower administration , which favored repealing cargo preference requirements in favor of direct subsidies to u.s. - flag operators , the 100% requirement was reduced to 50% , the commerce department was relieved of direct responsibility for administering the law , and a provision was added requiring that u.s. - flag commercial vessels charge the government "fair and reasonable rates. .

the clear intent of the legislation was to encourage greater use of u.s. - flag private operators and reduce the role of the msts as a vessel operator .

since passage of the 1954 act , congress has amended the cargo preference act numerous times , generally in favor of private u.s. - flag carriers .

u.s. foreign - aid cargo was a substantial share of total u.s. exports in the 1950s , and many of the amendments concerned carriage of food aid .

in 1961 ( p.l .

87-266 ) , congress required that ships eligible for food - aid cargoes must either be built in the united states , or , if built abroad , must have sailed under the u.s. flag for the previous three years .

congress wanted to discourage foreign - flag ships from entering the u.s. cargo preference trade only temporarily in periods when the world shipping market was oversupplied .

in the merchant marine act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-469 ) , congress empowered marad to regulate how other federal agencies should comply with the 1954 act after hearing allegations that other agencies intentionally did not fully comply with the law or interpreted the law differently than marad .

also in 1970 , dod renamed the msts the military sealift command ( msc ) .

in the food security act of 1985 ( p.l .

99-198 ) , congress increased the requirement for the share of food - aid tonnage shipped on u.s. - flag vessels from 50% to 75% .

it also mandated that a certain portion of such cargo be shipped through great lakes ports .

in 1996 , congress established the maritime security program ( msp ; p.l .

104-239 ) to replace a similar program that had been in existence since 1936 — the operating differential subsidy program ( ods ) .

the msp provides a flat per - ship operating subsidy intended to offset the higher cost of registering under the u.s. flag .

this change from the ods , whose subsidy rates fluctuated based on the difference between american and foreign crewing costs aboard a particular vessel , was intended to encourage u.s. - flag operators to constrain their operating costs .

a study sponsored by marad at the time showed that u.s. crew salaries were about three times greater than those aboard vessels sailing under european flags and several times greater than those of asian - flag ships .

another important difference between the msp and ods programs is that msp carriers are obligated to provide overland transport ( to and from ports ) to the military in addition to port - to - port ocean transport .

thus , through an operating subsidy , the military gains access to a worldwide commercial distribution network without having to fund the capital costs of that network .

in 1997 , congress allowed msp carriers to carry preference cargoes in foreign - built vessels ( p.l .

105-85 , §3603 ( b ) ) .

u.s. - flag international operators have stated that without both cargo preference and the msp there would be no incentive to flag their ships under u.s. registry .

in the fy2009 defense act ( p.l .

110-417 , §3511 ) , congress granted marad the authority to require "make up" cargoes if federal agencies fell short of the percentage of cargo required to be shipped on u.s. - flag vessels and to impose civil penalties .

in 2012 , congress reversed its action of 1985 , lowering the required share of food aid that must be carried in u.s. - flag vessels from 75% back to 50% ( moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act , p.l .

112-141 ) .

competition between the msc and the commercial fleet for carriage of military - related cargo has continued .

at a recent hearing , a representative of the u.s. - flag shipping industry stated the following: dod must continue to abide by its long - standing "commercial first" policy to provide military cargo to privately owned united states flag vessels when available in lieu of government - owned or controlled vessels .

this policy has resulted in military cargo support for the united states flag fleet , and we strongly urge congress to ensure that dod continues its unwavering adherence to this essential policy .

at this same hearing , this witness stated that "united states flag vessels participating in msp carried more than 90% of the war material to the forward - operating bases during the recent afghanistan and iraq conflicts. .

signs of tension between the msc and private owners of u.s. - flag vessels have appeared periodically .

commercial operators have sought to perform "unrep" missions to resupply navy ships at sea , but the msc continues to use its own ships and mariners for these missions .

in one instance in the early 1980s , u.s. - flag tanker operators sued the msc , claiming that it improperly tallied the costs for using its own tankers in order to justify rejecting the bids of private operators , which were much higher .

in the late 1980s , the msc fleet expanded from about 120 vessels to nearly 200 , despite the opposition of commercial operators .

in the early 1990s , when two u.s. - flag container carriers , sea - land and american president lines , were threatening to reflag their ships under foreign registry , they called for requiring more military - related shipping activity to be turned over to commercial operators .

at this time , there was reportedly an attempt by the navy to amend the wilson - weeks agreement so as to effectively annul it .

after the msc attempted to use one of its own vessels for a large overseas shipment of tanks , legislation was introduced that would have written the wilson - weeks agreement into statute .

when the msc began acquiring its own fleet of roll - on / roll - off ships and contested with marad over control and administration of the reserve fleet , tensions with the commercial industry increased further .

since the mid - 1990s , the msc fleet has stabilized at around 120 ships , and the focus of u.s. - flag carriers has shifted from containing the size of the msc fleet to fully funding the msp program in annual appropriations and to more vigorous enforcement of civilian cargo preferences .

u.s. - flag operators have also been wary of msc attempts to allow foreign - flag carriers to bid on msc contracts in an effort to increase competition and obtain lower rates , even though the foreign carriers would have used u.s. - owned ships and u.s. crews .

in recent years , military cargo has accounted for the vast majority of government - sponsored cargo .

according to the latest available data compiled by marad , in fy2011 military cargo accounted for about 86% of cargo preference tonnage , while food aid accounted for 11% and civilian agency cargoes accounted for 3% .

the percentage breakdown of revenue was roughly the same .

in 1955 , u.s. - flag ships carried about 25% of u.s. foreign trade .

today , their market share is around 1% .

the u.s. - flag international fleet has shrunk during this time from 850 ships to 80 ships .

sixty of these ships receive annual maritime security program operating subsidies of $3.1 million each .

in return for the subsidies , these 60 ships are to be made available to dod in times of war or national emergency .

the msp vessels are designated as "militarily useful" by marad in consultation with dod , and are funded from marad's budget .

the size of the privately owned fleet fluctuates .

as of august 2015 , it was about the same size it was in 2000 , but in the intervening period it reached a peak of 107 ships in 2011 .

during the first seven months of 2015 , 10 ships left and eight ships joined the fleet .

a vessel cannot be transferred to a foreign flag without marad's approval unless it no longer receives msp subsidies or is being replaced with an equally capable vessel .

ships joining the u.s. - flag international fleet would seek a "registry endorsement" from the u.s. coast guard , submitting documentation demonstrating u.s. ownership , among other things .

over 30 of the u.s. - flag ships carrying preference cargoes ( about 40% of the fleet ) were built before 2000 .

if preference cargoes were not available , they might be scrapped , as likely being too old to be attractive to a foreign - flag carrier .

about 60% of the 80 ships in the fleet are controlled by u.s. entities owned by four large foreign shipping lines ( they are permitted as "documentation citizens," as explained below ) .

the ships owned by these entities also make up the majority of the vessels receiving msp subsidies .

the largest operator of u.s. - flag international vessels , maersk line , which also owns farrell lines , owns 27 u.s. - flag vessels .

most of the u.s. owners not affiliated with a foreign parent company have small fleets under the u.s. flag .

three of them have between five and seven ships each , and about a dozen companies have one or two u.s. - flag ships each .

by contrast , the leading foreign - flag containership lines operate hundreds of containerships each , and the largest foreign - flag tanker operators own more than 100 ships each .

information about the revenues and profits of u.s. - flag international maritime operations is not publicly available .

however , it appears that the profitability of u.s. - flag international services is highly dependent on revenues from preference cargos , as many of the operators also use foreign - flag vessels to compete for commercial business .

according to a marad study , "u.s. - flag carriers face a significantly higher cost regime than do foreign - flag carriers. .

this study found that a u.s. - flag containership in international trade , for example , has a daily operating cost that is more than twice that of a foreign - flag containership ( see table 1 ) .

according to the study , the largest cost difference comes from higher wage costs for u.s. - flag containerships .

several recent developments suggest that the volume of preference cargo may change in the coming years .

u.s. food - aid policy has been increasing the use of cash payments and local or regional sourcing of food overseas , potentially reducing food - aid shipments from the united states .

the drawdown of forces in iraq and afghanistan has reduced military shipments to these regions .

the authorization of the export - import bank that generated about 2% of u.s. - flag freight revenue from government - sponsored cargo in 2011 expired on july 1 , 2015 , although bills reauthorizing the bank have passed both houses .

on the other side of the ledger , an increased u.s. military presence in asia and the pacific , where voyages between stations are relatively long , could increase demand for u.s. - flag shipping .

congress is considering several bills that could significantly affect the volume of preference cargo .

h.r .

1987 , as passed by the house , would increase marad's enforcement of food - aid cargo preference requirements .

the bill would raise the share of food aid that must be carried in u.s. - flag ships from 50% to 75% , reversing the reduction that was enacted in the surface transportation act of 2012 ( map - 21 ) .

s. 525 , sponsored by senator corker , the chairman of the foreign relations committee , takes the opposite approach .

it would further reduce the u.s. - flag shipping requirement for food aid under title ii of the food for peace act ( 7 u.s.c .

1721 et seq. ) .

from 50% to 0% , and increase the amount of food aid supplied locally from overseas , thereby decreasing the amount of food aid shipped from the united states .

the administration also supports changes in food - aid policy that would have the effect of reducing u.s. - flag shipments , and sought $25 million in its fy2016 marad budget request to "otherwise retain" u.s. merchant mariners .

congress has not approved similar requests in recent years .

congress is also reauthorizing the export - import bank , almost all of whose financed cargoes are carried on u.s. - flag ships .

while the bank's authorization expired on july 1 , 2015 , the house and senate have passed reauthorization bills .

the national defense authorization act for fy2016 ( h.r .

1735 ) , which passed the house and the senate but was vetoed by president obama on october 22 , 2015 , expressed concern for a recent decline in military and food - aid cargoes , and would have increased operating subsidies for msp carriers from $3.1 million per ship to $3.5 million .

h.r .

702 , as passed by the house , would increase msp operating subsidies to about $5 million per ship .

