the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) was last comprehensively reauthorized by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) .

the authorization of appropriations for most programs authorized by the esea extended through fy2007 .

as congress has not reauthorized the esea , there is currently no explicit authorization of appropriations for esea programs .

however , because the programs continue to receive annual appropriations , appropriations are considered implicitly authorized .

during the 114 th congress , the house education and the workforce committee reported the student success act ( h.r .

5 ) , which would provide for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea .

the bill was subsequently passed on the house floor on july 7 , 2015 .

the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee reported the every child achieves act of 2015 ( ecaa ; s. 1177 ) , which was subsequently passed on the senate floor on july 16 , 2015 .

h.r .

5 and s. 1177 would both make changes to the formulas used to allocate funds under title i - a of the esea .

under s. 1177 , an equity grant formula would be added to the existing formulas used to distribute title i - a funds to state educational agencies ( seas ) and local educational agencies ( leas ) .

s. 1177 would also modify the process by which title i - a funds are allocated from leas to schools .

under h.r .

5 , a new option for distributing funds from the state level to leas and from leas to schools would be available .

this option is often referred to as the "state option" or "title i portability. .

h.r .

5 would also make changes to the determination of weighted child counts under two of the four title i - a formulas included in current law .

this report begins with a detailed discussion of the four title i - a formulas used to determine grants under current law .

it then discusses changes to these formulas proposed by s. 1177 and h.r .

5 .

table a - 1 in appendix a provides an overview of the key elements included in the four current formulas and the equity grant formula that would be added by s. 1177 .

title i - a of the esea authorizes aid to leas for the education of disadvantaged children .

title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending pre - kindergarten through grade 12 schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families .

title i - a has also become a vehicle to which a number of requirements affecting broad aspects of public k - 12 education for all students have been attached as conditions for receiving title i - a grants .

it is the largest program authorized under the esea and was funded at $14.4 billion for fy2015 .

under title i - a , funds are allocated to leas via states using four different allocation formulas specified in statute: basic grants , concentration grants , targeted grants , and education finance incentive grants ( efig ) .

annual appropriations bills specify that portions of each year's appropriation be allocated under each of these different formulas .

in fy2015 , an estimated 45% of title i - a appropriations were allocated through the basic grant formula , 9% through the concentration grant formula , and 23% through each of the targeted grant and efig formulas .

the current four - formula strategy has evolved over time , beginning with the basic grant formula when the esea was originally enacted .

the concentration grant formula was added in the 1970s in an attempt to focus funding more effectively on leas with relatively large numbers or high percentages of formula children ( i.e. , low - income children or children in need ) .

during consideration of esea reauthorization in the early 1990s , there was an attempt to replace the two existing formulas with a new formula that would target title i - a funds better by providing more funding per formula child as the percentage or number of formula children in an lea increased .

both the house and the senate developed formulas intended to accomplish this goal ( targeted grants and efig , respectively ) .

a compromise on one new formula was not reached ; nor was there agreement on eliminating the existing formulas .

as a result , funds are allocated through four formulas under current law .

for each formula , a maximum grant is calculated by multiplying a "formula child count," consisting primarily of estimated numbers of school - age children in poor families , by an "expenditure factor" based on state average per pupil expenditures for public k - 12 education .

in some formulas , additional factors are multiplied by the formula child count and expenditure factor .

then these maximum grants are reduced to equal the level of available appropriations for each formula , taking into account a variety of state and lea minimum grant and "hold harmless" provisions .

in general , leas must have a minimum number of formula children and / or a minimum formula child rate to be eligible to receive a grant under a specific title i - a formula .

some leas may qualify for a grant under only one formula , while other leas may be eligible to receive grants under multiple formulas .

under three of the formulas — basic grants , concentration grants , and targeted grants — funds are initially calculated at the lea level .

state grants are the total of allocations for all leas in the state adjusted for state minimum grant provisions .

under efig , grants are first calculated for each state overall and then are subsequently suballocated to leas within a state using a different formula .

once funds reach leas , the amounts allocated under the four formulas are combined and used jointly .

under s. 1177 , title i - a funds would be allocated to leas via states using five formulas .

more specifically , all appropriations up to $17 billion would be allocated through the four formulas prescribed in current law .

all funds appropriated in excess of $17 billion would be allocated using a new equity grant formula .

additionally , s. 1177 would alter the process by which schools are annually ranked to determine title i - a grants .

while there are several rules related to title i - a school selection , under current law leas must generally rank their public schools by their percentages of students from low - income families and serve them in rank order .

this must be done without regard to grade span for any eligible school attendance area in which the concentration of children from low - income families exceeds 75% .

below this point , an lea can choose to serve schools in rank order at specific grade levels ( eg , only serve elementary schools in order of their percentages of children from low - income families ) .

under s. 1177 , leas would have to serve elementary and middle schools with more than 75% of their children from low - income families and high schools with more than 50% of their children from low - income families before choosing to serve schools in rank order by specific grade levels .

however , no lea would be required to reduce the amount of funding provided to elementary and middle schools below the level provided in the fiscal year prior to the enactment of s. 1177 in order to comply with the proposed requirement related to serving high schools under title i - a .

under h.r .

5 , title i - a grants would continue to be allocated to states and leas based on the four formulas prescribed in current law .

as discussed previously , under the targeted grant and efig formulas , there are five sets of weights that apply to an lea's formula child count and percentage of formula children , and these weights correspond to formula child quintile ranges .

h.r .

5 would slightly alter both the numbers - based and percentage - based quintiles used to determine the weighted child counts under targeted grants and efig beginning in fy2022 .

additionally , h.r .

5 specifies that if the quintile change would result in a decrease in title i - a funds for any lea , the quintiles demarcated in current law would continue to be used to determine grant amounts .

it should be noted that h.r .

5 would also add a new option for states to distribute funds available under title i - a to leas and schools .

this provision is commonly referred to as the "state option" or "title i - a portability. .

unlike the change to the quintiles , the state option would not alter the formulas used by ed to calculate title i - a grant amounts but would give states the option to change how title i - a funds are allocated within the state .

as the state option is discussed in detail in crs report r43929 , allocation of funds under title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act: h.r .

5 and the state option , by [author name scrubbed] , the remainder of this section focuses only on the quintile changes proposed in h.r .

5 .

the changes to the quintiles used for weighted child counts based on the number of formula children and based on the percentage of formula children are shown in table 5 and table 6 , respectively .

under h.r .

5 , the ceiling for the first four quintiles on the numbers weighting scale would be increased by 1 and the ceiling for the first four quintiles on the percentage weighting scale would be increased by 0.01 percentage points .

the floors for the 2 nd through 5 th quintiles would then be adjusted accordingly .

as these would be relatively small changes to the quintiles , their impact would be somewhat limited .

the quintile ranges in current law were based on the actual distribution of formula children among the nation's leas , according to the latest data in 2001 ( at the time nclb was being considered ) .

each quintile contains one - fifth of the national total of formula children .

if reauthorization legislation were to follow the model of nclb , these quintiles would need to be updated to reflect the actual distribution of formula children in fy2015 .

the changes to the quintiles proposed by h.r .

5 do not follow the nclb approach .

under h.r .

5 , the changes to the quintiles would go into effect in fy2022 , only if the change to the new quintiles would result in no "harm" to an lea .

that is , for fy2016 through fy2021 there would be no change to the quintiles used in the targeted grant and efig formulas .

subsequently , the new quintiles would only be used in the determination of title i - a grants if , as a result of the change , no leas were to lose title i - a funds relative to their title i - a grant amount for the prior year as a result of the change .

the quintile change , like any formula change , would shift title i - a funds among states and leas .

in general , formula changes result in no leas losing funds when there is a large enough increase in appropriations to offset any losses .

in recent years , appropriations for title i - a have remained relatively constant .

thus , there is a reasonable chance that the proposed change to the quintiles would result in "harm" to some leas and would therefore not go into effect during fy2022 or a subsequent fiscal year .

additionally , as the quintile change would not immediately go into effect , it is possible that the esea would be reauthorized before the new quintiles were used in the determination of title i - a grants .

thus , the quintile changes proposed in h.r .

5 would have little , if any , impact on title i - a grants .

title i - a formula characteristics esea title i - a appropriation .

