the securities and exchange commission's ( sec's ) increased use of its in - house administrative forum to resolve charges against persons alleged to have violated federal securities laws is receiving considerable attentio n. congressional hearings have discussed the issue ; several cases are challenging the sec's authority to use the forum ; and the press has widely covered the issue .

this report will take a brief look at the administrative law process in general ; the likely reason for the increased use by the sec of the administrative forum ; selected cases challenging the sec's use of the administrative forum on the bases of constitutional violations of due process and equal protection and of unconstitutional selection of the sec's administrative law judges ; possible implications of these cases ; and congressional interest in the issue .

after congress has enacted legislation , federal agencies typically issue rules , to the extent permitted by the statutes , to implement the legislation .

although issued by an administrative agency , these rules have the force of law .

it is not unusual for an agency to interpret the details of federal statutes , which may have been written in a somewhat general way .

this ability to interpret the statutes often gives agencies considerable discretion in issuing rules .

however , the agency must have been given the authority by statute to act in this discretionary rule - making manner .

the general antifraud provision of the securities exchange act , section 10 ( b ) , in its use of the language "as the commission may prescribe as necessary or appropriate," is an example of this discretionary authority given by statute .

congress has enacted statutes such as the administrative procedure act ( apa ) to set out the process by which agencies issue these rules .

in general , when a person wishes to challenge in court an action brought by an agency in an administrative forum , such as a charge of rule violation , he must first exhaust the administrative remedies ; that is , the agency's action must have reached finality .

administrative actions may include hearings , findings , and decisions by administrative law judges ( aljs ) .

an alj is a judge and trier of fact within an agency ; the alj presides over trials within the agency and adjudicates claims and disputes .

aljs are appointed according to statute .

often , a defendant may not challenge an agency action in court until an alj has rendered an opinion .

in the securities enforcement remedies and penny stock reform act of 1990 ( penny stock act ) , the sec received broad authority to seek in court civil money penalties in enforcement actions .

with respect to imposing civil penalties on persons in administrative actions , however , the penny stock act limited the sec's authority to persons in regulated or registered entities , such as brokerage firms , investment advisers , and investment companies .

section 929p ( a ) of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank ) , titled "authority to impose civil penalties in cease and desist proceedings," eliminated the limitation on the sec's authority to impose civil money penalties in administrative actions .

this provision of dodd - frank amended section 8a of the securities act , section 21b ( a ) of the securities exchange act , section 9 ( d ) ( 1 ) of the investment company act , and section 203 ( i ) ( 1 ) of the investment advisers act to allow the sec to impose civil money penalties , as well as cease - and - desist orders , on almost any person involved with securities .

section 929p ( a ) essentially provides the sec a choice of either proceeding in federal district court or of conducting its own administrative enforcement proceedings against almost any person charged with securities violations .

this provision of dodd - frank appears to have been a strong incentive for the sec to bring more administrative actions , instead of going to court .

there appear to be both advantages and disadvantages of administrative hearings .

possible advantages of administrative hearings over court proceedings include expedited procedure and the use of hearing examiners with expertise in the complexities of federal securities laws .

however , despite a mandate of having fair and impartial hearing examiners , it may be argued that an administrative hearing provides a kind of home - court advantage for the agency .

one commenter believes that this dodd - frank change has created significant disadvantages for defendants , such as the following: ( 1 ) administrative actions go to hearing on an accelerated schedule in which a hearing must be completed and an initial decision rendered by an administrative law judge within 270 days of the filing of the commission's complaint ; ( 2 ) there is no discovery in administrative proceedings ; ( 3 ) there is no right of trial by jury ; and ( 4 ) factual findings by the sec in an administrative proceeding can only be reversed on appeal if the defendant shows that the findings failed to meet the "substantial evidence" test .

an sec official , however , has described its use of the administrative forum as having benefits for both the agency and for respondents: there are a number of benefits to using the administrative forum that can lead us to file cases there .

first , administrative actions produce prompt decisions.... second , administrative proceedings have the benefit of specialized factfinders.... third , the rules governing administrative hearings provide that aljs should consider relevant evidence... .

i should note that these features of the administrative forum can also benefit the respondents .

either side can benefit when witnesses' recollections are fresher .

and the relaxed rules of evidence may likewise give them more flexibility in offering evidence .

several cases are challenging the sec's use of the administrative forum as violating the u.s. constitution .

as mentioned in the "introduction," plaintiffs have brought suit against the sec's administrative forum as violating their due process and equal protection rights and as violating the constitution's appointments clause in the way that the sec chooses its administrative law judges .

in addition to defending cases brought against its use of the administrative forum , the sec has responded to these challenges by issuing in december 2014 a commission opinion indicating that it intends to continue to use the administrative forum aggressively to charge alleged securities wrongdoers and to appeal court opinions that strike down the agency's use of its administrative forum .

as described herein , the decisions in cases that have been brought to challenge the constitutionality of the sec's administrative forum have sometimes validated the sec's use of the forum and at other times have found in favor of the challenging plaintiff , thus halting the use of the administrative forum .

so far , it appears that the cases validating the forum have focused primarily on plaintiffs' due process and equal protection challenges .

this is true in the jarkesy , chau , and bebo cases .

all three cases held that the plaintiffs had to exhaust their administrative remedies before they could challenge in a federal court of appeals the sec's final action and thereby the agency's violation of their constitutional rights .

these case decisions did not hinge on a discussion of the merits of plaintiffs' constitutional challenges .

instead , they focused on the statutory procedural scheme set out by such statutes as section 25 of the securities exchange act and section 929p ( a ) of dodd - frank .

the cases held that plaintiffs had to abide by this procedure before they could bring a court challenge .

in contrast , the hill and duka cases allowed plaintiffs to go forward with their lawsuits in federal district court , holding that their arguments concerning the unconstitutionality of the appointment of sec aljs likely had merit .

the tilton decision , however , appeared to criticize the reasoning in hill and held that the plaintiff's argument about the unconstitutionality of the alj selection could not be brought in court until the sec reached finality in the administrative proceeding .

tilton used language similar to the language used by the courts in jarkesy , chau , and bebo .

timbervest differs from jarkesy , chau , and bebo because the plaintiff waited for a final administrative decision before petitioning a federal court of appeals to accept his case challenging the constitutionality of the sec's administrative forum .

at this time , there does not appear to be a decision by the d.c .

circuit as to whether to accept the appeal of the sec's final order .

bebo and jarkesy are the only cases to have been decided by federal courts of appeals , the seventh circuit and the d.c circuit respectively .

other cases discussed in this report , decided by federal district courts , are on appeal to federal courts of appeals .

with attacks on two fronts to the sec's administrative forum — due process and equal protection challenges on one front and selection and tenure protection of sec aljs on the other front — there is the possibility of different holdings on the different issues by different circuit courts .

if there are different opinions in the federal circuit courts , or even if there is not a split in the circuits , the u.s. supreme court may decide to grant certiorari in order to decide the constitutionality of the sec administrative forum .

a supreme court decision could be written broadly enough that it would have an impact on the administrative forum in other agencies .

for example , should a supreme court decision hold unconstitutional the sec's statutory and regulatory framework requiring exhaustion of administrative remedies before bringing a court of appeals challenge to the sec's final order , whether constitutional or otherwise , a similar statutory and regulatory framework in other federal agencies could be in jeopardy .

at this time , the challenges to the sec's administrative forum based on due process and equal protection appear to have been unsuccessful .

however , challenges to the constitutionality of the forum based on selection procedure and tenure protection have met with some success .

should the plaintiffs in hill and duka be ultimately successful , the result could have an impact on agencies in addition to the sec .

the constitutionality of the way in which aljs are appointed in other federal agencies is beyond the scope of this report .

however , the alj appointment "quandary" has been discussed for some time .

if sec aljs are actually determined to be inferior officers , the appointment of aljs in some agencies other than the sec may be improper .

the apa gives agencies a certain amount of discretion in the manner in which they appoint aljs .

if aljs have not , for example , been appointed by department heads — the argument made in hill and duka — they may face a constitutional appointments clause problem .

as mentioned in the discussion of the hill decision , the supreme court in freytag v. commissioner of internal revenue found that special trial judges appointed by the chief judge of the u.s. tax court exercised significant powers and were therefore to be considered inferior officers requiring appointment by the department head .

so too , according to hill , are sec aljs inferior officers who must be appointed by the department head .

if this line of reasoning is followed by the courts with respect to the appointment of aljs of all federal agencies , so too , it might be argued , must all aljs be appointed by department heads .

that may not currently be the situation in agencies other than the sec .

nevertheless , it is not certain that all aljs are inferior officers who must be appointed by the department head .

for example , the apa refers to aljs as "presiding employee[s]," although , as mentioned by one scholar , "this reference might be understood as a lingering indignity from the aljs' 'hearing examiner' past. .

in addition , the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit held in landry v. federal deposit insurance corporation that aljs appointed by the office of thrift supervision were not inferior officers: [w]e believe that the stjs' power of final decision in certain classes of cases was critical to the court's decision .

as the aljs hired pursuant to § 916 of firrea have no such powers , we conclude that they are not inferior officers .

with respect to the argument made by hill and duka concerning the unconstitutionality of the tenure protections afforded sec aljs — an argument not addressed by either of the courts — justice breyer in his dissent in free enterprise fund v. public company accounting oversight board stated that the decision in the free enterprise fund case could result in: sweeping hundreds , perhaps thousands of high - level government officials within the scope of the court's holding , putting their job security and their administrative actions and decisions constitutionally at risk .

justice breyer went on to state that the officials and their decisions swept out by the free enterprise holding could include aljs: my research reflects that the federal government relies on 1,584 aljs to adjudicate administrative matters in over 25 agencies .

see appendix c , infra ; see also memorandum of juanita love , office of personnel management , to supreme court library ( may 28 , 2010 ) ( available in clerk of court's case file ) .

these aljs adjudicate social security benefits , employment disputes , and other matters highly important to individuals .

does every losing party before an alj now have grounds to appeal on the basis that the decision entered against him is unconstitutional ? .

cf .

ante , ( "[o]ur holding also does not address" this question ) .

this discussion is not to suggest that a supreme court case on sec aljs is forthcoming — much less that , should there be a decision , the court would strike down the sec alj selection process or tenure protections or that a decision would have an impact on aljs in other agencies .

instead , the discussion is intended to set out only possible ramifications of a definitive decision on the constitutionality of sec alj appointments and tenure protections .

as mentioned in this report's "introduction," at least two congressional hearings have discussed the issue .

on december 2 , 2015 , the subcommittee on capital markets and government sponsored enterprises of the house committee on financial services held a hearing titled "legislative proposals to improve the u.s. capital markets. .

one of the legislative proposals discussed in the hearing was h.r .

3798 , 114 th congress , titled the "due process restoration act of 2015. .

h.r .

3798 would allow a defendant in an sec administrative proceeding involving a cease - and - desist order and a penalty to require the sec to terminate the proceeding .

after the required termination , the sec may bring a civil action against the person for the same remedy .

the bill would also require that in an administrative proceeding the sec must show by clear and convincing evidence , instead of the commonly used "preponderance of the evidence" standard , that a person has violated the relevant securities law .

on march 19 , 2015 , the subcommittee on capital markets and government sponsored enterprises of the house committee on financial services held a hearing titled "oversight of the sec's division of enforcement. .

in his comments , representative garrett , chairman of the subcommittee , expressed concern about the possible infringement of constitutional protections for persons charged with securities violations in sec administrative forums .

he stated in part: [w]hale the sec is first and foremost a disclosure agency .

i support a strong enforcement function of the sec .

this enforcement function , however , must be used in an evenhanded , non - political manner that preserves the due - process rights of issuers , regulated entities , and their employees... .

while bringing more cases through the administrative proceedings can lead to lower costs for the agency and increases in efficiency , it is important to realize that those benefits come with a cost .

the cost is less due - process protections for defendants .

because the sec administrative proceedings use the sec's procedural rules , respondents are forced to operate on a condensed timeframe , and do not have the benefit of many of the fundamental due - process protections provided under the federal civil procedures act , and the federal rules of evidence , such as full discovery rights , the right to a jury trial , and the exclusion of hearsay evidence .

moreover , initial appeals of administrative law judge ( alj ) rulings must be made to the full commission , an alj's employer , rather than federal district court .

while the commission's decision may be appealed to the d.c .

circuit court of appeals , the sec's interpretation of the security laws generally will be given significant deference .

appealing an administrative decision is a time - consuming and expensive proposition... .

so this , coupled with the sec's 100% success rate — which is a pretty good success rate — 100% success rate from the year 2014 illustrates a very troubling pattern of the sec's attempting to stack the rules and process in a way that the outcome of the case is , well , predetermined .

this is not appropriate in a country that values appropriate due process for its citizens .

due process is a fair process , and fair process is fair play .

andrew ceresney , the director of the division of enforcement of the sec and the sole witness at this hearing , defended the sec's use of the administrative hearing .

he stated in part: administrative proceedings is a procedure that is available to us .

and we try to use it when it is appropriate to protect investors .

and we look at a whole bunch of factors to determine whether an administrative proceeding is appropriate.... we use a number of facts and circumstances .

first , there are certain proceedings we can only bring as administrative proceedings .

so that includes failures to supervise and causing violations .

second , in cases where we need quick relief , where we want to get a bar very quickly , or we want to get investors relief quickly , administrative proceedings can be much quicker than district court actions .

district court actions will often take years to get a resolution in .

aps , we can get a decision within 300 days of the institution of the action .

so that is important .

and another important point is where we have technical rules , where we have complicated rules , some of our rules are very complicated , we have sophisticated fact - finders who are the aljs ; whereas with a jury , it would be much more difficult for them to grasp those very , very complicated issues .

