on april 20 , 2015 , the department of labor ( dol ) issued a proposed rule that would expand the definition of investment advice within employer - sponsored private - sector pension plans and individual retirement accounts ( iras ) .

individuals who provide recommendations that meet the definition of investment advice are held to a fiduciary standard , which is a higher standard of conduct than for individuals who provide recommendations that do not meet the definition .

individuals who are held to fiduciary standards are required to act solely in the interests of plan participants and beneficiaries .

therefore , expanding the definition of investment advice may increase the number of individuals held to this higher standard .

the proposed fiduciary rule has generated much controversy .

controversial issues include questions about the obama administration's rationale for the rule ; concerns about the rule's effect on small businesses and small investors ; and suggestions that dol should wait for the sec to issue a rule requiring a fiduciary standard for securities brokers and dealers .

dol published the proposed rule on april 20 , 2015 .

the comment period for the proposed rule was extended by 15 days from to july 6 , 2015 , to july 21 , 2015 .

dol held a public hearing on the proposed rule from august 10 to august 13 , 2015 , and had an additional comment period after the public hearing lasting until september 24 .

2015 .

dol may develop and release the final rule but has not indicated a timetable for doing so .

the following legislation has been introduced in the 114 th congress that would prevent or delay implementation of the fiduciary rule .

h.r .

1090 , the retail investor protection act , introduced on february 25 , 2015 , by representative ann wagner , would ( 1 ) prohibit dol from issuing a fiduciary rule until 30 days after the sec issues a rule for the standards of conduct for brokers and dealers and ( 2 ) require the sec to report to the house committee on financial and the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs on , among other items , whether retail investors would be harmed by the rule and whether there are alternatives to the rule that the sec could pursue .

explaining the rationale behind the bill , representative ann wagner said , [the] proposed rule from the department of labor potentially harms the very people that it claims to protect: low - and moderate - income americans seeking advice for investing for their retirement .

it would greatly expand the definition of a fiduciary under erisa and fails to take into account the vast regulatory structure already in place… .

while omb typically reviews labor rules for an average of 117 days , this was pushed through without a full review process in just 50 days .

we believe that the sec should go first in regulating this space , and we hope that democrats who have supported that position previously continue to do so .

although the bill appears to have the support of a number of stakeholders , including several insurance industry - related groups , it has also attracted critics who characterized it as an attempt to delay or prohibit the dol from completing its fiduciary rulemaking .

on october 27 , 2015 , h.r .

1090 passed the house of representatives .

two bills were introduced in the u.s. house and reported out of committee that would define investment advice and add a best interest pte .

companion legislation has been introduced in the u.s. senate .

h.r .

4293 , the affordable retirement advice protection act , introduced by representative phil roe on december 18 , 2015 , and h.r .

4294 , the strengthening access to valuable education and retirement support act of 2015 ( or the savers act of 2015 ) , introduced by representative peter roskam on december 18 , 2015 , are nearly identical bills which would define investment advice in u.s. code and also provide for a best interest pte .

h.r .

4293 was reported out of the house education and workforce committee on february 2 , 2016 , and h.r .

4294 was reported out of the house ways and means committee on february 3 , 2016 .

companion legislation has been introduced in the u.s. senate .

s. 2502 , the affordable retirement advice protection act , was introduced by senator johnny isakson on february 4 , 2016 , and s. 2505 , the savers act of 2016 , was introduced by senator mark kirk on february 4 , 2016 .

h.r .

4293 amends the labor code ( 29 u.s.c. ) .

and h.r .

4294 amends the tax code ( 26 u.s.c. ) .

many of the provisions in the bills are nearly identical , though h.r .

4294 contains provisions that are not in h.r .

4293 .

this section summarizes the provisions common to h.r .

4293 and h.r .

4294 .

the bills would define investment advice and also provide an exemption for recommendations that are in the best interest of the investor , provided specified conditions are adhered to .

investment advice would be a recommendation to buy , hold , or sell a plan investment , including distributions from a plan or a rollover ; on the management of plan assets ; or of a person to manage plan assets .

the advice must be provided through either a written acknowledgement that the person providing the advice is a fiduciary ; or a mutual agreement , arrangement , or understanding that the advice is individualized to the plan or to the plan participant and that the individual who receives the advice intends to materially rely on the advice .

the person providing a recommendation could provide a written disclaimer that the recommendation is not individualized for the recipient and should not be materially relied upon for making investment decisions .

the disclaimer would state: "this information is not individualized to you , and there is no intent for you to materially rely on this information in making investment or management decisions. .

the disclaimer must be in writing and presented in a clear and prominent manner .

such a recommendation would not be considered investment advice and would not be held to a fiduciary standard .

the bills provide for several "carve - outs" in which information or recommendations would not be considered investment advice .

these carve - outs include individuals who provides a disclosure that they are providing recommendations in a sales or marketing capacity ; counter - parties in swaps transactions ; employees of the plan sponsor , provided they are not receiving any additional compensation ; platform providers who make available investment alternatives without regard to the needs of a plan or plan participants ; valuation information ; and financial education .

in the bills , financial education would be defined as either ( 1 ) information described in dol's interpretative bulletin 96-1 or ( 2 ) information that describes the factors to consider in deciding whether to receive a distribution from a plan and whether to roll over such a distribution , provided that examples are accompanied by all of the material facts and assumptions upon which the examples are based .

the bills contain provisions in which an individual may provide investment advice under a best interest recommendation .

individuals who adhere to the best interest recommendation would not be subject to the fiduciary standard .

the best interest standard would require that the individual who provides the recommendation would receive no more than reasonable compensation ; provide recommendations that a prudent person would provide , based on the recipient's age , other factors as disclosed by the recipient , and other unspecified factors ; and place the interests of the recipient of the advice above his or her own interests .

a best interest recommendation may include a recommendation that would contain only a limited number of investment options , provided there is a disclosure that "the same or similar investments may be available at a different cost ( greater or lesser ) from other sources" ; or variable compensation ( such as commissions ) provided there is a clear disclosure of the variable compensation .

the requirements of this disclosure include ( 1 ) a notice that the same or similar investments may be available at a greater or lesser cost from other sources ; and ( 2 ) a description of the fees or compensation received ( i ) directly from the advice recipient and ( ii ) from a third party in connection with the transactions ( what are sometimes called "indirect fees." ) .

the advice recipient would be able to request the specific amounts of indirect compensation received in connection with the transaction .

individuals would be able to correct errors or omissions in disclosing information about variable compensation provided the individual was acting in good faith and the error is corrected as soon as possible but not later than 30 days from when the person learns of the error .

the provisions of the bill would take effect on the 61 st day after date of enactment and would apply to information or recommendations made on or after two years after the date of enactment .

the bills would prohibit dol from amending any investment advice rules or administrative procedures promulgated under erisa 3 ( 21 ) or 26 u.s.c .

4975 ( e ) ( 3 ) .

the bills would require that any regulations or administrative procedures that became effective after january 1 , 2015 , would not be effective unless a bill or joint resolution that specifically approves the rule is enacted within 60 days of the enactment of either h.r .

4293 or h.r .

4294 .

the bills contain provisions that would grandfather existing transactions: the provisions of the bills would not apply to transactions for which compensation has been received prior to the date on which the provisions of the bill become effective .

in the tax code , the penalty for engaging in a prohibited transaction is an excise tax .

under current law , a person who engages in a prohibited transaction may be subject to excise taxes .

the tax is 15% of the amount involved and can be 100% if the transaction is not corrected .

because h.r .

4294 amends the tax code , several provisions are in h.r .

4294 but are not in h.r .

4293 .

h.r .

4294 would add special rules for prohibited transactions with respect to investment advice that is not a best interest recommendation .

the bill defines "correction" and "correct" to be the payment to , or reimbursement of , actual damages as a result of relying on the investment advice .

h.r .

4294 also provides a prohibited transaction exemption related to certain fee arrangements .

an individual who provides investment advice would not be engaging in a prohibited transaction if the investment advisor receives no more than reasonable compensation defined in 4975 ( d ) ( 2 ) ; discloses that the same or similar investments may be available at a greater or lesser cost ; discloses any variable compensation the investment adviser receives ; and corrects any omissions of disclosure , provided the adviser was acting in good faith .

h.r .

3020 , the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 , introduced by representative tom cole on july 10 , 2015 , and s. 1695 , the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 , introduced by senator roy blunt on june 25 , 2015 , contain provisions that would prohibit dol from using any funds to "finalize , implement , administer , or enforce the proposed" fiduciary regulation .

h.r .

3020 was reported out of the house committee on appropriations on july 10 , 2015 .

s. 1695 was reported out of the senate appropriations committee on june 25 , 2015 .

p.l .

114-113 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , did not contain any provisions related to proposed fiduciary regulation .

h.r .

3922 , the retirement choice protection act of 2015 , introduced by representative mike kelly on november 4 , 2015 , would ( 1 ) transfer authority for issuing regulations on iras from dol to the department of the treasury and ( 2 ) establish a best interest standard for fiduciaries who provide investment advice .

