many u.s. officials and members of congress consider spain to be an important u.s. ally and one of the closest u.s. partners in europe .

political developments in spain , cooperation between the united states and spain on security issues and counterterrorism , and u.s. - spain economic ties are possible topics of continuing interest during the 115 th congress .

members of congress may have an interest in considering the dimensions and dynamics of current issues in u.s. - spain or u.s. - european relations , or with regard to nato , in the course of oversight or legislative activities , or in the context of direct interactions with spanish legislators and officials .

the congressional friends of spain caucus is a bipartisan group of members of congress who seek to enhance u.s. - spain relations and promote political , economic , and social ties between the two countries .

the u.s. - spain council brings together u.s. and spanish leaders to promote economic , educational , and cultural ties .

since the council was founded in 1996 , five of the six chairmen have been members of the u.s. senate .

the spanish state consists of 19 provincial territories referred to as "self - governing communities" or "autonomous communities. .

two spanish regions in particular , catalonia and the basque region , maintain a distinctive cultural identity , and politics in these regions features the strong presence of nationalist independence movements .

cooperation between spain and the united states on counterterrorism issues is strong .

in past years , spain has been a base for islamist extremists , including some of those involved in the 9 / 11 attacks .

in march 2004 , terrorists inspired by al qaeda killed 191 people in a series of bombings on the madrid train system three days before national elections .

on august 17 , 2017 , a terrorist attack in barcelona killed 14 people and injured more than 100 when a van drove through a crowded pedestrian area .

the islamic state claimed responsibility for the attack , and spanish authorities subsequently identified a terrorist cell of 12 people , all of whom were either arrested ( 4 ) , shot by police ( 6 ) , or killed attempting to make explosives at a house ( 2 ) .

analysts agree that the cell was inspired by the islamic state , but authorities were unable to determine that its members had direct links to the islamic state organization .

the members of the barcelona terrorist cell were all born in morocco .

 ( about 70% of the approximately 1.18 million muslims living in spain have their origins in morocco. ) .

spain and morocco cooperate closely with regard to counterterrorism , including regular intelligence exchanges and joint operations against terrorist organizations and recruiting networks .

moroccan authorities coordinated with their spanish counterparts in support of the investigations following the barcelona terrorist attack .

compared to many other western european countries , a relatively low number of people have traveled from spain as "foreign fighters" seeking to join the islamic state or other jihadist groups fighting in syria and iraq .

spanish authorities estimate that approximately 150 spanish nationals or permanent residents ( mostly moroccan nationals ) have traveled to the conflict zones in those two countries .

in recent years , spanish police have conducted raids to dismantle jihadist recruiting networks active in ceuta and melilla , spanish enclaves located on the north coast of africa , as well as in madrid .

from 2015 to 2017 , spanish security forces reportedly conducted 128 police operations against domestic terrorist networks , resulting in the arrest of 242 individuals .

in 2015 , the spanish parliament adopted legislation backed by the pp and psoe to strengthen counterterrorism laws and police powers in response to the foreign fighter threat .

the new legislation made it a criminal offense to receive terrorist training or to participate in an armed conflict abroad ; allows for passport seizures , accelerated expulsion orders , and reentry bans of identified extremists ; and introduces streamlined search and capture warrants for police to arrest fighters attempting to travel to conflict zones .

the government also initiated reforms to the regulation of evidence collection and standards for witness protection , in order to improve the success rate of terrorism - related prosecutions .

the united states and spain have close links in many areas , including extensive cultural ties .

the u.s. - spain political relationship rests on a foundation of cooperation on a number of important diplomatic and security issues .

spain has been a member of nato since 1982 .

the rajoy government ( 2011-2018 ) maintained a relatively low profile in international affairs , while continuing the main tenets of past spanish foreign policy: support for european integration , friendly and cooperative relations with the united states , and strong ties with central and south america .

the pp has traditionally promoted a strongly "atlanticist" foreign policy that emphasizes close security ties with the united states .

the pp - led government of prime minister josé maría aznar ( 1996-2004 ) supported the u.s. - led invasion of iraq in 2003 and contributed forces to the coalition .

during the socialist - led government of prime minister josé luis rodríguez zapatero ( 2004-2011 ) , u.s. - spain tensions arose over differences in approach to issues including iraq , the middle east peace process , and spain's engagement with cuba and venezuela .

prime minister sánchez is not expected to make any dramatic changes to spain's foreign policy .

his government has adopted a distinctly pro - eu approach and an outlook emphasizing multilateral foreign policy cooperation through spain's membership in institutions such as nato and the united nations .

the psoe is in favor of maintaining u.s. - spain defense cooperation and security ties ( see below ) .

the author thanks crs visual information specialist amber wilhelm and crs information research specialist [author name scrubbed] for their work in creating the graphics for this report .

