within a week of each other , senator grassley and representative goodlatte , respective chairmen of the senate and house judiciary committees , introduced parallel sentencing reform bills with bipartisan cosponsors .

by and large in identical language , the two would amend existing mandatory minimum sentence provisions found in federal drug and firearms laws .

the differences between s. 2123 and h.r .

3713 , occasioned by the manager's amendment adopted before the senate judiciary committee passed s. 2123 , are noted in the prefatory remarks for each chart , and in the remarks relating to the inventory of federal crimes .

the subjects of their proposals appear in earlier proposals including ( 1 ) h.r .

2944 , which representatives sensenbrenner and scott , the chairman and ranking minority member of the house judiciary committee's crime subcommittee , respectively , introduced for themselves and others , and ( 2 ) s. 502 / h.r .

920 , introduced by senator lee and representative labrador with additional bipartisan cosponsors .

their common components notwithstanding , the bills have some varying features .

h.r .

3713 and h.r .

2944 would create no new mandatory minimum sentencing provisions .

s. 2123 , on the other hand , would establish two: one for interstate domestic violence offenses and another for certain violations of the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) .

existing federal law criminalizes interstate domestic violence and interstate stalking , and penalizes them equally .

s. 2123 would establish a mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment for not less than 10 years when death resulted from interstate domestic violence .

in addition , it would increase the maximum penalties for interstate domestic violence from imprisonment for not more than 20 years to not more than 25 years when life - threatening or permanent disfigurement resulted and from imprisonment for not more than 10 years to not more than 15 years when a dangerous weapon was used or serious bodily injury resulted .

otherwise , the senate proposal would leave the penalties for interstate domestic violence and interstate stalking unchanged .

ieepa authorizes the president to exercise various authorities to "deal with any unusual and extraordinary [overseas threat] ... to the national security , foreign policy or economy of the united states. .

presidents have used this authority to issue executive orders banning various unlicensed transactions with various countries , entities , and individuals .

ieepa violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years .

s. 2123 would create a separate mandatory minimum sentence of imprisonment for not less than five years for three types of ieepa violations .

one prohibits ieepa violations that involve providing defense articles or services as defined by the arms export control act to countries under an arms embargo .

another prohibits ieepa violations that involve supplying goods or services for the foreign development of weapons of mass destruction .

the third prohibits ieepa violations that furnish certain foreign entities with goods and services that are subject to export restrictions .

in contrast , h.r .

2944 does not create new mandatory minimum sentences for crimes .

s. 2123 would call for an inventory of federal crimes .

section 109 of the bill would direct the attorney general to prepare and provide the house and senate committees on the judiciary an inventory of federal statutory crimes and of federal regulatory offenses .

the compilation of federal statutory crimes would have to identify for each offense: the attendant penalties and mens rea ; the number of referrals for prosecution , prosecutions , convictions , and sentences imposed ; as well as the number of prosecutions which did not require proof of a mens rea .

the compilation of federal regulatory offenses would be organized by enforcing agency and would require the same information for regulatory offenses as required for statutory offenses .

the attorney general and pertinent agency head would also be responsible for the creation of a publicly available online index of such offenses .

similarly , h.r .

2944 requires the attorney general to produce and publish a list of "the various federal law violations that carry criminal penalties. .

in addition , federal agencies must obtain the attorney general's approval to add a criminal penalty to an agency regulation .

finally , the attorney general must develop procedures to provide coordination between the department of justice and other federal agencies to determine whether criminal or civil penalties are most appropriate to address unlawful conduct that involves federal agencies ; and to coordinate between federal and state law enforcement officers to reduce duplicative prosecutions .

