the congressional budget act of 1974 ( hereinafter referred to as the budget act ) created the budget resolution and specifies that it be adopted annually .

the budget resolution reflects an agreement between the house and senate on spending and revenue levels .

the budget resolution does not become law ; therefore no money is spent or collected as a result of its adoption .

instead , it is meant to assist congress in considering an overall budget plan .

once agreed to by both chambers in the exact same form , the budget resolution creates parameters that may be enforced in two primary ways: ( 1 ) by points of order , and ( 2 ) by using the budget reconciliation process .

the budget resolution reflects an agreement between the house and senate on a budgetary plan for the upcoming fiscal year .

when the house and senate do not reach final agreement on this plan , the budget process for the upcoming fiscal year may become complicated .

without an agreement on budgetary parameters , it may be more difficult for congress to reach agreement on subsequent budgetary legislation , both within each chamber and between the chambers .

if congress agreed upon a budget resolution for the prior fiscal year , that resolution remains in effect and may provide some operative parameters , since a resolution includes multi - year enforceable levels .

the usefulness of such levels may be limited , however , due to altered economic conditions and technical factors , not to mention any changes in congressional budgetary goals .

since a committee allocation to the appropriations committee is made for only the upcoming fiscal year , the house and senate cannot rely on a prior year's budget resolution .

this means that there is no allocation of spending made to the appropriations committees and no formal basis for them to make the required spending sub - allocations .

without such enforceable budgetary levels , the development and consideration of individual appropriations measures may encounter difficulties .

without agreement on a budget resolution , congress also may not use the budget reconciliation process .

this means that any budgetary changes to revenue or mandatory spending may not be considered under the special expedited procedures provided by the budget reconciliation process .

the budget act sought to require adoption of a budget resolution before congress could consider budgetary legislation for the upcoming year .

under section 303 ( a ) of the budget act , the house and senate generally may not consider spending , revenue , or debt limit legislation for a fiscal year until the budget resolution for that fiscal year has been adopted .

the budget act provides for exceptions , however , and in addition allows the point of order to be waived in both chambers by a simple majority .

in the absence of a budget resolution , other budget enforcement mechanisms are available to congress comprising two general categories .

first , there are types of budget enforcement that are entirely separate from the budget resolution , such as chamber rules and statutory spending caps .

these mechanisms remain in effect in the absence of a budget resolution and place restrictions on certain types of budgetary legislation .

such enforcement is briefly described below in the section titled " what types of budgetary enforcement exist outside of the budget resolution ? .

second , in the absence of agreement on a budget resolution , congress may employ alternative legislative tools to serve as a substitute for a budget resolution .

when congress has been late in reaching final agreement on a budget resolution , or has not reached agreement at all , it has relied on such substitutes .

these substitutes are typically referred to as "deeming resolutions," because they are deemed to serve in place of an agreement between the two chambers on an annual budget resolution for the purposes of establishing enforceable budget levels for the upcoming fiscal year ( or multiple fiscal years ) .

employing a deeming resolution , however , does not preclude congress from subsequently agreeing to a budget resolution .

while referred to as deeming resolutions , such mechanisms are not formally defined and have no specifically prescribed content .

instead , they denote the house and senate , often separately , engaging legislative procedures to deal with enforcement issues on an ad hoc basis .

as described below , the mechanisms vary in form and function , but they always ( 1 ) include or reference certain budgetary levels ( eg , aggregate spending limits and committee spending allocations ) and ( 2 ) contain language stipulating that such levels are to be enforceable by points of order as if they had been included in a budget resolution .

as shown in table 1 , since the creation of the budget resolution , dates of adoption have varied , and there have been 10 years in which congress did not come to agreement on a budget resolution .

as shown in table 2 , in each of those years , one or both chambers employed at least one deeming resolution to serve as a substitute for a budget resolution .

it should be noted that table 2 includes only the deeming resolutions that pertain to the fiscal years for which congress did not agree on a budget resolution .

for example , for fy2017 , the house and senate ultimately agreed to a budget resolution , and so data pertaining to fy2017 is not included in this report even though the senate utilized a deeming resolution before agreement on a budget resolution was reached .

as described below , deeming resolutions have varied in several ways .

in addition to the budget resolution , congress employs other types of budget enforcement .

some of these enforcement mechanisms are procedural ( which are enforced through points of order ) , and some are statutory ( which are enforced through sequestration ) .

in the absence of a budget resolution , these additional budget enforcement mechanisms remain intact .

this means that even without a budget resolution , there are still prohibitions and restrictions on different types of budgetary legislation .

for example , a limit on defense and nondefense discretionary spending currently exists in the form of annual discretionary spending caps and in addition can act as a guide to appropriators in crafting appropriations measures .

in addition , limits on new direct spending and revenue legislation exist through points of order and statutory enforcement such as senate paygo , house cutgo , and statutory paygo .

the house and senate have many budget - related points of order that seek to restrict or prohibit consideration of different types of budgetary legislation .

these points of order are found in various places such as the budget act , house and senate standing rules , and past budget resolutions .

for example , for fy2017 , congress moved forward with appropriations in the absence of a budget resolution or deeming resolution .

the house appropriations committee adopted "interim 302 ( b ) sub - allocations" for some individual appropriations bills .

such levels did not act as an enforceable cap on appropriations measures when they were considered on the floor .

a separate order adopted by the house as a part of h.res .

5 ( 114 th congress ) , however , prohibited floor amendments that would increase spending in a general appropriations bill , effectively creating a cap on individual appropriations bills when they were considered on the floor .

in addition , in the senate there exists a pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) rule that prohibits the consideration of direct spending or revenue legislation that is projected to increase the deficit .

another example is the house cut - as - you - go ( cutgo ) rule that prohibits the consideration of direct spending legislation that is projected to increase the deficit .

numerous other points of order exist .

a summary of many of these can be found in crs report 97-865 , points of order in the congressional budget process , by james v. saturno .

in addition to points of order , there are other types of budget enforcement mechanisms that employ statutory enforcement known as a sequester .

a sequester provides for the automatic cancellation of previously enacted spending , making largely across - the - board reductions to nonexempt programs , activities , and accounts .

a sequester is implemented through a sequestration order issued by the president as required by law .

the purpose of a sequester is to enforce certain statutory budget requirements , such as enforcing statutory limits on discretionary spending or ensuring that new revenue and direct spending laws do not have the net effect of increasing the deficit .

generally , sequesters have been used as an enforcement mechanism that would either discourage congress from enacting legislation violating a specific budgetary goal or encourage congress to enact legislation that would fulfill a specific budgetary goal .

sequestration is currently employed as the enforcement mechanism for three budgetary policies: 1 .

the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) established annual statutory limits on each defense discretionary and non - defense discretionary spending that are in effect through 2021 .

if legislation is enacted breaching either the defense or non - defense discretionary spending cap , then a sequester will occur , making cuts to non - exempt programs within the corresponding category to make up for the breach .

in this situation , the sequester will either deter enactment of legislation violating the spending limits or — in the event that legislation is enacted violating these limits — automatically reduce discretionary spending to the limit specified in law .

2 .

the bca also created a joint select committee on deficit reduction instructed to develop legislation to reduce the budget deficit by at least $1.5 trillion over the 10-year period fy2012-fy2021 .

the bca stipulated that if a measure meeting specific requirements was not enacted by january 15 , 2012 , then a sequester would be triggered to enforce the budgetary goal established for the committee .

in this situation the sequester was meant to either encourage agreement on deficit reduction legislation or , in the event that such agreement was not reached , automatically reduce spending so that an equivalent budgetary goal would be achieved .

because the agreement was not reached , this sequester is now in effect through 2024 .

3 .

another enforcement mechanism was created by the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-139 ) .

the budgetary goal of statutory paygo is to ensure that new revenue and direct spending legislation enacted during a session of congress does not have the net effect of increasing the deficit ( or reducing a surplus ) over either a 6- or 11-year period .

the sequester enforces this requirement by either deterring enactment of such legislation or , in the event that legislation has such an effect , automatically reducing spending to achieve the required deficit neutrality .

