t he u.s. supreme court's highly anticipated decision in obergefell v. hodges recognized federal constitutional protection for same - sex marriage .

although on its face the case addressed only whether states must issue marriage licenses to same - sex couples and recognize marriages legally formed in other states , obergefell has implicated a number of other legal rights , particularly those related to religious exercise and civil rights .

some religious doctrines include objections to same - sex marriage , leading to questions about the extent to which individuals , businesses , or religious institutions that share such objections must recognize or accommodate couples in same - sex marriages .

because federal law includes both constitutional and statutory protections for religious beliefs that may involve such conflicts , the manner in which these protections may intersect with constitutional protection of same - sex marriage can become complicated .

this report will analyze a range of legal issues for which obergefell has implications .

since states initially began recognizing same - sex marriage , one of the primary questions has been whether recognition of same - sex marriage requires individuals , who officiate at weddings or issue marriage licenses but object to same - sex marriage on religious grounds , to provide those services to same - sex couples .

another conflict has arisen over whether businesses , which are owned by individuals with religious objections to same - sex marriage , would be subject to civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination against same - sex couples .

likewise , it is unclear whether religiously affiliated social service providers who object to same - sex marriage may participate in certain federally funded programs ( eg , adoption services grants ) .

finally , another potential legal issue that has been raised in light of obergefell is whether churches and other religious entities could be denied federal tax - exempt status if they act in opposition to same - sex marriage .

in its landmark decision , obergefell v. hodges , the u.s. supreme court struck down state bans on same - sex marriage as unconstitutional under the fourteenth amendment of the u.s. constitution .

the issues presented to the court included whether states were required to permit same - sex couples to marry in their states and whether states were required to recognize same - sex marriages formed in other states , but did not include any issue directly affecting the manner in which such marriages were formed or what legal rights such couples may have beyond the ability to marry itself .

ultimately , the court ruled that "the state laws challenged ... in these cases are now held invalid to the extent they exclude same - sex couples from civil marriage on the same terms and conditions as opposite - sex couples. .

the court characterized the protection of the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment as one that "extend[s] to certain personal choices central to individual dignity and autonomy , including intimate choices that define personal identity and beliefs. .

examining the evolving history of the institution of marriage , the court noted a shift in societal perceptions of same - sex relationships over the past century .

in particular , the court acknowledged that it "has long held the right to marry is protected by the constitution," and cited four principles supporting governmental recognition of marriage rights: individual autonomy ; the unique nature of the institution of marriage ; the safeguards that legal marriage provides for children and families ; and the "keystone" role marriage plays in the nation's social order .

examination of these principles led a majority of the court to conclude that the reasons for which marriage is a fundamental right apply equally to same - sex couples as they have to opposite - sex couples , and thus same - sex marriages must be afforded the same constitutional protection .

obergefell was decided by a 5-4 vote , with the dissenting justices expressing strong objections to the majority opinion , in part raising arguments regarding religious freedom .

even justice kennedy , writing for the majority , acknowledged that recognition of same - sex marriage would not be universally accepted , specifically citing religious objectors: many who deem same - sex marriage to be wrong reach that conclusion based on decent and honorable religious or philosophical premises , and neither they nor their beliefs are disparaged here .

but when that sincere , personal opposition becomes enacted law and public policy , the necessary consequence is to put the imprimatur of the state itself on an exclusion that soon demeans or stigmatizes those whose own liberty is then denied .

the court emphasized the continued first amendment right of individuals and religious entities to engage in debate regarding expansion of the scope of couples eligible to marry , while distinguishing that the fourteenth amendment precluded the government from engaging in unequal treatment of these couples .

the first amendment states that "congress shall make no law respecting the establishment of religion , or prohibiting the free exercise thereof ...," in what are known respectively as the establishment and free exercise clauses .

establishment clause protections apply in circumstances in which a government action may be considered as sanctioning a particular religious practice or point of view .

free exercise clause protections generally apply if a government action is directed at interfering with voluntary religious practices of private parties .

the establishment clause prohibits the government from taking actions that would create an official position related to a religious practice or point of view .

the supreme court has applied a range of different tests to identify whether a particular government action would violate the establishment clause .

under the traditional tripartite lemon test , a challenged government action would be upheld if it ( 1 ) has a secular purpose ; ( 2 ) has a primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion ; and ( 3 ) does not foster excessive entanglement with religion .

when applying that test , the court has required that laws cannot create a relationship between government and religious entities that would cause one to interfere with the internal affairs of the other .

other tests consider whether the government action may endorse or disapprove a particular religion , or whether the law is neutral between religions and between religion and nonreligion .

under the free exercise clause , the first amendment also provides protection against the government's interference with voluntary religious exercise .

the court historically had applied heightened scrutiny to government actions that would infringe on religious exercise , requiring the government to show a compelling interest to do so .

however , in the 1990 decision employment division , department of human resources in oregon v. smith , it lowered the constitutional standard to require only that the government not intentionally infringe upon religious exercise .

under the current interpretation , the court explained that the free exercise clause never "relieve[s] an individual of the obligation to comply with a valid and neutral law of general applicability. .

however , the court has emphasized that congress remains free to consider whether heightened protection would be appropriate through the legislative process .

shortly after the court adopted the new standard , congress responded by enacting the religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ) , which applies heightened scrutiny to federal government actions that may affect religious exercise .

rfra states that the "[g]overnment shall not substantially burden a person's exercise of religion even if the burden results from a rule of general applicability , except" when the burden furthers a compelling governmental interest and uses the least restrictive means to achieve that interest .

since its enactment , rfra traditionally has been applied in cases involving alleged burdens on the religious exercise of individuals and nonprofit religious organizations .

although litigation involving rfra has been extensive in lower courts , the supreme court has heard only a few cases requiring it to interpret the substantive provisions of rfra .

in the landmark 2014 case , burwell v. hobby lobby stores , inc. , the court interpreted the scope of applicability of rfra's protections to include some corporations .

in hobby lobby , the owners of closely held for - profit corporations challenged a provision of the affordable care act that required employers to provide insurance coverage for certain contraceptives as a burden on their religious exercise under rfra .

the supreme court held that rfra requires the government to accommodate the beliefs of such entities , meaning that rfra now may be understood to protect individuals , nonprofit religious organizations , and closely held for - profit businesses , that is , those "owned and controlled by members of a single family. .

notably , the court acknowledged , but declined to resolve , the remaining question of whether other businesses ( eg , publicly traded companies ) also may be protected .

the closely divided hobby lobby decision sparked a vigorous debate over the future implications of neutral laws of general applicability that may affect the ability of various entities to exercise their religious beliefs .

in a highly critical dissenting opinion , justice ginsburg questioned , for example , the extent to which the decision could be read to permit employers with religious objections to various government mandates to avoid compliance .

the majority opinion addressed this concern , explaining that it was unfounded because the hobby lobby decision reached only the contraceptive coverage requirement at issue in the case .

according to the majority , other legal mandates would be subject to a different set of interests and different arguments regarding methods of meeting those interests .

however , the majority did not state definitively that other requirements would be beyond the reach of a future rfra challenge .

this response implied that other legal mandates that may be challenged under future rfra cases would have to be assessed on a case - by - case basis , a point that has generated much debate since the decision was issued .

the extent to which individuals and businesses are able to avoid compliance with various legal mandates related to same - sex marriage as a result of rfra and hobby lobby is unclear .

although hobby lobby clearly broadened the applicability of rfra's protections , the decision did not clearly delineate the parameters of how that protection might be used .

one outstanding question that appears to be critical to the analysis of balancing legal rights in the context of religious objections to same - sex marriage is what constitutes a substantial burden under rfra , a term that was not defined by congress in the statute itself .

it is important to note that rfra applies only to federal government actions that may burden religious exercise .

protection against burdens imposed by state or local governments depends on state law .

after the supreme court held that the federal rfra did not constrain the states , many states enacted their own versions of rfra to prevent burdens on religious exercise at the state and local level .

almost half of the states have enacted a version of rfra , many of which follow the federal model .

some states have proposed broader protections than are available in the federal rfra , with mixed results .

in one example of broader protection enacted by a state , indiana's rfra explicitly applies to individuals , organizations , and a broad range of businesses ( not only closely held corporations ) , and can be invoked not only when religious exercise has been substantially burdened but also when it "is likely to be substantially burdened. .

it also permits eligible persons to assert a violation of the protection provided "as a claim or defense in a judicial or administrative proceeding , regardless of whether the state or any other governmental entity is a party to the proceeding. .

notably , states that have not enacted heightened statutory protections may have constitutional provisions that the state has interpreted to provide heightened protection without additional legislation .

one of the ongoing debates related to same - sex marriage as it intersects with religious freedom is whether the government's recognition of marriage should be intertwined with a religious solemnization of marriage in any way .

as states began recognizing same - sex marriages , questions arose related to the impact of such recognition on marriage officiants .

state marriage laws generally allow religious ministers to act on behalf of the state in officiating civil marriage requirements as well as the religious ceremonial requirements .

this dual role of religious officiants has raised concerns that ministers , because of their concurrent role for civil requirements , may be forced to solemnize marriages to which they object .

notably , the court's decision in obergefell specifically addresses the right of same - sex couples to enter " civil marriage[s] on the same terms and conditions as opposite - sex couples," and does not require or suggest that religious marriages must include all couples .

some argue that establishing distinct institutions of civil and religious marriage may resolve some of the controversy regarding the scope of marriages to be recognized .

under that model , any couple wishing to marry and qualify for associated government benefits would have a civil ceremony , and couples wishing to be married in accordance with their chosen religious faith would also have a religious ceremony .

this scenario arguably would eliminate the perception that religious officiants could be forced to solemnize marriages recognized by the state that conflict with their religious beliefs .

however , religious ministers may not be the only officiants with religious objections to same - sex marriages .

questions also arise regarding whether an individual working for the government and having job duties related to officiating or facilitating civil marriages could be required to do so for same - sex couples .

such individuals would not have the same constitutional protections as religious officiants , but arguably may seek other legal protection .

as a result of the obergefell decision , federal , state , and local governments may not discriminate against same - sex couples seeking to marry .

the decision did not recognize general fourteenth amendment protection based on sexual orientation , nor does it dictate the behavior of private parties .

however , through civil rights legislation , federal , state or local governments may regulate the behavior of private entities that operate public accommodations ( i.e. , entities that provide goods and services to the general public ) ; that provide housing , employment , or credit ; or those which receive public funds .

although existing federal civil rights law does not provide express protection in these contexts based on sexual orientation , some states and local governments have enacted such protection , leading to legal challenges from individuals , organizations , and businesses with religious objections to serving same - sex couples .

entities with religious objections may seek legal protection under state religious freedom laws , whether a state rfra or a state constitutional provision that applies the same protection , claiming that the nondiscrimination laws are a substantial burden subject to the limitations of rfra .

as discussed earlier , a number of states have enacted legislation that is substantially similar to the federal rfra .

although some more recently enacted state rfra laws have attempted to address these types of claims more explicitly , it is unclear how rfra and various civil rights provisions may be reconciled .

because of the absence of civil rights protections based on sexual orientation at the federal level , these issues have been explored as a matter of state laws .

concerns about religious objections to same - sex marriage have also manifested in the context of government funding programs that provide financial assistance to private entities , including organizations with religious objections to same - sex marriage .

the provision of public funds to religious entities raises a number of constitutional questions , which are beyond the scope of this report , but generally such funding has been permitted under certain circumstances .

questions about the implications of obergefell for religious service providers who object to same - sex marriages have arisen most often in the realm of adoption services , but religious social service providers receiving federal funds may have objections in other contexts as well .

the crux of the question is whether entities that receive public funds to administer a particular program may refuse to serve same - sex couples who would be potential beneficiaries of that program .

for the purposes of this report , the term beneficiaries , in the context of adoption programs , generally refers to parents who seek assistance to adopt a child from an adoption services provider .

it is noted that the children being adopted also may be considered beneficiaries of the program .

another potential issue , which was raised at oral argument in obergefell and recently addressed by internal revenue service ( irs ) commissioner koskinen in testimony before congress , is whether churches and other religious entities could be denied federal tax - exempt status if they act in opposition to same - sex marriage ( eg , a church that does not perform same - sex marriages or a religious school that refuses to provide same - sex couples with married student housing ) .

churches and other religious organizations , such as religious schools and religiously affiliated charities , are among the entities that qualify for tax - exempt status under section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) entities are broadly referred to as charitable organizations .

in addition to being exempt from federal income and unemployment taxes , they are eligible to receive tax - deductible charitable contributions under irc section 170 .

one qualification for section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status and section 170 eligibility is that an organization cannot engage in activities that are illegal or violate a well - established , fundamental public policy .

this is referred to as the "illegality doctrine. .

the doctrine is not found in the statutory language of either section .

rather , the supreme court has held that it is an implicit condition under both sections , stemming from the common law of charitable trusts .

the possibility that the illegality doctrine could be applied to churches and other religious institutions that act in opposition to same - sex marriage is controversial .

this report analyzes two legal questions that would be raised by the doctrine's application in this context .

the first is whether a religious organization's first amendment rights would be violated if it were denied section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status due to actions based on sincerely held religious beliefs .

if yes , then that is the end of the matter , and the denial could not occur .

if , however , the denial of tax - exempt status would not run afoul of the first amendment , then the second question is whether such denial would be appropriate under the illegality doctrine .

answering this question requires determining whether a law or public policy exists in the same - sex marriage context that would trigger the doctrine's application and , if so , whether an organization's specific actions justify revocation under the doctrine .

these questions are discussed below .

the first question is whether a religious entity's first amendment rights would be violated if it were denied section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status due to actions that were based on sincerely held religious beliefs .

in the seminal 1983 case bob jones university v. united states , the supreme court held that such denial is permissible under certain circumstances .

in bob jones , the court upheld the irs's determination that a private religious school could have its section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status revoked under the illegality doctrine for engaging in racially discriminatory practices .

in so doing , the court held that the revocation did not run afoul of the first amendment's religious clauses , even assuming the school's racially discriminatory policies were based on sincerely held religious beliefs .

with respect to the free exercise clause , the court explained that the government can justify a burden on religion by showing it is necessary to accomplish a compelling governmental interest that cannot be achieved by less restrictive means .

the court determined that the burden on religion in the form of revoked tax benefits was justified in light of the government's compelling interest in eradicating racial discrimination in education , and that no less restrictive means existed .

the court also rejected the school's argument that the revocation policy violated its rights under the establishment clause by favoring religions that did not have such racial beliefs , with the court concluding that the policy was permissible because it was based on neutral , secular criteria .

notably , the extent to which the first amendment analysis in bob jones applies in the context of churches and other houses of worship is not clear .

the court , in holding that the school's first amendment rights were not violated , expressly stated that it was not addressing churches and other "purely religious institutions," and emphasized that the governmental interest supporting revocation was denying public support to racial discrimination in education .

thus , the court did not address the circumstances under which the application of the illegality doctrine to a church acting on sincerely held religious beliefs would be constitutionally permissible .

it does not appear that any cases since bob jones have clarified this issue .

as such , it is not clear whether the bob jones analysis would support the denial of tax - exempt status under the illegality doctrine for churches and other houses of worship acting on sincerely held religious beliefs , particularly in light of the constitutional protection of noninterference in internal matters of religious institutions discussed above .

in those instances in which the denial of section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status to a religious entity is permissible under the first amendment , the next question is whether the illegality doctrine would support such denial for religious entities acting in opposition to same - sex marriage .

this raises two fundamental issues: ( 1 ) whether a section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization that acts in opposition to same - sex marriage would be in violation of a law or public policy and thus trigger the doctrine's application ; and ( 2 ) if so , whether the organization's specific actions would justify the denial of tax - exempt status under the doctrine .

the first issue is whether a section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization's action in opposition to same - sex marriage would be in violation of a law or public policy and thus trigger the application of the illegality doctrine .

if the entity's actions were illegal , then the doctrine would apply ( although denial might not be justified in light of the organization's other activities , as discussed below ) .

in those situations in which a law is not violated ( which would appear to generally be the case in the same - sex marriage context ) , the supreme court has clearly stated that the doctrine applies only if there is "no doubt" the organization's activity "is contrary to a fundamental public policy. .

this raises the critical question of how to determine whether such a public policy exists .

in bob jones , the supreme court held that the school's racially discriminatory practices violated a well - established , fundamental national public policy against racial discrimination in education .

the court determined that this public policy existed because all three branches of the federal government had taken clear , unmistakable action to end racial discrimination in education .

as evidence , the court pointed to its unbroken stream of cases beginning with the landmark decision in 1954 of brown v. board of education ; multiple laws passed by congress , including the civil rights act of 1964 ; and various executive orders and presidential pronouncements .

here , it is arguably not clear that a well - established , fundamental public policy exists that would justify the denial of section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status to an organization acting in opposition to same - sex marriage .

in contrast to bob jones , where the court identified decades of congressional , judicial , and executive branch actions prohibiting racial discrimination in education , analogous governmental action in support of same - sex marriage is arguably minimal .

for example , while the supreme court has issued two significant cases in the context of same - sex marriage — obergefell , holding that states must recognize same - sex marriage , and windsor v. united states , striking down section 3 of the federal defense of marriage act — these are recent cases , and their implications are not fully developed .

similarly , it might be argued that congress has not taken significant legislative action in the same - sex marriage context that would be analogous to the civil rights act of 1964 and other laws prohibiting racial discrimination .

thus , at this time , it is not clear the illegality doctrine would apply to section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) entities acting in opposition to same - sex marriage .

in july 2015 , irs commissioner koskinen took this position in testimony before congress .

he stated that the irs would not attempt to revoke the tax - exempt status of religious entities that engage in activity in opposition to same - sex marriage because public policy does not currently support revocation under the illegality doctrine .

the commissioner did , however , leave open the possibility that the irs might revisit the issue in response to future legal and policy developments .

this is consistent with the supreme court's decision in bob jones , where the court noted that public policy can change over time , and behavior that once was considered acceptable can later run afoul of the illegality doctrine .

the commissioner indicated that any future action by the irs would only be done after sufficient public notice and opportunity to comment , and that nothing would happen during the next several years .

as the court explained in bob jones and the commissioner discussed in his testimony , the irs is not responsible for determining what constitutes public policy — that determination is left to congress and the courts .

rather , the irs is responsible , in its role of administering the tax laws , for determining whether a public policy exists so that denial of tax - exempt status would be appropriate under the illegality doctrine .

if the agency were to find that a public policy exists sufficient to trigger the doctrine's application , its determination would be subject to review by congress , which could address the matter through legislation ( see " implications for congress " below ) , and the courts , which could assess the validity of the agency's action in any legal challenges brought by affected organizations .

in light of the possibility that the public policy prong of the illegality doctrine could become relevant in the same - sex marriage context at some later date , it might be asked what led the irs to determine the doctrine was triggered for private schools engaging in racially discriminatory practices , which then led to the bob jones case .

it seems a court case brought by black families in mississippi challenging the provision of tax - exempt status to discriminatory private schools in that state played a pivotal role .

prior to 1970 , the irs had allowed private schools to qualify for section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status without considering their racial admissions policies .

in january 1970 , a three - judge panel for the d.c .

circuit issued a preliminary injunction in the mississippi case , prohibiting the irs from granting tax - exempt status to the schools .

six months later , the irs issued a news release stating it could "no longer legally justify allowing tax - exempt status to private schools which practice racial discrimination. .

in june 1971 , the court permanently enjoined the irs from granting tax - exempt status to any mississippi school without a nondiscrimination policy , and the irs responded shortly thereafter with a revenue ruling articulating a nationwide policy for denying tax - exempt status to private schools engaging in racial discrimination .

to the extent that the irs application of the public policy doctrine in this context was influenced by the mississippi case , it might be difficult for an individual to bring a similar case in the same - sex marriage context under the court's current standing jurisprudence .

constitutional standing requires that a party establish personal injury by allegedly unlawful conduct fairly traceable to the defendant , and that the injury is redressable in court .

beginning in 1976 , the court has applied this standard in a way that has significantly limited the ability of third parties to challenge the irs's administration of the laws providing tax - exempt status .

this may make it difficult , although not impossible , to challenge an irs policy administering ( or failing to administer ) the illegality doctrine .

even if a section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization were found to be in violation of a law or public policy , this would not mean the organization would automatically lose its tax - exempt status under the illegality doctrine .

rather , the denial would have to be justified based on the entity's actions and their interaction with the law or public policy at issue .

a key question would likely be whether the organization , despite its impermissible actions , should still be granted tax - exempt status because of its other charitable activities .

while this issue was not addressed by the court in bob jones , the irs subsequently explained that an organization with a charitable purpose will lose its tax - exempt status under the illegality doctrine only if it engages in "substantial" impermissible activities .

it is not clear what threshold is used for determining substantiality .

an important aspect of the illegality doctrine is that it is an implicit statutory condition for section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status and section 170 eligibility .

congress could therefore choose to affect the doctrine's applicability by amending the statutes .

for example , congress could , if it so chose , prohibit the application of the doctrine ; limit its application to only illegal behavior ( i.e. , remove the doctrine's public policy component ) ; or codify the doctrine as developed through case law and irs rulings .

legislation could address the doctrine's application generally or only in the same - sex marriage context .

any legislative changes would have to be consistent with the constitution .

under current law , it does not appear that any supreme court case suggests an amendment to the irc would run afoul of the constitution ; however , an issue could arise if same - sex couples or lesbian , gay , bisexual or transgender ( lgbt ) individuals were found to have constitutional protections that would be violated by providing tax - exempt status to discriminatory institutions .

for example , in bob jones , the court noted that some amicus briefs had argued that denial of section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status to racially discriminatory private schools was required by the fifth amendment's equal protection guarantees provided to affected black students , but the court did not address the argument due to its holding that the denial was required under the illegality doctrine .

had the court determined that the denial was required by the fifth amendment , then it appears congress could not have amended the irc to permit section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status to racially discriminatory schools because this would have violated the students' constitutional rights .

it should also be noted that legislation outside the context of tax - exempt status could affect the application of the illegality doctrine .

for example , if congress were to pass legislation expanding the legal protections afforded to same - sex couples or lgbt individuals generally , then this action might be evidence that a public policy exists sufficient to trigger the doctrine's application .

on the other hand , if congress were to take no action or pass legislation limiting the scope of their protections , then this approach might support the determination that such a public policy does not exist at this time .

