by the very nature of their job , law enforcement officers are tasked with using physical force to restrain individuals and protect themselves and others from harm .

police officers must stop and seize violent suspects , serve search warrants in hostile environments , and maintain the peace and safety of the communities in which they serve .

as then - justice rehnquist observed , "[p]olicemen on the beat are exposed , in the service of society , to all the risks which the constant effort to prevent crime and apprehend criminals entails: because these people are literally the foot soldiers of society's defense of ordered liberty , the state has an especial interest in their protection. .

however , a number of recent high - profile police shootings and other law enforcement - related deaths have reignited the debate about how much force police should wield in a democratic society that values both law and order and the personal liberty of each of its citizens under law .

the shooting of michael brown by a ferguson , missouri police officer in the summer 2014 served as a flashpoint for this debate , but it is just one in a spate of recent law enforcement - related deaths .

these deaths , and others , have prompted a call for legal accountability against the officers involved in these killings , but also , more broadly , for systemic police reform on both the federal and state level .

president obama responded by establishing the task force on 21 st century policing in december 2014 to develop best policing practices and recommendations .

the task force's final report issued in may 2015 offered a set of policy recommendations focused on training , investigations , prosecutions , data collection , and information sharing .

similarly , the house judiciary committee held a hearing on policing strategies on may 19 , 2015 , and various measures have been introduced in the 114 th congress to address both use of force tactics and data collection by state and local police departments .

the public , too , has been thoroughly engaged on this issue .

"black lives matter," a movement that sprung up in response to the treyvon martin shooting and other police - related deaths , has recently released an initiative called "campaign zero," which contains a set of policy proposals to limit police use of excessive force , including a call for a national standard governing the use of deadly force and better reporting requirements on instances of excessive force by law enforcement officers .

these reforms prompt the perennial debate concerning the role of congress in addressing police reform , especially on the local level , where many of these deaths have occurred .

certain segments of the law enforcement community and its supporters have argued that regulating local police is best left to the province of state and local governments , and that a one - size - fits - all approach would hamper local experimentation .

proponents of reform have countered that federal intervention is warranted as state and local governments and police departments have not adequately held their officers legally accountable for the improper use of force .

insofar as constitutional violations are concerned , there is historical precedent for congressional intervention .

shortly after the civil war , congress enacted two federal statutes — one criminal and one civil — to provide legal remedies for newly freed african americans who were being deprived of their civil rights .

on the civil side is 42 u.s.c .

section 1983 , which provides individuals with a civil cause of action to recover damages for the deprivation of such rights .

on the criminal side is 18 u.s.c .

section 242 , which makes it a federal crime to willfully deprive someone of his constitutional rights .

of more recent vintage ( 1994 ) is 42 u.s.c .

section 14141 , which permits the department of justice ( doj ) to sue local police departments that engage in a "pattern or practice" of constitutional violations , including the use of excessive force .

to provide legal context for this debate , this report will address three overarching questions: ( 1 )  what are the constitutional rules governing an officer's use of force ; ( 2 ) what role has congress played in providing a remedy for a violation of these rules ; and ( 3 ) what are the potential reforms to these rules and remedies ? .

the first question that must be addressed is what rules govern police use of force .

because the majority of recent law enforcement - related deaths have arisen in the context of street encounters with police ( rather than pre - or post - trial detention ) , this report will focus almost exclusively on the fourth amendment right to be free from unreasonable seizures , which governs such encounters .

to provide legal remedies for the unconstitutional use of force by law enforcement officers , congress has primarily relied on three federal statutes: ( 1 ) a criminal offense for violations of constitutional rights , including excessive force ; ( 2 ) a civil cause of action for deprivation of such rights ; and ( 3 ) a statute authorizing the attorney general to bring civil suits for injunctive relief against police departments engaged in a "pattern or practice" of such unconstitutional use of force .

in each of these statutes , congress relied on its power under the fourteenth amendment to "enforce , by appropriate legislation" certain constitutional safeguards including the right to be free from unreasonable seizures .

in response to the recent law enforcement - related deaths in ferguson and elsewhere , members have introduced various bills in the 114 th congress to rein in police use of excessive force and provide accountability .

the excessive use of force prevention act of 2015 ( h.r .

2052 ) would amend 18 u.s.c .

section 242 so that "the application of any pressure to the throat or windpipe which may prevent or hinder breathing or reduce intake of air" would be considered "a punishment , pain , or penalty. .

it is not clear how this statute would operate in practice .

most excessive force prosecutions brought under section 242 rely on the statute's first prong , the deprivation of a constitutional right , and not the second prong , the unequal punishment on account of a person's race , color , or alien status .

it would appear that prosecutions under h.r .

2052 would occur only when an officer administers a chokehold as a punishment or penalty based on the suspect's race , color , or alien status .

the police accountability act of 2015 ( h.r .

1101 ) would create a new federal crime for certain homicides committed by law enforcement officers .

h.r .

1102 would provide that any state or local officer in a public agency that receives funding under the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant ( jag ) program who engages in conduct in the line of duty that would constitute murder or manslaughter if it were to occur in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the united states would be punished as provided for that offense under federal law .

the constitutionality of this bill has been addressed previously by crs .

the national statistics on deadly force transparency act of 2015 would reduce a state or local government's jag funding by 10% if it fails to submit data concerning police use of excessive force , including data concerning the following: identifying characteristics of the person who was the target of the use of deadly force and the officer who used deadly forced ; time , date , and location of the use of deadly force ; alleged criminal activity of the person who was the target of deadly force ; nature of the deadly force used , including the use of a firearm ; explanation , if any , from the relevant law enforcement agency on why deadly force was used ; copy of deadly force guidelines in effect at the time deadly force was used ; and description of any non - lethal efforts employed to apprehend or subdue the person who was the target of the use of deadly force before deadly force was used .

the police reporting information , data , and evidence act of 2015 ( pride act ) ( s. 1476 , h.r .

3481 ) would require the collection of data concerning any incident where the use of force by either a law enforcement officer or a civilian results in serious bodily injury or death .

such data shall include the following: gender , race , ethnicity , and age of each individual who was shot , injured , or killed ; date , time , and location of the incident ; whether the civilian was armed , and , if so , the type of weapon the civilian had ; the type of force used against the officer , the civilian , or both , including the types of weapons used ; number of officers involved in the incident ; and a brief description regarding the circumstances surrounding the incident .

on december 21 , 2014 , president barack obama signed an executive order establishing the task force on 21 st century policing .

the task force was charged with identifying best police practices , including use of force policies .

in may 2015 , the task force issued its final report with the following recommendations for law enforcement agencies concerning the use of force: develop comprehensive policies on the use of force that include training , investigations , prosecutions , data collection , and information sharing .

these policies must be clear , concise , and openly available for public inspection .

training on use of force should emphasize de - escalation and alternatives to arrest or summons in situations where appropriate .

mandate external and independent criminal investigations in cases of police use of force resulting in death , officer - involved shootings resulting in injury or death , or in - custody deaths .

mandate the use of external and independent prosecutors in cases of police use of force resulting in death , officer - involved shootings resulting in injury or death , or in - custody deaths .

require agencies to collect , maintain , and report data to the federal government on all officer - involved shootings , whether fatal or nonfatal , as well as any in - custody death .

policies should clearly state what types of information will be released , when , and in what situation , to maintain transparency .

establish a serious incident review board comprising sworn staff and community members to review cases involving officer - involved shootings and other serious incidents that have the potential to damage community trust or confidence in the agency .

the purpose of this board should be to identify any administrative , supervisory , training , tactical , or policy issues that need to be addressed .

implement nonpunitive peer review of critical incidents separate from criminal and administrative investigations .

in addition to introduced legislation , academics , civil rights advocates , and others have suggested other reform proposals: lower the mens rea standard in 18 u.s.c .

section 242 ; create a standalone excessive force statute ; alter the "deliberate indifference" standard for failure to train claims under section 1983 ; and a mend 42 u.s.c .

section 14141 to permit lawsuits by private citizens .

