in 1996 , congress enacted the native american housing assistance and self - determination act ( nahasda ; p.l .

104-330 ) .

the law represented a major reorganization of federal housing assistance for native americans , consolidating most of the federal housing funding that previously had been provided to tribes into a single block grant .

nahasda recognizes the rights of tribal self - governance and self - determination , and is intended to give tribes more control over affordable housing decisions and provide flexibility to tribes to address their specific housing needs .

the centerpiece of nahasda is the native american housing block grant ( nahbg ) , the primary program that provides housing assistance to native american tribes .

through the nahbg , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) provides formula funding to federally recognized tribes and alaska native villages or to their tribally designated housing entities ( tdhes ) .

these recipients of nahbg funds can use them for a variety of affordable housing activities that address the housing needs of low - income native americans living in the respective tribes' formula areas .

nahasda also authorizes a loan guarantee program to help tribes access private funding for housing development activities ( the title vi loan guarantee program ) and funding for training and technical assistance .

additionally , a 2000 amendment to nahasda authorized the native hawaiian housing block grant ( nhhbg ) program , through which hud provides funds to hawaii's department of hawaiian home lands .

nhhbg funds are used to provide housing for low - income native hawaiians eligible to live on the hawaiian home lands .

tribes are largely supportive of nahasda and the native american housing block grant .

nevertheless , tribes have also advocated for a number of changes to program requirements that they argue could enhance their ability to improve housing conditions in tribal areas .

many of the changes that have been proposed by tribes have to do with streamlining program requirements , particularly when nahasda funds are used with other sources of federal funds ; providing more flexibility for tribes to make their own decisions about housing programs ; and requiring hud to be more responsive to requests for approvals or waivers of certain requirements .

in some cases , goals such as increasing tribal flexibility and self - determination may need to be balanced against the goal of providing sufficient protections and oversight to ensure that program funds are being used appropriately .

congress has expressed interest in certain issues related to nahasda beyond those raised by tribes .

one such issue has been concern about some tribes' accumulated balances of unspent nahasda funds .

additionally , some members of congress have opposed reauthorization of the native hawaiian housing block grant out of concerns that it could be construed to provide benefits based on race .

others have debated whether nahasda funding should be provided to the cherokee nation in light of an ongoing legal dispute involving whether the cherokee freedmen , descendants of former cherokee slaves and free blacks who resided with the cherokee at the time of the civil war , are entitled to membership in the tribe .

the latter two issues were debated when nahasda was last reauthorized in 2008 and continue to be of interest to congress .

the authorization for most nahasda programs expired at the end of fy2013 , although congress has generally continued to provide funding for nahasda programs .

the reauthorization process has presented an opportunity for congress to consider changes to the law and the programs that it authorizes as well as other housing issues affecting native americans .

the 114 th congress considered nahasda reauthorization legislation , with different bills being offered in the house and the senate .

however , no nahasda reauthorization legislation was enacted by the end of the 114 th congress .

this report briefly describes selected policy issues related to nahasda that have been raised by tribes or congress in recent years .

it then provides a table that compares the provisions of the nahasda reauthorization bills that were considered by the house and the senate in the 114 th congress with each other and with existing law .

for more information on nahasda in general , see crs report r43307 , the native american housing assistance and self - determination act of 1996 ( nahasda ) : background and funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

this section discusses some of the more prominent nahasda - related issues that have been raised by tribes or debated by congress in recent years .

among the issues raised by tribes , it generally focuses on proposed changes to nahbg program requirements .

it does not address issues that tribes have raised related to overall program funding levels or proposed changes related to the nahbg funding formula .

tribes are not a monolithic group — their sizes , histories , and cultures , and the geography of where they live , vary greatly — and tribes do not always agree about potential changes to nahasda .

when this report discusses changes that have been advocated by tribes , it generally means that the changes have been repeatedly raised by some tribes or championed by the national american indian housing council ( naihc ) , a group that advocates for the housing interests of native americans .

nahasda has been reauthorized twice since it was first enacted in 1996 .

the most recent authorization for most nahasda programs expired at the end of fy2013 , during the 113 th congress .

 ( the authorization for the native hawaiian housing block grant expired at the end of fy2005. ) .

the 113 th congress considered nahasda reauthorization legislation but did not enact any prior to the end of the congress .

during the 114 th congress , the house and the senate considered separate versions of nahasda reauthorization legislation: in the house , h.r .

360 was introduced on january 14 , 2015 , and was passed by the house under suspension of the rules on march 23 , 2015 .

in the senate , s. 710 was introduced on march 11 , 2015 .

an amended version was favorably reported by the senate committee on indian affairs on june 4 , 2015 , and the senate banking committee was discharged from further consideration of the bill on august 5 , 2015 .

both h.r .

360 and s. 710 would have reauthorized a number of native american and native hawaiian housing programs , authorized certain new program demonstrations and set - asides for native american housing , and made several changes to nahbg requirements .

both bills addressed a number of the issues described earlier in this report , although not necessarily in the same way .

both bills also included certain other changes to nahasda or other native american housing programs , many of which have been supported by tribes .

table 1 compares the provisions of h.r .

360 , as passed by the house , and s. 710 , as reported out of committee in the senate , with each other and with existing law .

ultimately , no nahasda reauthorization legislation was enacted during the 114 th congress .

