the impact aid program , administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , is one of the oldest federal education programs , dating from 1950 .

impact aid compensates local educational agencies ( leas ) for a "substantial and continuing financial burden" resulting from federal activities .

these activities include federal ownership of certain lands , as well as the enrollments in leas of children whose parents work or live on federal land and children living on indian lands .

the federal government provides compensation because leas are unable to collect property or other taxes from these individuals ( eg , members of the armed forces living on military bases ) or their employers , even though the leas are obligated to provide free public education to their children .

thus impact aid is intended to compensate leas for the resulting loss of tax revenue the improving america's schools act of 1994 ( p.l .

103-382 ) , which reauthorized and substantially revised the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , also reauthorized and revised the impact aid program , incorporating impact aid into title viii of the esea .

title xviii ( the impact aid reauthorization act of 2000 ) of p.l .

106-398 ( floyd d. spence national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2001 ) , signed into law in 2000 , made changes to the impact aid program and reauthorized it through fy2003 .

on january 8 , 2002 , the president signed the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) , which reauthorized the esea .

the act made certain technical amendments to the impact aid program , including extending its authorization of appropriations through fy2007 .

as congress has not acted to reauthorize the impact aid program , appropriations for it are currently not explicitly authorized .

however , because the impact aid program continues to receive annual appropriations , these appropriations are considered to be implicitly authorized .

during the 114 th congress , the house education and the workforce committee reported the student success act ( h.r .

5 ) , which would provide for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea .

the bill was subsequently passed on the house floor on july 7 , 2015 .

the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee reported the every child achieves act ( ecaa ; s. 1177 ) , which would also provide for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea .

s. 1177 was subsequently passed on the senate floor on july 16 , 2015 .

both h.r .

5 and s. 1177 would reauthorize the impact aid program .

this report begins with a general overview of the various payments made under the impact aid program , followed by a detailed discussion of each section of title viii .

this discussion is followed by information about recent appropriations for impact aid .

the report concludes with an overview of programs administered by the u.s. department of defense ( dod ) that are often referred to as the "dod impact aid" programs .

esea title viii authorizes several types of impact aid payments .

these include payments under section 8002 , section 8003 , section 8007 , and section 8008 , which are discussed briefly below .

this part of the report provides a section - by - section analysis of esea title viii .

sections are generally discussed in order .

there is also a summary of the title viii sections that focus primarily on program administration and are not otherwise discussed in the section - by - section analysis , including section 8005 and section 8010 through 8014 .

appropriations for the impact aid program are made through the annual departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations acts ( l - hhs - ed ) .

appropriations to provide additional funding to leas serving significant numbers of military dependent students and federally connected children with severe disabilities have also been made available through the department of defense appropriations acts ( see subsequent section for more information ) .

this section provides detailed information about impact aid funding provided through l - hhs - ed appropriations from fy2008 through fy2015 .

the dod impact aid program was established in the early 1990s to supplement the impact aid programs administered by ed .

the most recent dod authorization bill , the carl levin and howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fy2015 ( p.l .

113-291 ) , specifically authorized funding for two dod impact aid programs that provide additional funding for leas serving significant numbers of military dependent children and leas serving military dependent children with severe disabilities .

in the past , dod authorization bills have also authorized a dod impact aid program for leas affected by base closures , force structure changes , or force relocation .

the authorizations of appropriations for these programs have been lower than those provided for the impact aid programs administered by ed .

funds for these programs are appropriated in the dod annual appropriations acts under operation and maintenance for defense - wide activities , but line item appropriation levels are not provided for these programs in the appropriations bills .

the annual national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) provides the authorization of appropriations for these programs .

this section provides an overview of the three impact aid programs administered by dod and their appropriations .

the supplemental assistance program ( also referred to as "dod supplemental impact aid" and "assistance to schools with significant numbers of military dependent students" ) provides funds to leas with significant numbers of military students .

funds are provided to eligible leas if , without the additional funding , an lea would be unable to provide students with a level of education equivalent to the minimum level of education available in the schools of other leas in the state .

leas are eligible for assistance if at least 20% of their students in average daily attendance during the preceding school year were military dependent students counted under section 8003 ( a ) ( 1 ) of esea , title viii .

about 120 districts receive funds through supplemental assistance .

dod appropriations for military students with severe disabilities are provided to reimburse leas for money previously spent on providing such children with a free appropriate public education .

section 363 of the floyd d. spence national defense authorization act for fy2001 ( p.l .

106-398 ) authorized payments for this purpose beginning in fy2002 .

an lea may receive funding if it serves at least two severely disabled students who are military dependent ( esea , section 8003 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) or ( d ) ( i ) ) or have a parent who is a foreign military officer ( esea , section 8003 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ( ii ) or ( d ) ( ii ) ] ) .

payments may only be made on behalf of children with severe disabilities whose cost of educational and related services exceed ( 1 ) the lesser of five times the national or state average per pupil expenditure for a child who receives services in a program outside of the boundaries of the lea that pays for the services ; or ( 2 ) three times the state average per pupil expenditure for a child receiving services through a program offered by the lea or provided within the boundaries of the lea .

the payment provided to an lea for each child with severe disabilities is based on the expenditures made by the lea on behalf of the child that are in excess of the average per pupil expenditure in the state in which the lea is located , less the sum of funds received by the lea from the state to defray the costs of educational and related services for the child ; under the idea to defray the costs of services for the child ; and from any other source to defray the costs of services for the child provided specifically because the child has a severe disabling condition .

if the amount of funds appropriated is insufficient to pay the full amount for all eligible leas , the secretary of defense is required to ratably reduce payments to all eligible leas by an equal percentage .

approximately 40 to 50 leas are awarded funds through this program each year .

the large scale rebasing program ( also referred to as the dod impact aid brac program or assistance to schools with enrollment changes due to base closures , force structure changes , or force relocations ) provides assistance to leas affected by base closures , force structure , or force relocation .

funds are available to leas that experienced an overall increase or reduction in student enrollment of not less than 5% of military dependent students or not less than 250 military dependent students in daily attendance .

eligible leas have to meet two additional criteria: ( 1 ) military dependent students constituted at least 20% of the average daily attendance ( or would have if not for the reduction in students ) , and ( 2 ) the change in military student enrollment was due to dod's global rebasing plan , the official creation or activation of one or more new military units , the realignment of forces as a result of brac , or a change in the number of housing units on a military installation .

no lea is permitted to receive more than $1 million in assistance in a fiscal year under this provision .

in fy2006 and fy2007 , 45 leas received brac funding through dod impact aid .

although appropriations for this program were authorized through fy2013 , it has not received funding since fy2007 .

in recent years , appropriations for the supplemental assistance and military students with severe disabilities programs have ranged from $45 million to $30 million .

the large scale rebasing program was only funded in fy2006 and fy2007 .

table 5 shows the amount appropriated for each of these three activities for fy2008 through fy2015 .

