the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) was last comprehensively amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) .

appropriations for most programs authorized by the esea were authorized through fy2007 .

as congress has not reauthorized the esea , appropriations for esea programs are currently not explicitly authorized .

however , because the programs continue to receive annual appropriations , appropriations are considered implicitly authorized .

during the 114 th congress , the house education and the workforce committee reported the student success act ( h.r .

5 ) , which would provide for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea .

the bill was subsequently passed on the house floor on july 8 , 2015 , based on a strictly partisan vote of 218-213 .

the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee reported the every child achieves act of 2015 ( ecaa ; s. 1177 ) , which would also provide for a comprehensive reauthorization of the esea .

s. 1177 was subsequently passed on the senate floor on july 16 , 2015 , based on a bipartisan vote of 81-17 .

both chambers agreed to a conference to resolve their differences .

on november 19 , 2015 , the conference committee agreed to file the conference report of the every student succeeds act ( essa ) by a vote of 39-1 .

on december 2 , 2015 , the house agreed to the conference report based on a bipartisan vote of 359-64 .

this report highlights key provisions included in the essa and provides some context regarding the treatment of similar provisions in current law , where applicable .

table 1 highlights key provisions in the bill .

an emphasis has been placed on issues that have received the most attention during the reauthorization process , including title i - a accountability and formula issues and title ii - a formula issues .

table 2 depicts the proposed structure of the esea under the essa and includes all authorizations of appropriations for fy2017 through fy2020 .

the table also indicates whether a comparable program was included in current law .

table 3 provides examples of programs authorized under current law that would not be retained by the essa .

the report does not aim to provide a comprehensive summary of essa or of technical changes that would be made by the bill .

as congress had not enacted legislation to reauthorize the esea , on september 23 , 2011 , president obama and the secretary of education ( hereinafter referred to as the secretary ) announced the availability of an esea flexibility package for states and described the principles that states must meet to obtain the included waivers .

the waivers exempt states from various academic accountability requirements , teacher qualification - related requirements , and funding flexibility requirements that were enacted through nclb .

state educational agencies ( seas ) may also apply for optional waivers related to the 21 st century community learning centers program and the use of funds , determinations of adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) , and the allocation of title i - a funds to schools .

however , in order to receive the waivers seas must agree to meet four principles established by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) for "improving student academic achievement and increasing the quality of instruction. .

the four principles , as stated by ed , are ( 1 ) college - and career - ready expectations for all students ; ( 2 ) state - developed differentiated recognition , accountability , and support ; ( 3 ) supporting effective instruction and leadership ; and ( 4 ) reducing duplication and unnecessary burden .

taken collectively , the waivers and principles included in the esea flexibility package amount to a fundamental redesign by the administration of many of the accountability and teacher - related requirements included in current law .

as of december 2015 , 42 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico had approved esea flexibility applications , and ed was reviewing applications from other states .

the essa would terminate all waivers associated with the esea flexibility package on august 1 , 2016 .

the remainder of this report focuses only on current law and does not compare the provisions in the essa with the provisions included in the esea flexibility package .

 table 1 highlights similarities and differences between the essa and current law .

as previously discussed , areas of the essa that have received the most congressional interest are given a more in - depth review in the table .

the major areas considered include the following: overall structural and funding issues ; title i - a accountability ; title i - a formulas ; teachers , principals , and school leaders ; flexibility and choice ; and general provisions .

no attempts , however , were made to provide a comprehensive analysis of the essa .

 table 2 depicts the structure of the essa by title .

for each program with an authorization of appropriations , the amount authorized is provided for fy2017 through fy2020 .

the table also indicates whether the program is a new program or one that is similar to a program included in current law .

an indication that a program is also included in current law does not mean that the program is being retained without changes .

for example , while the essa would retain title ii - a , a state grant program focused on teachers , it would modify the formula used to award grants and the uses of funds .

 table 3 provides examples of programs authorized under current law that would not be authorized under the essa .

activities supported by some of the programs that would no longer be authorized , however , may be required or allowable uses of funds under programs that would be authorized under the essa .

for example , under the student support and academic enrichment grants program ( block grant program ) , leas could use funds to support counseling programs , create safe school environments , provide physical education , and support the use of technology ; and states and leas could use funds to reimburse low - income students for the costs of accelerated learning examination fees , such as advanced placement ( ap ) exams .

this is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all programs authorized under current law that would no longer be authorized .

rather , this list is based primarily on programs that have been included as line - items on appropriations tables in recent years and would not continue to be authorized by the essa .

