t he labeling of genetically engineered ( ge ) foods , sometimes referred to as genetically modified foods ( gmo foods ) , has been the subject of debate among members of the general public , industry participants , and federal and state governments .

the u.s. house of representatives also debated the issue of ge food labeling when passing the safe and accurate food labeling act of 2015 ( h.r .

1599 , safla ) in july 2015 .

while the food and drug administration ( fda ) does not impose specific labeling requirements on food just because it may or may not contain ge ingredients , some states have responded to public demand for ge labeling by enacting state laws requiring such a labeling scheme .

as of the date of this report , three states have passed mandatory labeling laws for ge foods: vermont , connecticut , and maine .

while none of these state labeling schemes are yet in effect , some industry participants have filed suit in federal court against the state of vermont trying to prevent the state's ge labeling requirements from going into effect .

these plaintiffs , generally industry representatives of grocery and food manufacturers , have claimed that vermont's ge labeling law , act 120 , is unconstitutional by imposing undue burdens on speech , and by interfering with federal oversight of the food industry , and the federal regulation of commerce .

while grocery manufacturers association ( gma ) v. sorrell is in the early stages of litigation , the legal issues that the court must consider have repeatedly appeared in debates over ge labeling on both the federal and state level and in the wider food regulation context .

gma v. sorrell thus serves as a case study on the constitutional implications of state ge labeling laws and provides some insight on the judicial consideration of ge labeling as congress considers related legislation in the 114 th congress .

this report analyzes three constitutional provisions relevant to state ge food labeling laws , the first amendment , the supremacy clause , and the commerce clause , by explaining the wider legal background of ge labeling as well as the court's analysis of these constitutional issues in gma v. sorrell .

first , the report begins with a brief discussion about ge foods and the states that have passed mandatory ge labeling laws .

next , the report examines the gma v. sorrell litigation and the constitutional claims made by the plaintiffs , including a brief background on each constitutional principle .

the report concludes with a discussion about the legislation introduced during the 114 th congress that would impose a voluntary labeling and certification scheme for ge foods and may impact state law .

in 2014 , the grocery manufacturers association , the snack food association , the international dairy foods association , and the national association of manufacturers filed a complaint in the federal district court in vermont to invalidate vermont's act 120 on constitutional grounds , specifically claiming that act 120 violates the first amendment , the commerce clause , and the doctrine of preemption found in the supremacy clause .

the relief sought by the plaintiffs included a preliminary injunction to prevent act 120 from taking effect on july 1 , 2016 , while the court decides whether to issue a permanent injunction invalidating the law .

in response to these claims , vermont filed a motion to dismiss the plaintiffs' case on august 8 , 2014 , arguing that the plaintiffs have failed to establish sufficient claims to invalidate act 120 on constitutional grounds .

the district court issued its opinion on these motions on april 27 , 2015 .

vermont's act 120 and other state labeling laws have triggered controversy regarding the constitutional parameters in which the states can impose voluntary and mandatory ge labeling schemes .

the following discussion analyzes the constitutional issues raised by the plaintiffs in gma v. sorrell .

however , these constitutional principles are not confined to vermont's act 120 alone , but instead provide a case study on the constitutional implications of state ge labeling laws .

the safe and accurate food labeling act of 2015 ( safla ) would impact state legislation regulating the labeling of ge foods , including vermont's act 120 .

generally , safla would establish different certification programs and labeling requirements under the oversight of both the fda and the usda .

first , section 101 of safla would direct the fda to continue its current premarket consultation process for food derived from new plant varieties , including ge plants .

under safla , the fda may require that the labeling of food produced from , containing , or consisting of a ge plant display a statement to inform consumers of a difference between food so produced and a comparable non - genetically engineered food .

under this proposed requirement , the fda may require such labeling if the agency has determined that there is a material difference between the two foods and the disclosure of such difference is necessary to protect public health or to prevent the label from being false or misleading .

additionally , safla would amend the plant protection act to create a notification program requiring those who plan to introduce into interstate commerce ge plants for food use to notify the secretary of health and human services , who must then evaluate the food under the premarket consultation process described above .

safla's section 111 would then require the entity to submit the evaluation to the secretary of agriculture .

section 201of safla would establish a voluntary ge food certification program within the usda to govern labeling claims with respect to the use or non - use of ge in the production and process of food .

section 301 of safla would amend section 403 of the ffdca to deem a food misbranded if its labeling contains an express or implied claim that such food is "natural," unless the claim uses terms that have been defined by regulations promulgated by the fda .

safla also contains several preemption provisions that would potentially impact a state's regulation of ge food labeling , including vermont's act 120 .

section 113 of safla contains an express preemption provision that reads in relevant part , [n]o state or political subdivision of a state may directly or indirectly establish under any authority or continue in effect as to any food in interstate commerce any requirement with respect to the sale or offering for sale in interstate commerce of a [ge] plant for use or application in food that is not identical to the requirement [imposed in ... ] section 111 of this act .

section 111 of safla , as mentioned above , would establish a premarket notification program for ge plants .

specifically , under this section , it would be unlawful to place a ge plant in interstate commerce without approval by the department of health and human services .

because of the use of the term "not identical," it appears that section 113 would prohibit states and localities from imposing different or additional safety requirements with respect to ge foods that have been reviewed under section 111 of safla .

section 113 would likely not prevent states and localities from creating laws that parallel federal standards imposed under safla .

similarly , section 113 would likely not prevent states from creating additional remedies to help enforce the federal ge safety standards created under section 111 .

safla's section 203 preemption provision reads as follows: [n]o state or political subdivision of a state may directly or indirectly establish under any authority or continue in effect as to any covered product ... in interstate commerce , any requirement for the labeling of a covered product indicating the product as having been produced from , containing , or consisting of a [ge] plant , including any requirements for claims that a covered product is or contains an ingredient that was produced from , contains , or consists of a [ge] plant .

section 203's preemption provision also contains a savings clause that would allow a state or a state's political subdivision to establish one of two "voluntary programs" respecting the labeling of ge and non - ge products , as long as the programs follow standards identical to those under section 201 of the act .

it appears that section 203's preemption provision would provide states very little discretion with respect to the substantive standards for a food label of a ge plant .

as a result , a state law permitting ge food labeling could not , for example , allow for a label that implied the use of genetic engineering was safer or of a higher quality simply because the product was ge , as such a label would contradict the federal standard proposed by safla .

however , the savings clause might permit states to establish standards that would be identical to those section 201 of the act would establish .

safla's section 303 contains an express preemption clause that would amend the existing preemption clause within nlea .

specifically , section 303 of safla would prohibit a state or political subdivision of a state from directly or indirectly establish[ing] under any authority or continu[ing] in effect as to any food in interstate commerce ... any requirement for the labeling of food of the type required by [section 301] that is not identical to the requirement of such section .

courts have interpreted nlea's preemption provision as prohibiting states from passing labeling laws that are not "identical" to the federal standards .

thus , section 303 would likely preserve state laws that impose standards that are "identical to" the underlying federal standard .

additionally , the provision may also allow states to impose "different or additional remedies " to enforce the underlying substantive federal standards created under safla , which would address the use of the word "natural" on food labels .

