obesity is a major public health concern in the united states .

two - thirds of adults and one - third of children are overweight or obese .

although many factors contribute to obesity , weight gain is generally the result of an energy imbalance — an excess of calories consumed over calories expended .

high rates of obesity and chronic disease have prompted various state and local nutrition labeling initiatives , in addition to other tactics and strategies .

the 1990 nutrition labeling and education act ( nlea , p.l .

101-535 ) authorized the food and drug administration ( fda ) to require nutrition labeling of most foods and dietary supplements , but it did not require the labeling of food sold in restaurants .

section 4205 of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) amended the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , establishing nutrition labeling requirements for standard menu items offered for sale in chain restaurants or similar retail food establishments ( srfes ) that have 20 or more locations , that conduct business under the same name regardless of the type of ownership of the locations , and that offer the same menu items for sale .

the aca provision required fda to promulgate regulations specifying the scope of entities and foods covered by the law , as well as details regarding how the required calorie and nutrition information would be conveyed to consumers .

in 2011 , fda proposed two rules delineating nutrition labeling requirements for restaurants and srfes , as well as vending machines ; both rules were finalized and published in the federal register on december 1 , 2014 .

prior to the final rule , some food establishments had already begun voluntarily posting nutrition information .

however , variable state and local regulations had resulted in a patchwork of labeling requirements , making compliance more challenging for chain food establishments .

certain groups , such as the national restaurant association , expressed support for a federal nutrition labeling standard , stating that it would ease the regulatory burden on national chain restaurants .

this report discusses the role of nutrition labeling in obesity management and prevention ; the research on the effectiveness of restaurant menu calorie labeling ; fda's authority to regulate nutrition labeling ; and the fda's final rules on restaurant menu and vending machine labeling .

the report also identifies issues for congress and flags stakeholders' concerns regarding fda's final menu labeling rule .

according to the most recent data from the national health and nutrition examination survey ( nhanes ) , in 2011-2014 , the prevalence of obesity in the united states was 36.5% among adults and 17% among youth .

although rates appear to have stabilized in youth since 2003-2004 ( see figure 1 ) , the prevalence of obesity among u.s. adults and children is higher than the healthy people 2020 goals of 30.5% and 14.5% , respectively .

this is of public health concern because obesity is associated with increased risk of a number of health conditions , such as high blood pressure , type 2 diabetes , cardiovascular disease , and stroke .

research has shown that frequent eating out is associated with increased calorie intake , and that food eaten away from the home tends to be of lower nutritional quality and higher in saturated fat and sodium than food prepared at home .

larger portion sizes served in restaurants contribute to greater calorie intake , and analyses of three fast food chain restaurants indicate that portion sizes have not changed since the mid - 1990s ( 1996-2013 ) .

studies also suggest that consumers tend to underestimate the number of calories in restaurant meals .

changes in the prevalence of overweight and obesity in the united states have paralleled changes in calorie consumption .

as obesity rates increased , calories consumed by individuals two years and older also increased significantly , from a daily average of 1,875 calories in 1977-1978 to 2,002 calories in 2005-2008 .

the same study indicates that in 1977-1978 , individuals in the united states consumed approximately 18% of calories away from the home , compared with 32% in 2005-2008 .

more recent nhanes data suggest that obesity rates have been leveling off and even decreasing in some age groups ( eg , among two - to five - year - olds ) .

data from usda's economic research service show that average calorie intake has also declined — by 118 calories ( about 5% ) between 2005-2006 and 2009-2010 .

during this time period , consumption of calories from food eaten away from home fell by 127 calories per day , and daily fast food calories fell by 53 calories per day .

these changes suggest that consumer preferences for nutritious foods may be increasing , and there may be greater use of available nutrition information ( eg , the nutrition facts panel ) , resulting in improved diet quality among consumers .

public health stakeholders have generally supported restaurant menu labeling as a policy option for obesity prevention .

proponents of menu labeling say that providing calorie information in restaurants and food establishments may help consumers make healthier and more informed dietary choices .

however , some researchers have found that current evidence does not support a significant impact of menu labeling on calories ordered , suggesting that posting calorie counts does not result in consumers making healthier food choices .

it is difficult to predict what effect , if any , mandatory restaurant menu labeling will have on food purchasing and health outcomes .

however , changes in behavior following implementation of calorie labeling regulations in other jurisdictions prior to publication of the final federal rule ( eg , new york city , philadelphia , and king county , wa ) may provide some insight .

the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act of 1938 authorized fda to regulate most food products and their ingredients .

in 1990 , congress passed the nutrition labeling and education act ( nlea p.l .

101-535 ) , which amended the ffdca and gave fda authority to require nutrition labeling of most foods ( including dietary supplements ) , exempting restaurants from this requirement .

however , current regulations pursuant to the nlea requirement do require restaurants and srfes that make either a nutrient content or health claim to provide certain nutrition information upon request .

for example , if an entrée is listed as low - fat , the restaurant must be able to provide information about the fat content of the entrée upon request .

section 4205 of the affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , aca ) amended ffdca section 403 to establish nutrition labeling requirements for standard menu items offered for sale in chain restaurants or srfes that have 20 or more locations , that conduct business under the same name regardless of the type of ownership of the locations , and that offer the same menu items for sale .

establishments subject to the menu labeling requirements must disclose the number of calories in each item "as usually prepared and offered for sale," and must post a succinct statement , specified by regulation , concerning suggested daily caloric intake on menus and menu boards .

the law requires covered establishments to provide additional nutrition information ( eg , total fat ) to consumers in writing upon request .

self - service food or food on display must have an adjacent sign that lists calories per displayed food item or per serving .

certain food items are exempted from the labeling requirements , such as items not listed on a menu or menu board ( eg , condiments ) , daily specials and temporary items appearing on the menu for less than 60 days , custom orders , and food items that are part of a market test and on the menu for less than 90 days .

covered establishments must have a "reasonable basis" for their nutrient content disclosures , such as nutrient databases , cookbooks , or laboratory analyses .

the secretary must establish standards for determining and disclosing the nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors , varieties , or combinations but are listed as single menu items ( eg , ice cream , pizza , doughnuts , or children's combination meals ) .

in fda's final regulatory impact analysis , the agency estimated that approximately 298,600 establishments , organized under 2,130 chains , would be covered by the menu labeling regulations ( see table 1 ) .

the law also established nutrition labeling requirements for vending machine items and amended ffdca section 403a regarding federal preemption of state and local food labeling requirements .

as noted , ffdca section 403 ( q ) ( 5 ) ( h ) requires the secretary to promulgate regulations to implement the menu labeling requirements , including standards for determining and disclosing the nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors , varieties , or combinations but are listed as single menu items , as well as registration rules for establishments that are not otherwise subject to the law's requirements to voluntarily provide nutrition information .

in promulgating regulations , the secretary is required to consider , among other things , the format and manner of the nutrient content disclosure requirement .

the secretary may also require , by regulation , that other nutrient information be disclosed to help consumers maintain healthy dietary practices .

in 2011 , fda published two proposed rules establishing calorie labeling requirements for food items sold in restaurants and vending machines .

the two rules were finalized and published in the federal register on december 1 , 2014 .

this section provides an overview of the fda's proposed and final regulations on menu labeling , and describes corresponding statutory requirements upon which the regulations are based .

in addition to the requirements for restaurants and srfes , the ffdca also requires calorie labeling for food sold from vending machines ; specifically , operators who own or operate 20 or more vending machines must disclose calorie information for food sold from vending machines , subject to certain exemptions .

in tandem with the restaurant menu labeling rule , fda issued a final rule regarding calorie labeling for food items sold in covered vending machines .

vending machine operators who are not subject to the calorie labeling requirements may voluntarily register with fda to be covered by the regulation .

the final rule defines a vending machine as "a self - service machine that , upon insertion of a coin , paper currency , token , card , or key , or by optional manual operation , dispense servings of food in bulk or in packages or prepared by the machine , without the necessity of replenishing the machine between each vending operation. .

the rule requires that if a vending machine does not permit a consumer to examine nutrition information before purchase or at point - of - purchase , then the vending machine operator must provide calorie declarations for such foods via a sign close to the article of food or on a selection button ( i.e. , in , on , or adjacent to the vending machine ) .

as previously noted , in 2011 , fda published two proposed rules establishing calorie labeling requirements for food items sold in restaurants and vending machines .

the two rules were finalized and published in the federal register on december 1 , 2014 , and were to take effect one year from publication ( december 1 , 2015 ) for restaurants and two years ( december 1 , 2016 ) for vending machines .

on july 9 , 2015 , fda extended the compliance date until december 1 , 2016 , for restaurants and srfes .

compliance with the regulations was delayed again as a result of language included in the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) , which prohibited the use of any funds for implementation , administration , or enforcement of the menu labeling requirements until the later of december 1 , 2016 , or until one year from the date that the secretary of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) issues final , level 1 guidance on compliance with specified requirements for menu labeling contained in the final menu labeling rule .

fda issued draft guidance to help companies comply with the menu labeling final rule on september 11 , 2015 , and final guidance on may 5 , 2016 .

in issuing the final guidance , fda announced that enforcement of the final rule would commence on may 5 , 2017 .

however , in response to continued concerns from certain sectors of the affected industry and some members of congress , fda announced that it was further extending the compliance date to may 7 , 2018 .

fda has also extended the compliance date for calorie labeling of certain food products sold in vending machines to july 26 , 2018 .

a standard menu item offered for sale in a covered establishment would be deemed misbranded under ffdca section 403 if its labeling does not meet the requirements of the final rule .

for example , if the calorie declaration of a self - service standard menu item or food on display is not listed clearly and conspicuously in compliance with the final rule , that standard menu item would be deemed misbranded .

generally , fda relies on manufacturers to voluntarily recall misbranded products , either by their own initiative or upon regulators' request .

however , the food safety and modernization act ( fsma , p.l .

111-353 ) provided fda with mandatory recall authority .

in addition , the agency has the authority to pursue other enforcement actions , including warning letters , seizures , injunctions , civil monetary penalties , and prosecution .

fda estimates that the labeling requirements ( both menu and vending machine rules combined ) are estimated to have benefits exceeding costs by $477.9 million on an annualized basis ( over 20 years discounted at 7% ) .

in response to concerns from certain sectors of the industry affected by the menu labeling rule , some members of congress have supported amending nutrition disclosure requirements to provide for added flexibility .

for example , as introduced in the 115 th congress , the common sense nutrition disclosure act ( h.r .

772 , s. 261 ) would permit entities that receive the majority of orders from customers who are off - premises ( eg , pizza chains ) to provide their menus online in place of menu boards in restaurants ; would give manufacturers greater flexibility in how they determine and document nutrient content analyses ; and would permit establishments with standard menu items that come in different flavors , varieties , or combinations that are listed as a single menu item to determine and disclose nutritional information using specified methods or methods allowed by the secretary .

under this proposal , if a restaurant or retailer is determined to be in violation of the menu labeling requirements , the entity would have 90 days to take corrective action , and the secretary would be prohibited from taking enforcement action if the violations are corrected within those 90 days .

in addition , the secretary would be required to promulgate regulations to carry out the standards for determining and disclosing the nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors , varieties , or combinations , but which are listed as a single menu item .

such regulations , as well as any regulations issued before enactment of the common sense nutrition disclosure act , would not be allowed to take effect until the compliance date specified in the final regulations promulgated pursuant to this act .

as mentioned , the menu labeling compliance date has been extended multiple times since the final rule was issued in december 2014 .

opponents of the extension have argued that many chains are successfully complying with the labeling requirements and that consumers want menu labeling .

several public health groups have signed onto a letter to fda opposing changes to the menu labeling requirements .

