indian tribes are unique in that they are quasi - sovereign entities that enjoy all the sovereign rights not divested by treaties or congress , or inconsistent with their dependent status .

as "domestic dependent nations," "indian tribes are distinct , independent political communities , retaining their original natural rights in matters of local self - government. .

however , they are subordinate to the sovereignty of the united states .

because of tribes' unique status , courts have wrestled with the issue of whether statutes that do not mention tribes apply to tribes .

the national labor relations act ( nlra ) , which does not mention tribes , gives employees the right to collectively bargain with employers , and imposes on employers the obligation to bargain with employees in good faith .

section 2 ( 2 ) of the nlra defines the term "employer" to exclude "the united states or any wholly owned government corporation or any state or political subdivision thereof. .

in 1976 , the national labor relations board ( nlrb ) , the agency responsible for enforcing the nlra , concluded that tribal employers were "implicitly" exempted from the nlra as governmental entities .

later , it decided the exemption did not extend to tribal employers located off tribal land .

in 2004 , the nlrb abandoned the location - based test in favor of a test that presumes the nlra applies , but allows exceptions if application of the nlra interferes with a tribe's right of self - governance in intramural matters or treaty rights .

since 2004 , the nlrb has been enforcing the nlra against tribal casinos .

the tribal labor sovereignty act of 2015 , h.r .

511 and s. 248 , would amend the nlra's definition of employer to exclude , "any enterprise or institution owned and operated by an indian tribe located on its indian lands" effectively reinstating the board's position before 2004 .

the remainder of this report discusses how the nlrb developed its current position on applying the nlra to tribal casinos , considers how it has applied the nlra since 2004 , and discusses how the tribal labor sovereignty act of 2015 relates to the history of the nlrb applying the nlra to tribal enterprises .

the nlrb's position on enforcing the nlra against tribal employers has changed over time .

this section explains the reasoning behind the board's positions .

despite the fact that the court of appeals upheld the nlrb's decision in san manuel based on different reasoning , the nlrb has used its reasoning based on the tuscarora / coeur d'alene test from its san manuel decision in subsequent enforcement actions .

this section discusses the arguments the tribes have made against applying the nlra to their casinos and how the nlrb has analyzed those arguments .

the tribal labor sovereignty act of 2015 , h.r .

511 and s. 248 , would amend the definition of employer to exclude , "any enterprise or institution owned and operated by an indian tribe located on its indian lands. .

it would define "indian lands" to mean the following: ( a ) all lands within the limits of any indian reservation ; ( b ) any land title to which is either held in trust by the united states for the benefit of any indian tribe or individual subject to restriction by the united states against alienation ; and ( c ) any lands in the state of oklahoma that are within the boundaries of a former reservation ( as defined by the secretary of the interior ) of a federally recognized indian tribe .

it appears , therefore , under this bill , the nlra would not apply to tribal enterprises located within reservations , on tribal or individual trust or restricted fee land , or , in oklahoma , within a tribe's former reservation .

in effect , it seems that the bill would reinstate a location - based test similar to the one that the board overturned in san manuel .

