on september 9 , 2015 , the senate committee on energy and natural resources reported s. 2012 , the energy policy modernization act , a major energy bill with provisions addressing energy efficiency , critical infrastructure , energy supplies ( fossil , renewable , and nuclear ) , energy financing and markets , and critical minerals , among other topics .

the senate passed s. 2012 on april 20 , 2016 .

on may 25 , 2016 , the house passed an amended version of s. 2012 which contains the text of h.r .

8 , as well as the text of several other energy and natural resources - related bills .

the following day , the house moved to insist upon its amendment , and to appoint conferees to resolve the differences in s. 2012 .

on july 12 , the senate agreed to the request for a conference , and appointed conferees .

in addition to energy policy provisions , both versions of s. 2012 contain many natural resources and environmental provisions including provisions on fish and wildlife recreation and federal land conveyances .

the senate version includes permanent reauthorization of the land and water conservation fund and reauthorization of epa's brownfields program , while the house version includes provisions on national forest management and drought relief .

the house - passed bill would have eliminated restrictions on the export of u.s. - produced crude oil .

however , this provision was included in the fy2016 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

the house - passed bill also includes provisions on the physical security of the electric grid .

two of these provisions — on critical electric infrastructure security and a strategic transformer reserve — were included in the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act ( p.l .

114-94 ) .

this report summarizes recent congressional actions on s. 2012 , and briefly discusses key topics covered by the senate - and house - passed versions of the bills that may be addressed in conference .

for a side - by - side table identifying comparable and non - comparable provisions in the house and senate - passed versions of s. 2012 , see crs report r44569 , energy legislation: comparable provisions in s. 2012 as passed by the house and senate .

in addition to the energy provisions in the house and senate versions of s. 2012 , the bills also contain significant provisions on natural resources and environmental policy .

among other provisions , the senate version would permanently reauthorize the land and water conservation fund ( lwcf ) and the historic preservation fund ( hpf ) .

the senate version would also reallocate a share of revenues from outer continental shelf ( ocs ) oil and gas leases to a new national park service maintenance revitalization and conservation fund .

other sections would amend and reauthorize epa's brownfields program under the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) .

most of these provisions are contained in title x of the senate bill , except for the brownfields provisions ( title vii ) .

the house version of s. 2012 also contains a variety of natural resources provisions , including the bill's division b on federal forest management and wildfire funding and the bill's provisions on water management and drought relief .

other than the forestry provisions , most natural resources provisions in the house bill are contained in division c. both versions include provisions on federal land management and fish and wildlife recreation , although the house version contains a number of provisions not found in the senate version , and vice versa .

many of the natural resources and environmental provisions in the two bills are similar or identical to provisions in other house and senate legislation .

the following sections of the report discuss selected provisions in the house and / or senate versions of s. 2012 .

section 5002 of the senate version of s. 2012 would make several changes to the land and water conservation fund ( lwcf ) act of 1965 , which was enacted to help preserve , develop , and ensure access to outdoor recreation resources .

the law created the lwcf in the treasury as a funding source to implement the outdoor recreation goals it set out .

the fund is currently authorized through september 30 , 2018 , to accrue revenues of $900 million annually .

monies in the fund are available only if appropriated by congress , except that a portion of the appropriations for the state grant program are mandatory .

appropriations from lwcf have been made for three general purposes: ( 1 ) federal acquisition of lands and waters and interests therein ; ( 2 ) grants to states for recreational planning ; acquiring recreational lands , waters , or related interests ; and developing outdoor recreational facilities ; and ( 3 ) related purposes .

among other provisions , section 5002 provides that: the lwcf would be permanently authorized , with $900 million deposited annually into the fund ; no less than 40% of appropriations from the lwcf would be used for federal purposes specified in the lwcf act , primarily land acquisition by federal land management agencies ; no less than 40% of appropriations from the lwcf would be used collectively for specified programs that benefit states: the lwcf outdoor recreation grant program , forest legacy program , cooperative endangered species grants , and american battlefield protection program ; not less than 1.5% of appropriations from the lwcf , or $10.0 million , whichever is greater , would be used for enhancing public access to federal lands ; the secretary of the interior and the secretary of agriculture are to consider acquiring conservation easements and other interests in land ( as opposed to full title ) when appropriate and feasible ; and the secretary of the interior and the secretary of agriculture are required to consider certain common factors in acquiring lands , such as management efficiencies , geographic distribution , and threats to the integrity of the land .

no similar lwcf provision is in the house - passed version of s. 2012 .

the house - and senate - passed versions of s. 2012 contain differing provisions related to the federal land transaction facilitation act ( fltfa ) , which expired on july 25 , 2011 .

fltfa had provided for the sale or exchange of lands owned by the bureau of land management ( blm ) that had been identified for disposal under blm's land use plans at the time of enactment .

the law allowed the proceeds from land sales to be retained in a special account in the treasury , and available to the blm and other land management agencies , without further appropriation ( mandatory appropriations ) , for subsequent land acquisition and other purposes .

it emphasized acquisition of inholdings and other nonfederal lands ( or interests therein ) that are adjacent to federal lands and contain exceptional resources .

the goals of the law included allowing for reconfiguration of land ownership patterns to better facilitate resource management , improving administrative efficiency , and increasing the effectiveness of the allocation of fiscal and human resources .

with the expiration of fltfa , proceeds of most blm land sales go to the general fund of the treasury .

section 2092 of the house - passed bill would make funds in the land sales special account subject to appropriations ( discretionary appropriations ) .

section 10241 of the senate - passed bill would permanently reauthorize the authority in fltfa , while section 2092 of the house - passed bill would provide reauthorization through july 25 , 2022 .

upon termination on that date , any funds remaining in the special account would be used for deficit reduction , or for federal debt reduction should there be no deficit .

for budget scoring reasons , the senate - passed bill provides that $1.0 million of the proceeds in the special account be transferred to the general fund of the treasury for each year from fy2016 through fy2025 .

both versions of the bill would allow for updated blm land management plans to be used as the basis for identifying lands for sale and exchange , and for acquisition of lands within or adjacent to federally designated areas regardless of when they were established .

the house - passed bill contained additional provisions , primarily to broaden the purposes for which funds in the account could be used .

new purposes would include addressing deferred and other maintenance that would enhance access to federal lands for recreation ; acquiring lands that provide opportunities for recreation or that would reduce operation , maintenance , or deferred costs ; and establishment by the secretary of the interior of a publicly available database of lands identified in blm land use plans as available for disposal .

both the senate and house versions of s. 2012 contain provisions related to the national park service ( nps ) , although the provisions differ .

some senate provisions address nps funding in the context of the agency's upcoming centennial anniversary and its growing backlog of deferred maintenance ; these provisions do not appear in the house version of the bill .

provisions of both bills address nps studies , designations of new areas , and other management matters , but the provisions' content do not overlap .

section 5001 of the senate bill would establish a national park service maintenance and revitalization conservation fund .

the fund would receive $150 million annually from revenues on oil and gas leases on the u.s. outer continental shelf ( ocs ) .

these amounts would be available for expenditure only if appropriated during the annual appropriations process .

they would be used to address the "high - priority deferred maintenance needs of the service that support critical infrastructure and visitor services," and could not be used for land acquisition .

the house - passed version of s. 2012 contains no similar provision .

section 4412 ( a ) of the senate bill would establish a national park centennial challenge fund .

the fund would consist of donations from outside entities , along with funding authorized to be appropriated from the general treasury to match the amount of donated funds , up to a cumulative total of $17.5 million in federal funding through fy2020 .

the money would finance "signature projects and programs" identified by the secretary of the interior to further the purposes of park units or the park system as a whole .

the house - passed version of s. 2012 contains no similar provision .

the house natural resources committee has reported h.r .

4680 , which would also establish a national park centennial challenge fund with outside donations matched by federal funding .

a difference between the proposals is that the senate's s. 2012 would derive the federal portion of the fund from discretionary appropriations , whereas h.r .

4680 would derive the federal funding from a price increase for park passes for senior citizens .

section 4412 ( b ) of the senate bill would establish a second century endowment for the national park system .

the nps's fundraising entity , the national park foundation , would be authorized to undertake a campaign to fund the endowment through gifts , devises , or bequests .

the funds could be used for projects and programs identified by the secretary that further the nps mission .

the house - passed version of s. 2012 contains no similar provision .

h.r .

4680 ( section 202 ) , as reported by the house committee on natural resources , would establish an nps second century endowment similarly funded through gifts , devises , or bequests to the national park foundation .

unlike the senate bill , h.r .

4680 would also provide for collections from a fee of up to 5% on park lodging to be deposited into the endowment .

h.r .

4680 also differs somewhat from that of the senate in its provisions for how the funds would be invested and its reporting requirements .

separately , the national park service administers the existing historic preservation fund ( hpf ) , which provides grants to nonfederal entities to conserve cultural and historical assets and sites .

the hpf has been funded by revenues from oil and gas activities on the ocs .

this funding authorization expired on september 30 , 2015 ( although a balance remains in the fund and is available for appropriation ) .

section 5003 of the senate - passed s. 2012 would permanently authorize funding for the hpf .

the house version of the bill contains no similar provision .

the house natural resources committee has ordered reported h.r .

2817 , which would reauthorize hpf funding through fy2023 .

both the senate and house versions of s. 2012 would direct nps to conduct special resource studies of potential new park system units , although the sites to be studied differ .

the senate bill would require nps studies of president street station ( section 10103 ) and thurgood marshall's elementary school ( section 10104 ) , both in maryland , and president james polk's home in tennessee ( section 10105 ) .

the house bill ( division c ) would require nps studies of the medgar evers house in mississippi ( sections 7001-7002 ) and the chief standing bear trail in nebraska , kansas , and oklahoma ( section 9001 ) .

the bills also contain differing provisions for nps designations and boundary changes .

in the senate bill , section 10102 would designate segments of connecticut's lower farmington river and salmon brook as part of the national wild and scenic rivers system , to be administered through nps's program for state partnership rivers .

section 10106 would expand the nps - administered north country national scenic trail in new york .

in the house bill ( division c ) , sections 6001-6007 would redesignate and expand the ocmulgee mounds national monument in georgia , sections 10001-10002 would expand the john muir national historic site in california , and sections 18001-18003 would redesignate the martin luther king jr. national historic site in georgia as a national historic park .

section 10101 of the senate bill would direct nps to refund state monies that were used to operate certain nps units during the october 2013 government shutdown .

the house - passed version of the bill has no similar provision .

the senate - passed version of s. 2012 also contains other provisions related to nps , such as those concerning nps intellectual property protection ( section 4412 ( c ) ) , education and interpretation in the parks ( section 4412 ( d ) ) , the public land corps ( section 4412 ( e ) ) , the national park foundation ( section 4412 ( f ) ) , the advisory council on historic preservation ( section 10108 ) , an nps land parcel in northern virginia ( section 10109 ) , and designation of wilderness in an alaska park ( section 10107 ) .

these provisions are not contained in the house - passed version of s. 2012 .

the house - passed version of s. 2012 ( division c ) contains a different group of provisions related to nps , including those concerning the coltsville national historical park in connecticut ( section 17001 ) , the gullah / geechee cultural heritage corridor in four southeastern states ( section 19001 ) , the 9 / 11 memorial in new york ( sections 20001-20004 ) , the kennesaw mountain national battlefield park in georgia ( sections 21001-21003 ) , the delaware water gap national recreation area in new jersey and pennsylvania ( sections 22001-22003 ) , the gulf islands national seashore in florida and mississippi ( sections 23001-23002 ) , and the korean war veterans memorial on the national mall in washington , dc ( sections 24001-24002 ) .

these provisions are not in the senate - passed bill .

section 10221 of the senate - passed s. 2012 would amend statutory provisions in 16 u.s.c .

460l related to commercial filming and still photography on federal lands .

the bill would direct the secretaries of interior and agriculture to complete a joint fee schedule for these activities within 180 days of the bill's enactment , would exempt small businesses and film crews of three or fewer from the fees , and would clarify the definition of noncommercial news - gathering activities that are not subject to fee and permit requirements , among other changes .

the house - passed version of s. 2012 contains no similar provision .

h.r .

2406 , passed by the house on february 26 , 2016 , would allow film crews of five persons or fewer to pay a special fee for commercial filming .

section 10212 of the senate version of s. 2012 would mandate an "open until closed" policy for hunting , fishing , and recreational shooting on lands currently open to such activities and managed by the forest service ( fs , department of agriculture ) and blm , in accordance with applicable law .

the two agencies could close their lands for reasons of public safety , administration , or compliance with applicable laws .

however , except in emergencies , the closures would have to be minimal in time and area .

consultation with state fish and wildlife agencies would be required , along with opportunities for public notice and comment .

in the house version of s. 2012 , section 2063 is similar .

section 10214 of the senate version would permit the two agencies to allow shooting ranges on their lands , except in designated wilderness , wilderness study areas , national monuments , wild and scenic rivers , and other specified , protected areas .

the house version ( section 2063 ( e ) ( 1 ) ) is similar .

section 10231 of the senate version would permit bows and crossbows that are not ready for immediate use to be transported across units of the national park system if the items remain in the vehicle while on nps lands and if the owner legitimately possesses them .

section 2081 of the house version is similar , but also contains provisions concerning hunter access corridors through nps lands adjacent to lands where hunting is permitted .

section 10232 of the senate version would allow the use of qualified volunteer hunters to assist nps in culling excessive populations of wildlife on nps lands .

in the house version , section 2064 is similar , except that any rejection of volunteer hunters ( defined as persons who hold a valid hunting license in that state ) would require state concurrence .

also , sections 2151-2153 of the house version contain specific provisions regarding volunteer bison hunters in grand canyon national park .

section 10233 of the senate version would mandate a survey of recreation access on lands under fs , blm , nps , or fish and wildlife service ( fws ) jurisdiction .

the agencies would report on recreational opportunities ( including hunting and fishing ) on federal lands where public access is limited or nonexistent .

after public input , the agencies would prepare for congress an acquisition priority list of easements , rights of way , or fee title to improve access .

no study would be required in the house version , but subtitle e would create an advisory committee to advise the secretaries of the interior and agriculture on access as well as recruitment and retention of new hunters .

annual reports would be required .

section 10251 of the senate version would affect the use by states and territories of the funds allocated to them under two provisions for hunter education in the pittman - robertson wildlife restoration act ( 16 u.s.c .

§669 ) for projects involving land acquisition , construction , and expansion of public target ranges for firearms or archery .

for the basic hunter education program , which was funded at $122.5 million in fy2016 , the section states that "a state may pay up to 90 percent of the cost of acquiring land for , expanding , or constructing a public target range. .

no other grant program administered by fws places an upper limit on the fraction of funding that may be provided by the grant recipient .

instead , other fws grant programs place upper limits only on the federal share of the grant .

for the enhanced hunter education program ( $8.0 million in fy2016 ) , the provision would increase the current maximum federal share from the pittman - robertson program from 75% to 90% for projects acquiring land for , expanding , or constructing target ranges .

the house bill ( section 2024 ) is similar , including the limit on state funds for land acquisition .

section 10252 of the senate version would reauthorize the appropriation of funds for the north american wetlands conservation act ( 16 u.s.c .

4406 ( c ) ) , which established the north american wetlands conservation fund .

the purpose of the program is to conserve wetland ecosystems through voluntary partnerships with required cost - sharing .

the house version has no similar provision .

section 10253 of the senate version would create a national fish habitat conservation partnership with a national fish habitat board .

the board would work with a variety of nonfederal partners and submit to the secretary of the interior a list of recommended priority fish habitat conservation projects for funding in the following year .

the selected projects would receive a maximum 50% federal match .

the house version has no similar provision .

the house bill has several provisions not found in the senate version .

section 2012 would amend the toxic substances control act ( 15 u.s.c .

§2602 ( 2 ) ( b ) ) to prohibit regulation of lead shot and lead sport fishing equipment by epa .

section 2032 would facilitate importation of polar bear trophies from canada , if the polar bears were killed before the species was listed as threatened under the endangered species act ( 16 u.s.c .

§1531 et seq. ) .

in 2008 .

section 2042 would prohibit the secretary of the army from promulgating or enforcing any regulation prohibiting possession of a firearm ( including an assembled or functional firearm ) at water resources projects of the u.s. army corps of engineers .

section 2072 of the house version would amend the migratory bird treaty act ( 16 u.s.c .

704 ) to limit the circumstances in which individuals might be prosecuted if they hunt birds over a field where grain or salt has been placed .

the focus is on agricultural practices which might lure birds to an area .

there has been controversy about the legitimacy of hunting in farm fields , when natural disasters such as flooding take place before grain can be harvested .

subtitle j ( sections 2101 to sections 2106 ) addresses conservation , poaching , and hunting of african elephants .

it would require an fws law enforcement official to be placed in each country in the species' range .

it would also affect restrictions on the transportation or sale within the united states of african elephant ivory that was originally lawfully imported .

and it would limit the ability of fws to require certain technological means to verify the provenance of the ivory .

section 2131 of the house version would limit the ability of nps and the office of national marine sanctuaries to restrict recreational and commercial fishing in waters within their jurisdiction without prior coordination with relevant state or territorial agencies .

section 2201 would require reissuance of rules delisting wolves in the western great lakes area and in wyoming .

the delisting rules were struck down by federal courts .

the section would also exempt the reissuance from judicial review .

finally , subtitle t of title ii ( sections 2211-2212 ) would ( a ) forbid fws from issuing a final rule , and ( b ) require nps to withdraw a final rule ; both rules would limit the take of predators on their lands in alaska .

the two agencies have supported limiting the take of predators on their lands in response to an alaska decision to encourage the take of predators on non - federal lands in order to increase populations of certain game species .

typically , federal agencies adhere to state hunting regulations ; in this case , the two federal agencies sought to differ from new state regulations and to limit methods of take of predator species on their own lands .

section 10215 of the senate version and section 2162 of the house version are substantially similar provisions that would require annual reporting of various information and expenditures made pursuant to the equal access to justice act ( eaja ; 5 u.s.c .

§504 ; 28 u.s.c .

§2412 ( d ) ) and of payments under the federal government's judgment fund in litigation against the federal government .

the eaja is a general fee - shifting statute that allows a "prevailing party" to recover costs and attorneys' fees against the united states in both administrative and judicial proceedings , if it is found that the position of the united states was not substantially justified .

data from the annual report would be made available online by the administrative conference of the united states in a searchable database .

information whose disclosure is prohibited by court order would not be included in the database .

the senate version would require the annual reporting of this information indefinitely , whereas the house version would require such annual reporting for up to six years .

information whose disclosure is prohibited by court order would not be included in the database , but the disclosure of fees and other expenses awarded pursuant to a settlement agreement would be required regardless of whether the settlement agreement is sealed or otherwise subject to nondisclosure provisions .

section 10215 of the senate version would amend 31 u.s.c .

§1304 , a provision that governs payments from the judgment fund , which is a permanent and indefinite appropriation generally used to pay all judgments against the united states not otherwise covered by a specific appropriation .

the section would require the secretary of the treasury to post specified facts about each judgment .

section 2162 of the house version omits such language .

title vii of the senate version of s. 2012 ―the brownfields utilization , investment , and local development act of 2016 or build act―would reauthorize the brownfields program administered by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) through fy2018 .

the house - passed version of s. 2012 does not include comparable provisions to reauthorize this program .

the authorization of appropriations for the brownfields program expired at the end of fy2006 , but congress has continued to fund the program each year through annual appropriations acts .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) provided $153.3 million for the program .

the brownfields program funds federal financial and technical assistance for the assessment and remediation of potentially contaminated "brownfield" sites , as authorized in the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) .

eligible brownfield sites generally are sites located on non - federal lands that are not addressed under the superfund program or other related remediation authorities , but at which some federal assistance may be desired to facilitate their redevelopment or reuse .

however , federal assistance under the brownfields program is limited .

the states play the predominant role in the remediation of most contaminated sites on non - federal lands .

liability relief under cercla may play a broader federal role in facilitating the redevelopment or reuse of brownfield sites .

title vii would not amend these authorities .

title vii of the senate version would reauthorize appropriations for the epa brownfields program at the same previously authorized levels of $200 million annually for competitive grants to state , local , and tribal governmental entities and non - profit organizations for site characterization , assessment , planning and remediation , job training for site remediation workers , and technical assistance ; and $50 million annually for formula - based grants to state and tribal governments to establish or enhance their own remediation programs .

in addition to reauthorizing appropriations , title vii would amend cercla to alter various aspects of eligibility and authorized uses of competitive grants , but the formula grant authorities would remain unchanged .

for competitive grants , title vii would expand the general eligibility of non - profit organizations ; reserve up to 15% of annual appropriations for "multipurpose" grants to combine site characterization , assessment , and planning , and site remediation , into one grant , similar to a pilot initiative that epa began in fy2012 ; allow governmental entities that purchased contaminated properties prior to january 11 , 2002 , to receive site characterization , assessment , and planning grants , if they did not cause or contribute to the contamination but otherwise still may be a liable party ; increase the dollar limit for individual site remediation grants from $200,000 to $500,000 , with an exception to allow up to $650,000 to be awarded based on the anticipated level of contamination , size , or ownership status of the site ; allow a grant recipient to use up to 8% of a grant for project administrative costs ; give priority to small communities of 15,000 individuals or less for technical assistance ; give priority to waterfront sites for characterization , assessment , planning , and remediation ; authorize a dedicated program element for renewable energy sites ; and reallocate up to $2 million annually from competitive grants to formula grants for increased assistance to state and tribal remediation programs .

the house - passed version of s. 2012 contains forest management provisions ; no similar provisions are in the senate - passed version .

division b of the house - passed version of s. 2012 contains titles and provisions that would impact aspects of the management of federal forests , which includes the national forest system ( nfs ) lands managed by the forest service ( fs ) and the public lands managed by bureau of land management ( blm ) .

the house provisions are nearly identical to h.r .

2647 , which passed the house on july 9 , 2015 .

the division defines several terms in section 2 , including collaborative process , forest management activity , reforestation activity , and salvage operation , among others .

title i and title ii would establish certain procedures for planning and implementing the nepa documentation required for specified forest management projects ( activities ) on nfs and public lands .

section 101 ( title i ) stipulates for collaboratively - developed projects ( as defined ) the action alternatives analyzed in any environmental assessment ( ea ) or environmental impact statement ( eis ) prepared pursuant to nepa would be limited to two alternatives: carrying out the project as proposed or taking no action .

section 201 ( title ii ) would require the completion of an ea for a salvage operation project within three months after the conclusion of a large - scale catastrophic event , as defined , and require any planned reforestation activities on the impacted area achieve 75% reforestation within five years .

title i also would establish four new nepa categorical exclusions ( ces ) that would be available to the fs and blm to conduct certain forest management activities to: expedite certain critical response actions ( section 102 ) , expedite salvage operations in response to catastrophic events ( section 103 ) , meet forest plan goals for early successional forests ( section 104 ) , and improve , restore , and reduce the risk of wildfire ( section 106 ) .

title iii would impose an additional procedural requirement if a plaintiff challenges certain agency decisions that were developed through a collaborative process .

specifically , title iii would require any plaintiff challenging such decisions to post a bond equal to the estimated costs of the legal challenge ( inclusive of attorneys' fees ) before the proceedings could move forward .

the provisions also would permit the secretary concerned ( agriculture or interior ) to recover the costs to the government , which would be limited to the amount of the bond posted , if the plaintiff does not prevail on every challenge .

section 302 ( e ) would prohibit an award of fees or expenses pursuant to section 2412 of title 28 united states code nor could payment be made from the judgment fund to pay any fees or expenses to any plaintiff who succeeds in an action described in title iii .

titles iv through viii would impact various federal forest management activities .

for example , title iv provisions would impact payments and activities authorized by the secure rural schools and community self - determination act ( srs ) which expired at the end of fy2015 .

title v would authorize contract ceilings for stewardship end - result contracts , amend the distribution of revenue generated from those contracts , and amend the current fire liability provisions for such contracts .

title vi would establish a fund and process for certain nonfederal parties , as defined in the bill , to provide financial contributions and receive appropriations .

if enacted , the fund could be used to plan , implement , and monitor certain projects on nfs and blm lands , for a period of 10 years , and any revenue - generated from such projects would return to the fund .

title vii contains provisions that would amend the tribal forest protection act to specify timeframes for the secretary concerned to respond and implement projects proposed under the act , and would authorize the applicable secretary to treat specified federal lands as tribal lands upon the request of a tribe .

title viii contains miscellaneous provisions that would impact a range of forest management activities , including specifying that certain provisions of the northwest forest plan would not apply to nfs and public lands and prohibiting the application of the "eastside screens requirements" on nfs lands .

title viii also would specify that none of the provisions in the previous seven titles would apply to nfs or public lands designated as wilderness , located within an inventoried roadless area , or where timber harvesting is prohibited by statute .

title ix could change how congress appropriates funds for wildfire suppression activities .

the provisions would broaden the purposes for major disasters under the stafford act to include "wildfires on federal lands" ( section 901 ) , and it would create a related budgetary mechanism that potentially could be used to fund the response to each wildfire on federal land that was declared to be a major disaster ( section 902 ) .

under this proposal , the secretary concerned may request a presidential declaration of a major disaster for wildfire on federal lands if certain requirements are satisfied .

title ix in the house - passed s. 2012 is nearly identical to title ix of h.r .

2647 .

while both the house and senate - passed versions of s. 2012 include water management and drought relief provisions , the content of those provisions are substantially different .

both title x , subtitle d ( §§10301-10331 ) of the senate - passed version of s. 2012 and division c , title i ( §§1001-1135 ) of the house - passed version of s. 2012 address issues related to management of specific federal water projects , as well as federal water activities at regional and national levels .

the senate - passed legislation focuses mostly on authorization of a few discrete federal projects and adds reporting requirements for the bureau of reclamation , a water resource agency in the department of the interior .

the house - passed version of s. 2012 incorporates the text of a larger drought relief bill ( h.r .

2898 ) , including language that may alter operations of the federal central valley project ( cvp ) in california .

some of the house provisions drawn from h.r .

2898 have been controversial and have been opposed by the administration .

title x , subtitle d of the senate - passed version of s. 2012 includes several provisions that would affect the authorization and management of federal water projects that are owned and operated by reclamation .

the projects are fontenelle reservoir ( located on the green river in wyoming , part of the colorado river storage project ) , the yakima project ( located on the yakima river in washington ) , and the klamath project ( located on the klamath river in oregon ) .

generally speaking , these sections would authorize study and expansion of fontenelle reservoir ( §§10301-10302 ) ; study and expansion of the yakima project ( §§10321-10325 ) ; and efforts aimed at reducing power costs for irrigators receiving water from the klamath project .

finally , it would also authorize water resource management changes that are more national in scope , such as a process for the u.s. army corps of engineers to study and implement a pilot program for "forecast - based" operations to enhance water supply benefits and flood control operations , and a process by which reclamation ( who operates in the 17 western states ) would complete an asset management report containing detailed project - level information on documented repair needs for its infrastructure .

division c , title i of the house - passed version of s. 2012 relates to the authorization and management of reclamation projects .

these provisions were not contained in the senate - passed version .

the house provisions were included in another bill ( h.r .

2898 , the western water and american food security act , which was passed by the house on july 17 , 2015 ) .

many of these provisions have previously been the subject of congressional debate on drought - related issues in the state of california .

the provisions included under division c , title i of house - passed s. 2012 draw in their entirety from h.r .

2898 and are organized under 11 subtitles .

several of these subtitles address the federal central valley project ( cvp ) in california ; others address drought and western water management more broadly .

subtitles a - c of house - passed s. 2012 ( title i - iii of h.r .

2898 ) address project operations and species protections for the cvp , with changes intended to alter cvp operations and water deliveries .

for example , the bill proposes to require the secretary of the interior to manage the cvp to maximize water deliveries without causing "imminent" or "significant" negative impacts on the long - term survival of specific species .

a controversial provision would set maximum negative flow rates ( a measurement of allowed pumping ) for california's old and middle rivers based on various inflow scenarios on the sacramento river .

these flow rates could only be overridden if the secretary of the interior determines that they create an "imminent negative impact" on the long - term survival of species such as the delta smelt .

opponents of these provisions , including the administration , have previously noted that they constitute a new standard for jeopardy ( compared to that currently used ) under the endangered species act ( esa , p.l .

93-205 ) , and that such changes would "invite litigation. .

supporters point to text that would direct the secretaries to implement the changes consistent with applicable laws ( eg , esa ) , and assert that water managers require more flexibility to address competing water demands during times of drought .

other water - related provisions in the house - passed version of the bill would address operations in california and other water management issues more broadly .

among other things , these provisions would: direct reclamation to complete certain surface water storage feasibility studies by specified deadlines , authorize reclamation to partner with local joint powers authorities to advance projects , and authorize construction of such projects pending a favorable feasibility finding and 100% nonfederal financing for construction ( subtitle d ) ; address certain water rights protections ( subtitle e ) ; expand the cvp service area , establish an oversight board for the central valley project restoration fund ( cvprf ) , and direct the secretary of the interior to enter into negotiations for the transfer of the new melones unit of the cvp to water users ( subtitle f ) ; create programs to expedite reclamation project permitting ( subtitle g ) and initiate a new process for reclamation project study and review ( subtitle h ) ; direct , upon the water contractors' request , accelerated repayment to the federal government of certain construction costs ( subtitle i ) ; provide for development of additional benefits at dam safety projects ( subtitle j ) ; and define and address treatment of water rights in connection with use of federal lands ( subtitle j ) .

among the key issues for congress posed by these provisions is how to address water supply shortages in general and management of federal water supply projects in particular during times of drought and increasing demand .

myriad laws , regulations , contracts , and other obligations affect federal water project management .

balancing these obligations while meeting growing demands for water for multiple purposes poses challenges for western water managers .

