the procedure for appointing a justice to the supreme court of the united states is provided for by the constitution in only a few words .

the "appointments clause" ( article ii , section 2 , clause 2 ) states that the president "shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint .. .

judges of the supreme court. .

the process of appointing justices has undergone changes over two centuries , but its most basic feature — the sharing of power between the president and senate — has remained unchanged .

to receive an appointment to the court , a candidate must first be nominated by the president and then confirmed by the senate .

this report provides information and analyses related to the debate and consideration of supreme court nominations by the full senate once nominations are reported by the judiciary committee .

once the full senate begins debate on a supreme court nomination , many senators typically will take part in the debate .

some , in their remarks , underscore the importance of the senate's "advice and consent" role , and the consequent responsibility to carefully determine the qualifications of a nominee before voting to confirm .

typically , each senator who takes the floor states his or her reasons for voting in favor of or against a nominee's confirmation .

the criteria used to evaluate a supreme court nominee are an individual matter for each senator .

in their floor remarks , some senators may cite a nominee's professional qualifications or character as the key criterion , others may stress the importance of the nominee's judicial philosophy or views on constitutional issues , while still others may indicate that they are influenced in varying degrees by all of these criteria .

after the judiciary committee has reported a nomination , it is placed on the executive calendar and assigned a calendar number by the executive clerk of the senate .

as with other nominations listed in the executive calendar , information about a supreme court nomination includes the name and office of the nominee ; the name of the previous holder of the office ; whether the committee reported the nomination favorably , unfavorably , or without recommendation ; and , if there is a printed report , the report number .

business on the executive calendar , which consists of treaties and nominations , is considered in executive session .

unless voted otherwise by the senate , executive sessions are open to the public .

floor debate on a supreme court nomination , in contemporary practice , invariably has been conducted in public session , open to the public and press and , since 1986 , to live nationwide television coverage .

after a senate vote to confirm a supreme court nomination , a senator who voted on the prevailing side may , under senate rule xxxi , move to reconsider the vote .

under the rule , only one such motion to reconsider is in order on each nomination , and the tabling of the motion prevents any subsequent attempt to reconsider .

the senate typically deals with a motion to reconsider a supreme court confirmation in one of two ways .

immediately following the vote to confirm , a senator may move to reconsider the vote , and the motion is promptly laid upon the table by unanimous consent .

alternatively , well before the vote to confirm , in a unanimous consent agreement , the senate may provide that , in the event of confirmation , the motion to reconsider be tabled .

the senate , it should be noted , has never adopted a motion to reconsider a supreme court confirmation vote .

sometimes , after a supreme court nomination has been reported , the senate may delay considering or voting on the nomination , in order to have the senate judiciary committee address new issues concerning the nominee or more fully examine issues that it addressed earlier .

opponents of a nomination may also seek such delay , through recommittal of the nomination to the committee , to defeat the nomination indirectly , by burying it in committee .

under the constitution , the senate alone votes on whether to confirm presidential nominations , the house of representatives having no formal involvement in the confirmation process .

if the senate votes to confirm the nomination , the secretary of the senate then attests to a resolution of confirmation and transmits it to the white house .

in turn , the president signs a document , called a commission , officially appointing the individual to the court .

next , the signed commission "is returned to the justice department for engraving the date of appointment ( determined by the actual day the president signs the commission ) and for the signature of the attorney general and the placing of the justice department seal. .

the department then arranges for expedited delivery of the commission document to the new appointee .

once the president has signed the commission , the incoming justice may be sworn into office .

in fact , however , the new justice actually takes two oaths of office — a judicial oath , as required by the judiciary act of 1789 , and a constitutional oath , which , as required by article vi of the constitution , is administered to members of congress and all executive and judicial officers .

until recently , the most common practice of new appointees had been to take their judicial oath in private , usually within the court , and , as desired by the presidents who nominated them , to take their constitutional oaths in nationally televised ceremonies at the white house .

in 2009 , however , in a departure from that practice , supreme court nominee sonia sotomayor , after senate confirmation , took both her constitutional and judicial oaths of office at the supreme court — with the constitutional oath administered in a private ceremony , and the judicial oath broadcast on television ( "marking the first live coverage of such a ceremony in the institution's history" ) .

this break from the practice of administering one of the oaths at the white house was attributed , in one report , to president obama "heeding concerns expressed by some justices — most recently john paul stevens — that a white house ceremony sends the inappropriate message that justices are beholden to their appointing president. .

following sonia sotomayor's example , president obama's second supreme court nominee , elena kagan , took both her constitutional and judicial oaths of office at the supreme court as well .

more recently , in contrast , neil gorsuch took the judicial oath of office at a public ceremony at the white house and the constitutional oath of office in a private ceremony in the justices' conference room at the supreme court building .

subsequently , the court itself , in its courtroom , also affords public recognition to the new justice's appointment , in a formal ceremony called an "investiture," at which the justice is sworn in yet again .

this invitation - only event , for which reserved press seating is made available , is attended by the court's other justices , by family , friends , and former associates of the new justice , and by outside dignitaries who may include the president and the attorney general .

the investiture typically occurs before the new justice publicly takes his or her courtroom seat alongside the other members of the court .

