on december 19 , 1995 , the lobbying disclosure act ( lda ) became law .

upon signing the lda into law , president william jefferson clinton endorsed lobbying as a basic american right , while also providing context as to why such a law is necessary for a transparent and open government .

lobbying has its rightful place in our system .

i believe every member here and every member who voted for this bill understands that and understands what a valuable role lobbying can play in the american system .

at one time or another , just about every american citizen has wanted to be a lobbyist before the congress on one issue or another .

but ordinary americans also understand that organized interests too often can hold too much sway in the halls of power .

they know that in washington an influence industry too often operates in secret and gets special privileges not available to most americans .

lobbyists in the back room secretly rewriting laws and looking for loopholes do not have a place in our democracy .

all the people should know what is done by people who affect public decisions .

commenting on the disparity between the right of "ordinary americans" to petition the government and the access that professional lobbyists can have to members of congress and executive branch decisionmakers , president clinton identified a central question: how can individual citizens' rights be balanced against the desire to regulate and potentially control the access of special interests to government ? .

questions of access have often been asked , perhaps most prominently in american history by james madison in the federalist papers .

madison called groups of individuals "who are united and actuated by some common impulse ... or interest," factions and recognized they had the right to form and advocate for their interests .

to address the potentially negative role of factions , or organized interests , madison believed that two solutions existed: ban the formation of groups or encourage the existence of multiple groups .

he advocated for the latter — allowing groups to proliferate so that no one group can dominate .

translated to lobbying , the madisonian ideal to provide all citizens the ability to contact government and express opinions has resulted in lobbying laws that focus on registration and disclosure — activities that do not impinge on the constitutional rights of citizens .

requiring the registration of lobbyists and the disclosure of lobbying activities , rather than banning lobbying , can ensure that all citizens continue to have access to government and a protected right to petition .

this report provides a retrospective and prospective analysis of the lda on its 20 th anniversary .

it begins with a historical summary of citizens' right to petition , the connection between the right to petition and lobbying , and the regulation of contact between citizens and government in the united states .

the report then examines contemporary issues that might affect lobbying and citizens' right to petition government .

finally , the report concludes with an analysis of potential options for congressional action should congress consider amending provisions of the lda .

the tension between the right to petition the government and the regulation of access to policymakers has played an essential role in how lobbying has been managed .

in an effort to balance these needs , congress has historically created boundaries to the right to petition that have required the registration of individuals who represent interest groups before congress and the executive branch .

this registration requires the public disclosure of certain lobbying activities .

additionally , congress has focused on ensuring that no single group has an undue advantage over other groups by creating rules that prohibit the acceptance of gifts by government officials from certain individuals ( eg , lobbyists ) and placing limits and restrictions on the post - congressional activities of members of congress and senior staff .

at various points in american history , there have been shifts in the way lobbying has been practiced and perceived .

in turn , these changes have led to new attempts to regulate lobbying and interest group influence .

changes in practice include how lobbyists conduct business and the types and scope of contacts with the legislative and executive branch .

changes in perception include shifts in societal norms about what lobbyists should or should not be doing .

regulation of lobbying has frequently been used as a political tool , especially in the early 20 th century .

senator robert byrd stated , progressive presidents like theodore roosevelt and woodrow wilson took advantage of ... popular images of lobbyists and business corruption as leverage for their reform legislation .

in seeking public support for lower tariff rates , president wilson trained his fire on the lobby with this sharply worded attack: "washington has seldom seen so numerous , so industrious or so insidious a body .

the newspapers are being filled with paid advertisements calculated to mislead the judgment of public men not only , but also the public opinion of the country itself. .

senator byrd's summary of the historic reasons for lobbying reform in many ways mirrors why change might take place in contemporary politics .

lobbying reform has historically focused on the registration of lobbyists and the disclosure of lobbying activities .

this focus , rather than on curtailing lobbying activities , has arguably allowed congress to avoid potential constitutional concerns over lobbying as a manifestation of citizens' first amendment right to petition the government .

historically , the focus has not been on radical lobbying reform .

instead , lobbying laws have focused on the registration of lobbyists and the disclosure of their activities .

the changes that have been enacted have arisen are often the result of what political scientist john kingdon described as the opening of a policy window .

put more plainly , change can occur when a crisis develops that allows governmental decisionmakers to seize the opportunity to make change .

for example , the foreign agent registration act ( fara ) was enacted in response to concerns about german interests being represented prior to world war ii , and the honest leadership and open government act ( hloga ) was enacted partly in response to the jack abramoff scandal .

even before the first lobbying law was enacted , congress made numerous attempts — some adopted , some not — to bring transparency to lobbying .

for example , in 1876 , after a bill reported by the house judiciary committee was only "argued at the request of an important corporation," the house required lobbyists to register with the clerk of the house .

this requirement , however , was only effective for the 44 th congress ( 1875-1877 ) .

since the 1930s , four key laws have been enacted to regulate , but not ban , lobbyist contact with the federal government .

through an examination of these laws , it becomes clear that each was precipitated by changes in the practice of lobbying or political perception of lobbyists and their activities .

the four primary lobbying laws are the foreign agent registration act ( fara ) of 1938 ; the regulation of lobbying act ( rla ) of 1946 ; the lobbying disclosure act ( lda ) of 1995 ; and the honest leadership and open government act ( hloga ) of 2007 .

when the lda was enacted , it required the clerk of the house and the secretary of the senate to make registration and disclosure statements available to the public .

since at least 1999 , that data has been available online .

using this data , a picture of the lobbying landscape emerges .

the lda data provides a window into the number of newly registered lobbyists and the number of disclosure statements filed .

while the data can provide information on these indicators of lobbying behavior , it does not provide a complete picture of the number of lobbyists or lobbying activity .

this section provides insight into the historic and current landscape of lobbying through the analysis of data on registration and disclosure under the lda ( pre - 2007 ) and under the hloga amendments ( 2008-present ) .

lda data are used to evaluate the number of registration and disclosures between 1999 ( the first year that data is available ) and 2007 .

hloga data are then used to consider the impact of the 2007 amendments to lda and how registration and disclosure has changed over time .

an examination of contemporary lobbying reveals that scholars , think tanks , and legislators are still thinking about registration and disclosure , often within the context of three current trends .

these are shadow lobbying , grassroots lobbying , and the revolving door .

the practice and perception of lobbying continues to evolve .

new technologies , including social media , have provided lobbyists with new ways to contact decisionmakers and were not contemplated when the hloga was enacted in 2007 .

should a desire for change occur , congress may wish to consider the appropriate balance between desired restrictions and the protection of the first amendment's right to petition .

current laws focus on the registration of lobbyists , the disclosure of lobbying activities , and regulating how federal officials and employees use the revolving door .

additionally , lobbying law provides specific penalties for violation of the lda and gives administrative authority to the clerk of the house and the secretary of the senate and enforcement authority to the department of justice ( doj ) .

should congress want to consider amending the current lobbying laws to address the revolving door , shadow lobbying , or grassroots lobbying , several options could exist .

these might include amending the definition of lobbying , changing disclosure thresholds for registered lobbyists , adjusting resources , and maintaining current lobbying standards .

additionally , congress could address the revolving door and shadow lobbying through the administration of the lda .

on december 19 , 2015 , the lobbying disclosure act celebrates its 20 th anniversary .

initially enacted to require lobbyists to register and disclose their activities and expenses to congress , the lda has been modified over its 20 years to include more frequent disclosure of lobbying activities and the reporting of lobbyists' campaign contributions .

coupled with fara , the lobbying registration and disclosure regime is designed to protect citizens' right to petition the government , while requiring that those activities be conducted in a transparent manner .

an analysis of the four key lobbying laws enacted since 1946 and scholarly work on lobbying raised three issues that have the potential to cause shifts in lobbying practices and perception: shadow lobbying , grassroots lobbying , and the revolving door .

should congress wish to address these issues , several options exist .

specific options include changing the definition of lobbying by amending time thresholds , compensation requirements , or contact thresholds ; altering the administration of the lda by providing additional monetary or staff resources , combining the administration of fara and lda either under the department of justice , the clerk of the house and secretary of the senate , or a new entity ; or instituting user fees or maintaining the current lobbying standards .

should congress decide to make changes to the lda , it will likely be the result of new changes in the practice or perception of lobbying .

whether future amendments to lda might occur is not known .

if history is a guide , however , a shift in the practice or perception of lobbying is likely to occur at some point in the future .

at that time , congress might reevaluate how lobbying registration and disclosure is managed and implemented .

signed by president obama on january 21 , 2009 , the order stated: section 1 .

ethics pledge .

every appointee in every executive agency appointed on or after january 20 , 2009 , shall sign , and upon signing shall be contractually committed to , the following pledge upon becoming an appointee: "as a condition , and in consideration , of my employment in the united states government in a position invested with the public trust , i commit myself to the following obligations , which i understand are binding on me and are enforceable under law: 1 .

lobbyist gift ban .

i will not accept gifts from registered lobbyists or lobbying organizations for the duration of my service as an appointee .

2 .

revolving door ban — all appointees entering government .

i will not for a period of 2 years from the date of my appointment participate in any particular matter involving specific parties that is directly and substantially related to my former employer or former clients , including regulations and contracts .

3 .

revolving door ban — lobbyists entering government .

if i was a registered lobbyist within the 2 years before the date of my appointment , in addition to abiding by the limitations of paragraph 2 , i will not for a period of 2 years after the date of my appointment: ( a ) participate in any particular matter on which i lobbied within the 2 years before the date of my appointment ; ( b ) participate in the specific issue area in which that particular matter falls ; or ( c ) seek or accept employment with any executive agency that i lobbied within the 2 years before the date of my appointment .

4 .

revolving door ban — appointees leaving government .

if , upon my departure from the government , i am covered by the post - employment restrictions on communicating with employees of my former executive agency set forth in section 207 ( c ) of title 18 , united states code , i agree that i will abide by those restrictions for a period of 2 years following the end of my appointment .

5 .

revolving door ban — appointees leaving government to lobby .

in addition to abiding by the limitations of paragraph 4 , i also agree , upon leaving government service , not to lobby any covered executive branch official or non - career senior executive service appointee for the remainder of the administration .

6 .

employment qualification commitment .

i agree that any hiring or other employment decisions i make will be based on the candidate's qualifications , competence , and experience. .

