t his report is part of a suite of reports that discuss appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fy2016 .

it specifically discusses appropriations for the components of dhs included in the second title of the homeland security appropriations bill — customs and border protection ( cbp ) , immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , and the u.s. secret service ( usss ) .

collectively , congress has labeled these components in recent years as "security , enforcement , and investigations. .

the report provides an overview of the administration's fy2016 request for security , enforcement , and investigations , the appropriations proposed by congress in response , and those enacted thus far .

rather than limiting the scope of its review to the second title , the report includes information on provisions throughout the proposed bill and report that directly affect these functions .

the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to dhs appropriations , with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the reports do not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor do they systematically follow other legislation related to the authorization or amending of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of specialized budgetary concepts .

the appendix to crs report r44053 , department of homeland security appropriations: fy2016 explains several of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act ( p.l .

112-25 ) .

a more complete discussion of those terms and the appropriations process in general can be found in crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] , and the government accountability office's a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process .

note on data and citations except in summary discussions and when discussing total amounts for the bill as a whole , all amounts contained in the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations represent budget authority and are rounded to the nearest million .

however , for precision in percentages and totals , all calculations were performed using unrounded data .

data used in this report for fy2015 amounts are derived from the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

114-4 ) and the explanatory statement that accompanied h.r .

240 as printed in the congressional record of january 13 , 2015 , pp .

h275-h322 .

contextual information on the fy2016 request is generally from the budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2016 , the fy2016 dhs congressional budget justifications , and the fy2016 dhs budget in brief .

however , most data used in crs analyses in reports on dhs appropriations is drawn from congressional documentation to ensure consistent scoring whenever possible .

information on the fy2016 budget request and senate - reported recommended funding levels is from s. 1619 and s.rept .

114-68 .

information on the house - reported recommended funding levels is from h.r .

3128 and h.rept .

114-215 .

data for fy2016 are derived from p.l .

114-113 , the omnibus appropriations act , 2016 — division f of which is the homeland security appropriations act , 2016 — and the accompanying explanatory statement published in books ii and iii of the congressional record for december 17 , 2015 .

generally , the homeland security appropriations bill includes all annual appropriations provided for dhs , allocating resources to every departmental component .

discretionary appropriations provide roughly two - thirds to three - fourths of the annual funding for dhs operations , depending how one accounts for disaster relief spending and funding for overseas contingency operations .

the remainder of the budget is a mix of fee revenues , trust funds , and mandatory spending .

appropriations measures for dhs typically have been organized into five titles .

the first four are thematic groupings of components: departmental management and operations ; security , enforcement , and investigations ; protection , preparedness , response , and recovery ; and research and development , training , and services .

a fifth title contains general provisions , the impact of which may reach across the entire department , impact multiple components , or focus on a single activity .

the following pie chart presents a visual comparison of the share of annual appropriations requested for the components funded in each of the first four titles , highlighting the components discussed in this report .

as noted above , the security , enforcement , and investigations title ( title ii ) of the dhs appropriations bill includes over three - quarters of the net discretionary budget authority provided in the legislation , and provides funding for many of dhs's largest operational components: cbp , ice , tsa , uscg , and usss .

some provisions in title v , general provisions , may affect the total funding provided for some of these components .

the administration requested $32,481 million in fy2016 net discretionary budget authority for components included in this title , as part of a total budget for these components of $39,431 million for fy2016 .

the appropriations request was $807 million ( 2.5% ) more than was provided for fy2015 .

senate - reported s. 1619 would have provided the components included in this title $32,484 million in net discretionary budget authority , $3 million ( 0.01% ) more than requested , and $810 million ( 2.6% ) more than was provided in fy2015 .

house - reported h.r .

3128 would have provided the components included in this title $32,182 million in net discretionary budget authority , $299 million ( 0.9% ) less than requested , and $508 million ( 1.6% ) more than was provided in fy2015 .

senate - reported s. 1619 also included $160 million in overseas contingency operations funding for the coast guard .

this amount , originally requested by the administration through the department of defense , is covered by an adjustment under the budget control act ( bca ) , and does not add to the total adjusted net discretionary budget authority in the bill .

house - reported h.r .

3128 did not include that funding , although house - passed h.r .

2685 , the department of defense appropriations act , 2016 , did , as well as language to authorize transfer of that funding to the coast guard .

on december 18 , 2015 , the president signed into law p.l .

114-113 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , division f of which was the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2016 .

the act included $33,062 million for these components in fy2016 , $1,388 million ( 4.4% ) more that was provided for fy2015 , and $581 million ( 1.8% ) more than was requested .

the act included the $160 million in overseas contingency funding for the coast guard as part of an appropriation to dhs , rather than as a transfer from the department of defense .

table 1 lists the enacted funding level for the individual components funded under security , enforcement , and investigations for fy2015 , as well as the amounts requested for these accounts for fy2016 by the administration , proposed by the senate and house appropriations committees , and provided by the enacted annual appropriation for fy2016 .

the table includes information on funding under title ii as well as other provisions in the bill .

cbp is responsible for security at and between ports of entry ( poe ) along the border , with a dual mission of preventing the entry of terrorists and instruments of terrorism , while also facilitating the flow of legitimate travel and trade into and out of the united states .

cbp officers inspect people ( immigration enforcement ) and goods ( customs enforcement ) at poes to determine if they are authorized to enter the united states .

cbp officers and u.s. border patrol ( usbp ) agents enforce more than 400 laws and regulations at the border to prevent illegal entries .

cbp's major programs include border security inspections and trade facilitation , which encompasses risk - based targeting and the inspection of travelers and goods at poes ; border security and control between ports of entry , which includes the border patrol ; air and marine interdiction ; automation modernization , which includes customs and immigration information technology systems ; border security fencing , infrastructure , and technology ( bsfit ) ; facilities management ; and a number of immigration and customs user fee accounts .

see table 1 for account - level detail for all of the agencies in title ii , and table 2 for subaccount - level detail for cbp appropriations and funding for fy2015-fy2016 .

ice focuses on enforcement of immigration and customs laws within the united states .

ice has two main components: homeland security investigations ( hsi ) and enforcement and removal operations ( ero ) .

hsi is responsible for disrupting and dismantling criminal organizations ( many of which are transnational ) engaged in activities including terrorist financing and money laundering , intellectual property theft , human trafficking , cybercrime , child exploitation , and drug trafficking .

hsi enforces export laws and enforces trade agreement noncompliance , and is responsible for investigating and enforcing violations of the immigration laws ( eg , alien smuggling , hiring unauthorized alien workers ) .

ero is the government agency responsible for locating , detaining if appropriate , and removing foreign nationals who have overstayed their visas , entered illegally , or have become deportable .

tsa , created in 2001 by the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa , p.l .

107-71 ) , is charged with protecting air , land , marine , and rail transportation systems within the united states to ensure the freedom of movement for people and goods .

in 2002 , tsa was transferred from the department of transportation to dhs with the passage of the homeland security act ( p.l .

107-296 ) .

tsa's responsibilities include protecting the aviation system against terrorist threats , sabotage , and certain other criminal acts through the deployment of passenger and baggage screeners ; detection systems for explosives , weapons , and other threats ; and other security technologies .

tsa also has certain responsibilities for marine and land modes of transportation including assessing the risk of terrorist attacks to all non - aviation transportation assets , including seaports ; issuing regulations to improve security ; and enforcing these regulations to ensure the protection of these transportation systems .

tsa is further charged with serving as the primary liaison for transportation security to the law enforcement and intelligence communities .

the tsa budget is one of the most complex components of the dhs appropriations bill .

net direct discretionary appropriations represent only a portion of the budgetary resources it has available .

an airline security fee collection offsets a portion of aviation security costs , including $250 million dedicated to capital investments in screening technology .

other fees offset the costs of transportation threat assessment and credentialing .

table 4 presents a breakdown of tsa's total additional budgetary resources requested from all non - appropriated sources and those provided through direct appropriations , as accounted for in the dhs budget justifications .

due to differences between omb and cbo methodologies and issues related to authorization of fee increases , these amounts are not completely congruent with other amounts presented in committee documents or this report .

the coast guard is the lead federal agency for the maritime component of homeland security .

as such , it is the lead agency responsible for the security of u.s. ports , coastal and inland waterways , and territorial waters .

the coast guard also performs missions that are not related to homeland security , such as maritime search and rescue , marine environmental protection , fisheries enforcement , and aids to navigation .

the u.s. secret service ( usss ) has two concurrent missions — criminal investigations and protection of certain people , places , and events .

criminal investigation activities encompass financial crimes , identity theft , counterfeiting , computer fraud , and computer - based attacks on the nation's financial , banking , and telecommunications infrastructure , among other areas .

the protection mission entails protecting current and former presidents , vice presidents , their spouses and minor children , as well as distinguished foreign visitors to the united states , and certain other individuals .

the usss also secures the white house , vice president's residence , and foreign missions in the district of columbia , and coordinates security for national special security events .

the fy2016 appropriations request for the secret service was $1,939 million , a net increase of $273 million ( 16.4% ) above the fy2015 enacted level .

this increase was largely driven by a $300 million increase in funding designated for the usss protection mission , including $117 million more for protection of persons and facilities , and $178 million more to ramp up operations in preparation for protection of presidential candidates and nominees .

part of the basis for this increase was the report of the usss protective mission panel , which was established in october 2014 to review the security of the white house complex after several high - profile incidents .

the response to that report's findings through appropriations legislation is discussed below .

senate - reported s. 1619 included $1,924 million for the usss , $15 million ( 0.8% ) below the requested level , but $258 million ( 15.5% ) above the amount appropriated in fy2015 .

the senate appropriations committee recommended $37 million ( 3.6% ) less than requested for protection of persons and facilities , but still proposed funding that was $80 million ( 8.9% ) higher than fy2015 .

the senate appropriations committee recommended fully funding the request for protection of presidential candidates and nominees .

house - reported h.r .

3128 included $1,906 million for the usss , $33 million ( 1.7% ) below the requested level , but $240 million ( 14.4% ) above the amount appropriated in fy2015 .

the house appropriations committee recommended $33 million ( 3.2% ) less than requested for protection of persons and facilities , slightly more than the senate appropriations committee , and $84 million ( 9.4% ) higher than fy2015 .

like the senate appropriations committee , the house appropriations committee recommended fully funding the request for protection of presidential candidates and nominees .

the omnibus included almost $1,934 million for the usss , almost $6 million ( 0.3% ) below the requested level and $268 million ( 16.1% ) above the fy2015 enacted level .

the explanatory statement notes that as a result of a history of hiring delays and new information provided by usss , a $49 million reduction is made in the salaries and expanses appropriation "to fund a realistic and achievable number of fte. .

the usss protective mission panel was established in october 2014 to make recommendations on upgrading security at the white house complex .

the executive summary to the report , released in december 2014 , included a series of recommendations that fell within three general areas: training and personnel ; perimeter security , technology , and operations ; and leadership .

however , not all of the panel's recommendations were released publicly — several in the "perimeter security , technology and operations" category were classified .

an additional $25 million , representing initial funding for some of the panel's recommendations , was included in the fy2015 dhs appropriations act ( p.l .

114-4 ) , including funding to upgrade security infrastructure at the white house complex and vice president's residence .

$87 million in additional investments were proposed by the administration for fy2016 , including $66 million in salaries and expenses and $21 million in acquisition funding to support the training facility of the usss — the james j. rowley training center .

the request for acquisition funds included $8 million for a scale mock - up of the white house grounds , $8 million to renovate or replace the existing canine training facility , and $5 million to renovate shooting ranges and tactical training areas .

while the senate appropriations committee also recommended providing the funding level requested for rowley training center improvements , in its report it described the cost estimates for the canine training facility and white house mock - up as "inaccurate," and recommended $13 million for construction of a new canine training facility , and less than $1 million for a feasibility study and design plan for the white house mock - up .

full funding was recommended for the range and tactical area renovations , and the remainder of the funding provided — slightly more than $2 million — was to be applied to deferred maintenance needs at the training center .

the house appropriations committee recommended $29 million in facilities funding , $3 million more than requested .

like the senate appropriations committee , it proposed a different allocation of the budget authority between projects than had been requested .

like the senate appropriations committee , the house appropriations committee recommended $13 million for the new canine facility construction , full funding for ranges and tactical training area upgrades , and funding to address backlogged maintenance .

almost $3 million was recommended for the white house mock - up , but the house - reported bill withholds over $2 million of those funds from obligation until a feasibility study and design plan are completed and approved by the national capital planning commission .

the house committee also required a detailed obligation plan for the facilities funding before it could be used .

the explanatory statement of the managers accompanying the omnibus noted that the bill included almost $85 million for enhancements associated with the findings of the protective mission panel .

it included over $24 million for facilities , and $11 million for the next generation of presidential limousine .

the explanatory statement also noted that $750,000 was provided "to complete a feasibility study and design plan for the proposed white house training facility," and indicate that further funding would only be considered after the full cost estimate for the project was completed by the usss and reviewed by a third party .

no specific direction was provided on canine training facilities or firing ranges in the explanatory statement .

