the united states constitution vests congress with broad authority to discipline its members .

article i , section 5 , clause 2 , provides congress with the power to "...determine the rules of its proceedings , punish its members for disorderly behaviour , and , with the concurrence of two thirds , expel a member. .

initially , interpretation and implementation of this clause was reconstituted on a case - by - case basis .

when the need arose , both the house of representatives and the senate conducted investigations and issued punishments on an ad - hoc basis .

as a result , institutional self - discipline was generally inconsistent and sporadic , with neither chamber having systematic definitions of disorderly behavior or codes of conduct to guide disciplinary action .

in the federalist papers , james madison discussed concerns over self - discipline .

"no man is allowed to be a judge in his own cause , because his interest would certainly bias his judgment , and , not improbably , corrupt his integrity .

with equal , nay with greater reason , a body of men are unfit to be both judges and parties at the same time...." while madison addressed the potential for conflicts of interest to be raised in a legislative environment , the lesson can also be applied to the judgment of ethics - related issues and the trust necessary for effective government .

prior to the creation of the ethics committees in the 1960s , congress historically was hesitant to use its power to conduct ethics investigations — except for the most grievous offenses .

instead , congress traditionally relied on "either criminal prosecution or voter rejection at the polls to punish misbehavior by members. .

overall , this was seen as an effective strategy .

until 1957 , when congress adopted the first government - wide code of ethics for government service , the lack of a formal ethics process resulted in congress following general society's norms of decency and applying sanctions in only the most egregious cases .

former senate historian richard baker observed , "[f]or nearly two centuries , a simple and informal code of behavior existed .

prevailing norms of general decency served as the chief determinants of proper legislative conduct. .

as a result , congress chose "to deal , on a case - by - case basis , only with the most obvious acts of wrongdoing , those clearly 'inconsistent with the trust and duty of a member.' .

additionally , there were no ethics cases brought to the floor between the 69 th congress ( 1925-1927 ) and the 89 th congress ( 1965-1966 ) .

this caused some scholars and interest groups to call for reform of the ethics enforcement process .

this led to the creation of the house committee on standards of official conduct ( now the committee on ethics ) in 1967 .

the investigation of disciplinary cases — and the recommendation of sanctions , if necessary — have since been under the committee's exclusive jurisdiction .

in the majority of instances , once the ethics committee has reported a sanction recommendation , it has been ultimately adopted by the house in that form .

in some circumstances , however , floor amendments or legislative alternatives have been offered to the committee's recommendation — either to increase or lessen the sanction .

the house , however , has never failed to adopt a sanction — either the recommended action or an alternative — following a committee recommendation .

since 1967 , the committee has taken action to recommend that the house sanction a member 16 times .

of these 16 cases , seven ( 43% ) have included attempts to alter the sanction recommendation , and three ( 42% of the seven cases and 18% of all cases ) have been successful .

while not a majority of cases , the offering ( and sometimes adoption ) of an alternate sanction illustrates that altering a sanction recommendation is possible .

between 1789 and 1957 , the house dealt with relatively few ethics cases .

as standards of acceptable behavior has shifted from one era to the next , house ethics enforcement has evolved .

for example , historical ethics cases have included charges of disorderly behavior for spitting or hitting on the house floor , insulting the speaker of the house , and taking up arms against the united states .

because a standing ethics committee did not exist in the house until 1967 , the house investigated these cases by referring them to existing standing committees , creating ad - hoc investigatory committees , or dealing with the case directly on the house floor .

historically , a resolution recommending expulsion , censure , or reprimand presents a question of privilege .

since the establishment of the committee on standards of official conduct , now the committee on ethics , it has been the practice of the house to take action on resolutions sanctioning members or officers upon the recommendation of the committee .

once the committee has completed any investigation , it may choose to report a recommendation to the house in the form of a house resolution .

under house rule xiii , clause 5 ( a ) ( 5 ) , the ethics committee has leave to report at any time on resolutions recommending action by the house relating to official conduct .

clause 5 ( b ) further provides that such a report may be called up for consideration in the house as a privileged question by direction of the committee .

as a privileged question , the resolution may be considered immediately , not subject to the layover requirement in rule xiii , clause 4 .

when the resolution is scheduled for consideration , a member from the committee designated as manager ( usually the chair of the committee ) is recognized by the speaker to call it up for consideration .

the resolution is then considered in the house under the "hour rule. .

pursuant to the hour rule , the manager is recognized for a period of one hour .

the manager then generally yields time from this hour to other members for the "purpose of debate only. .

typically , the manager will divide the time equally — giving him - or herself control of one - third , the committee's ranking minority member control of one - third , and the individual accused of the ethics violation control of one - third .

for example , during debate over the first of three koreagate investigations , the committee on standards of official conduct chair , representative john flynt , began the debate by announcing how his time would be divided .

mr. speaker , for purposes of debate only , i yield 20 minutes to the gentleman from south carolina ( mr. spence ) .

for purposes of debate only , i yield 20 minutes to the gentleman from california ( mr. charles h. wilson ) .

i reserve 20 minutes for myself , and i now yield myself 6 of those minutes .

debate on the resolution containing the committee sanction recommendation then proceeds in a manner similar to other debate in the house .

unless the manager were to yield time to another member for the purposes of offering an amendment , those interested in altering the sanction recommendation may not do so at this time .

the manager of the debate has the right to close debate , not the member who is the subject of the resolution , and in cases where the time has been divided three ways , the presiding officer has announced that the order of closing speeches would be the minority manager , the subject of the resolution , and then the manager of the resolution .

once debate has concluded , a motion for the previous question is in order .

if this motion is agreed to , debate on the resolution is ended allowing a vote on the committee's sanction recommendation to take place .

before the house votes on the resolution embodying the committee's recommendations , however , a motion to recommit is in order .

under rule xix , clause 2 , preference is given to a member from the minority who is opposed to the resolution to offer the motion .

because the motion may include amendatory instructions , it represents an opportunity to make changes in the sanctions recommended by the committee .

only one motion to recommit is in order .

rule xix allows for 10 minutes of debate on the motion to recommit , but in most cases there is no further debate .

amendatory instructions are in the form of an instruction that the committee report the resolution back to the house forthwith with the amendatory language incorporated .

if the motion is agreed to , the resolution does not actually leave the floor , and the house would immediately have the resolution and amendment before it with the opportunity to vote to adopt the amendment .

if the house then agrees to the amendatory language , it supplants the original committee - recommended sanctions , and the final vote will be on the resolution as amended .

if the resolution is agreed to , the house takes the appropriate action based on the discipline imposed by the resolution .

for example , in the event of a reprimand , the vote total is recorded in the journal .

if a member is censured , the censure resolution is read while the member stands in the "well" of the house .

finally , if a member is expelled , the expulsion is reported by the clerk of the house to the governor of the expelled member's state .

for example , following an expulsion of a member in 1980 , the house ordered the clerk to "notify the governor of the commonwealth of pennsylvania of the action of the house. .

once the ethics committee has reported a sanction recommendation , several options exist to potentially change the recommendation on the house floor .

these options include offering a motion to recommit , an amendment to the committee's sanction resolution , and a separate resolution with the alternative desired punishment .

this section provides an explanation and historical application of these options , followed by a discussion of the potential advantages and disadvantages of each .

an historical analysis of attempts to alter ethics committee sanction recommendations provides three main options for adjusting disciplinary decisions in the house of representatives: the motion to recommit , amending ethics committee sanction resolutions , and the introduction of a separate resolution with an alternate sanction .

since the committee's creation in 1967 , only 16 ethics cases have been brought to the house floor .

of these cases , attempts to alter the sanction recommendation have been made in seven and have been successful in three .

the history of altering sanction recommendations shows that while altering a sanction recommendation is possible , it can be a difficult process .

ultimately it is the house that must render a decision regarding whether a member should be disciplined .

the process through which the ethics committee investigates and reports disciplinary recommendations and how the floor considers recommended sanctions can illustrate the contextual differences between ethics and legislative products from other committees .

these include: the unique relationship between the house and the ethics committee , the perceived benefits of ethics committee service , cooperation between the ethics committee and other house committees , and the way sanction recommendations are considered by the house .

first , the relationship between the house of representatives and the ethics committee is unique .

the ethics committee does not have a traditionally defined policy jurisdiction — although it does have jurisdiction over the house code of conduct and other ethics matters .

instead , it is charged with investigating alleged ethics violations , and recommending sanctions when appropriate .

according to a number of scholars , these responsibilities have caused some members to not want to serve on the committee .

they posit that ethics committee service often does not provide members with "political advantages" normally associated with casework and committee service .

as a consequence , recruitment of members from either the majority or minority party to serve on the ethics committee can be difficult .

this stands in contrast to policy committees , where studies suggest that members often want to serve because they are interested in a particular area of policy or believe service will further their reelection chances .

second , the lack of perceived political benefits associated with ethics committee service is just one factor that sets the committee apart from policy committees .

the ethics committee is also unique because its jurisdiction is completely internal ; it only has jurisdiction over the actions and activities of currently serving members of congress , officers , and staff .

for example , should a member who is under investigation lose reelection or resign , the committee's jurisdiction ends ( although it is important to note that the then - former member's legal issues might not be resolved by a failure to be reelected or retirement ) .

third , although membership on committees generally provides an opportunity for members to pursue their personal or policy goals , this is not the case for the ethics committee .

because service on the ethics committee is often unrequested or even unwanted , members often do not build true seniority and expertise regarding ethics related issues .

furthermore , because of the committee's relatively narrow jurisdiction , members are rarely afforded the kinds of opportunities to cooperate with other committees to develop policies , as typically comes with service on other policy - related legislative committees .

finally , as was discussed above under " regular process for committee sanction recommendations ," the way that sanction recommendations are considered in the house reflects a process designed to promote bipartisan independence by insulating the work of the committee from the majority leadership - controlled institutional mechanisms that generally are used to control which measures are brought to the floor of the house for consideration and when .

instead of being considered under a special rule or suspension of the rules , sanction recommendations are considered as privileged matters under the "hour rule. .

as a consequence , the majority leadership does not need to play a direct role in raising or considering sanctions resolutions .

