many u.s. officials and members of congress consider poland to be a key u.s. ally and one of the strongest u.s. partners in europe .

according to the u.s. state department , areas of close bilateral cooperation include "issues such as nato capabilities , democratization , counterterrorism , nonproliferation , missile defense , human rights , economic growth and innovation , energy security , and regional cooperation in central and eastern europe. .

the congressional caucus on poland is a bipartisan group of members of congress who seek to maintain and strengthen the u.s. - poland relationship and engage in issues of mutual interest to both countries .

of the central european and baltic countries that have joined the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) and the european union ( eu ) , poland is by far the most populous country , the largest economy , and the most significant military actor .

in 1999 , with strong backing from the united states and members of congress , poland was among the first group of formerly communist countries to join nato .

in 2004 , again with strong support from the united states and members of congress , it was among a group of eight formerly communist countries to join the european union .

many analysts assert that more so than many other european countries , poland continues to look to the united states for foreign policy leadership .

the activities of the u.s. congress frequently involve issues that have a european dimension , including economic , security , and diplomatic issues .

many members of congress have long supported a close transatlantic relationship and have seen the eu , nato , and the idea of a europe "whole and free" as supporting and advancing u.s. interests .

members of congress may have an interest in considering the dimensions and dynamics of current issues in u.s. - european or u.s. - polish relations , or with regard to nato , in the course of oversight or legislative activities , or in the context of direct interactions with polish and other european legislators and officials .

poland is also frequently of interest to congress because some members have large ethnic polish constituencies .

in particular , developments related to the conflict in eastern ukraine and resurgent concerns about russia , as well as attendant implications for u.s. policy and nato , are likely to have continuing relevance during the 114 th congress .

as discussed in more detail below , a variety of factors combine to make poland a central interlocutor and partner for the united states in examining and responding to these challenges .

since poland's 2015 parliamentary election , members of congress have expressed concerns about trends in the country's governance , details of which are also discussed below .

since the end of the cold war , poland and the united states have had close relations .

the united states strongly supported poland's accession to nato in 1999 .

warsaw has been an ally in global counterterrorism efforts and contributed large deployments of troops to both the u.s. - led coalition in iraq and the nato - led mission in afghanistan .

in response to russia's aggressive actions in ukraine , president obama chose to announce his administration's european reassurance initiative ( eri ) during his visit to warsaw in june 2014 .

according to many observers , the shared interests that characterize the u.s. - poland relationship are underpinned to a large extent by a foundation of broadly shared values .

poland has been a leading u.s. partner , for example , in international democracy promotion efforts , and has particularly sought to offer its experience of post - communist transition in assisting democratic reform efforts in europe's eastern neighborhood .

links between the united states and poland are further anchored by considerable cultural ties , as evidenced by the approximately 9.6 million americans of polish heritage .

while relations between poland and the united states are largely positive , in recent years some poles have expressed disappointment about unfulfilled expectations for significantly increased military assistance and a changed policy on short - term visas for polish citizens .

some polish elites have voiced criticisms over the returns from their alliance with the united states .

in addition to efforts by members of congress , the u.s. administration has indicated that it has expressed its concerns over the recent developments related to the rule of law in poland to its counterparts in warsaw .

historically , poland has had a difficult relationship with russia .

despite a short - lived thaw in the relationship before and after the 2010 crash of the polish presidential airplane , polish suspicions about the nature of putin's russia persist , and warsaw tends to view russia as a potential threat to poland and its neighbors .

recent events in ukraine have sharpened long - standing polish concerns about russia's intentions and put security at the top of poland's national agenda .

poland's view of russia remains affected by the experience of soviet invasion during world war two and domination during the communist era , although more recent events such as the 2006 russian - german agreement to construct the nord stream gas pipeline through the baltic sea , bypassing the baltic states and poland , have also strained relations .

the russian government , in turn , was angered by the polish government's offer to host u.s. missile defense facilities during the bush administration .

warsaw's promotion of the eu's eastern partnership initiative to deepen ties with georgia , ukraine , belarus , moldova , armenia , and azerbaijan has also long annoyed officials in moscow , who view the region as lying within russia's traditional sphere of influence .

the former tusk government led calls for a robust response to russia's actions in ukraine , including through sanctions and an increased nato military presence in central and eastern europe .

public opinion backed this approach to a large extent: for example , in the german marshall fund of the united states' transatlantic trends 2014 survey , 77% of poles approved of stronger economic sanctions against russia .

the survey was conducted in june 2014 , before the shooting down of malaysian airlines flight 17 over eastern ukraine galvanized the european union to impose wider sectoral sanctions .

the government of prime minister kopacz sought to revise policy on russia and ukraine toward a relatively gentler approach .

in october 2014 , kopacz told poland's parliament she was concerned about "an isolation of poland" due to "unrealistic goals" for the ukraine conflict , adding , "[t]he goal of my government will be a pragmatic policy toward what's going on in ukraine. .

nevertheless , analysts observe that the currents of poland's russia policy run deeper than individual leaders .

while the kopacz government slightly softened poland's overall approach , poland continued to back robust sanctions and played a major role in coordinating eu and nato policy in response to russia's actions .

analysts expect that the law and justice government is likely to maintain a comparatively harder line in its approach to russia and to entrench poland's position as one of the eu's most hawkish countries with regard to russia policy .

in 2013 , trade between poland and russia totaled nearly $38 billion , and more than 5% of polish exports were sold to russia .

poland has been one of the countries most affected by russian retaliatory sanctions .

as a result of warsaw's lead role in pushing for eu measures against russia , moscow targeted poland even before the eu's tougher sanctions were adopted in july 2014 by banning the import of certain polish fruits and vegetables , citing alleged health and sanitary reasons .

in august , russia retaliated against western sanctions by banning the import of produce , meat , and dairy products from the eu and united states ( as well as canada , australia , and norway ) .

in recent years , polish exports of fruit and vegetables to russia have been valued at $1 billion to $2 billion annually .

one area of particular relevance to poland's security is kaliningrad , a 5,800-square - mile russian exclave wedged between poland and lithuania ( see table 1 ) .

kaliningrad has a heavy russian military presence , including the baltic sea fleet and two airbases .

in addition , russia has reportedly stationed , or at least threatened to station , iskander short - range nuclear missiles there .

over half of the natural gas and most of the oil consumed in poland comes from russia .

because poland continues to rely on coal for approximately 90% of its electricity generation , however , russian gas accounts for less than 10% of poland's primary energy supply .

overall , as the largest coal producer in the eu , poland relies on energy imports for 31% of its needs , well below the eu average of 53% .

successive governments have made a priority of efforts to diversify its energy sources to both reduce gas dependence on russia and increase the use of cleaner fuels that produce fewer co2 emissions .

poland has also been taking steps such as expanding pipeline interconnectivity with its neighbors and developing the ability to reverse the flow of gas in the polish section of the yamal pipeline , which runs from russia to germany via belarus and poland , in order to import natural gas from the west in the case of a crisis such as a cut - off of russian gas .

the construction of a liquefied natural gas terminal on the baltic sea coast near the german border ( swinoujscie ) has suffered a series of delays , but the facility was declared operational in october 2015 and received its first shipment from qatar in december 2015 .

the facility is expected to begin receiving commercial deliveries in may 2016 and reach full capacity by 2018 .

the polish government has also begun an initiative to introduce nuclear power to the country's energy mix with the construction of the country's first nuclear plant .

these plans have encountered challenges and setbacks , with the first unit possibly operational in 2025 and full completion by 2035 .

the polish government has been a leading advocate for a stronger eu energy policy that reduces collective dependence on russia .

in april 2014 , then - prime minister tusk suggested the formation of an eu "energy union" in which a single european agency would purchase natural gas for all 28 members , rather than the current system of bilateral negotiations and contracts .

such an energy union would also include "solidarity mechanisms" for member states to aid one another in cases of supply disruption .

the proposal was opposed by several other eu member states and has not advanced .

poland has been active in initiatives to link the natural gas grid of the baltic countries , which are dependent on russia for 100% of their natural gas , to the rest of the eu .

a project to build a pipeline connecting poland to lithuania has been launched , although the effort has been complicated by financing obstacles .

the pipeline is expected to become operational in 2020 .

many u.s. officials and members of congress have regarded european energy security as a u.s. interest .

in particular , there has been concern in the united states over the influence that russian energy dominance could have on the ability to present a united transatlantic position when it comes to other issues related to russia .

successive u.s. administrations have encouraged eu member states to reduce energy dependence on russia through diversification of supply and supported european steps to develop alternative sources and increase energy efficiency .

