p uerto rico's financial circumstances , including uncertainty about its ability to service its large public debt , have drawn attention in recent months .

as congress examines puerto rico's finances , questions have arisen about how federal health care programs ( medicare , medicaid , and the state children's health insurance program [chip] ) and private health insurance reforms apply to puerto rico .

is puerto rico treated like a state , or is it treated differently ? .

this report provides answers to frequently asked questions ( faqs ) about how federal health care programs and requirements are implemented in puerto rico , including eligibility , coverage , program requirements , and payment rules .

examples provided in the faqs illustrate that in many circumstances , health programs in puerto rico differ from programs in the 50 states and the district of columbia ( dc ) , while in other circumstances , puerto rico is treated the same as the states .

as such , these questions and answers should be viewed as a discussion of the complexity of health care financing as it relates to puerto rico under current law .

this faq begins with a brief background on the demographics and economics of puerto rico .

it then examines puerto rico's treatment under medicare , medicaid , and chip and concludes with a look at how federal requirements for private health insurance apply to puerto rico .

this report will be updated as additional relevant questions and answers arise .

this section addresses questions about puerto rico's population and key economic features .

these questions provide context for the federal health care program rules applied to puerto rico and their implications .

data used to answer these questions are drawn from several sources , and methodological differences should be borne in mind when interpreting the information .

although in many cases 2014 is the most recent data year for which data are available , some statistics represent outcomes in 2013 ( eg , national economic data ) and 2016 ( eg , labor force data ) .

medicare is a federal program that pays for covered health care services of qualified beneficiaries .

it was established in 1965 under title xviii of the social security act ( ssa ) to provide health insurance to individuals aged 65 and older , and it has been expanded over the years to include permanently disabled individuals under the age of 65 .

today , medicare consists of four distinct parts: part a ( hospital insurance ) , part b ( supplementary medical insurance ) , part c ( medicare advantage ) , and part d ( outpatient prescription drug coverage ) .

in fy2014 , the medicare program provided health care benefits to nearly 54 million seniors and certain individuals with disabilities at a cost of roughly $606 billion to the federal government .

medicaid is a joint federal - state program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services , as well as long - term services and supports ( ltss ) , for a diverse low - income population , including children , pregnant women , adults , individuals with disabilities , and people aged 65 and older .

in fy2014 , medicaid is estimated to have provided health care services to 63 million individuals at a total cost of $494 billion , with the federal government paying $299 billion ( about 61% ) of that total .

to participate in medicaid , the federal government requires states and dc to cover certain mandatory populations and benefits , but it allows states and dc to cover optional populations and services .

this flexibility results in variability across medicaid programs .

historically , medicaid eligibility generally has been limited to certain low - income populations , such as children , pregnant women , parents of dependent children , the elderly , and individuals with disabilities .

however , the aca included the aca medicaid expansion provision , which extends medicaid eligibility to individuals under the age of 65 with income up to 133% of fpl , at state option .

the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) is a means - tested program that provides health coverage to targeted low - income children and pregnant women in families that have annual income above medicaid - eligibility levels but have no health insurance .

for chip , the federal rules for the territories are the same as the rules for the 50 states and dc .

under chip , the federal government sets basic requirements , but states have the flexibility to design their own versions of chip within the federal government's basic framework .

as a result , there is significant variation across chip programs .

the federal government reimburses states for a portion of every dollar they spend on chip , up to state - specific annual limits called allotments .

states may design their chip programs in three ways: as a chip medicaid expansion , as a separate chip program , or through a combination approach in which the state operates a chip medicaid expansion and one or more separate chip programs concurrently .

chip benefit coverage and cost - sharing rules depend on program design .

private insurance includes both employer - sponsored ( group ) coverage and individual market ( non - group ) coverage .

the aca includes many different provisions that affect the private health insurance market .

all of the provisions apply to the 50 states and dc , but their application to puerto rico varies .

the applicability of many aca provisions to puerto rico is not explicitly stated in statute .

in the absence of explicit applications , hhs has provided some guidance on the topic .

private insurance is not as pervasive in puerto rico as it is in the 50 states and dc ; in particular , enrollment in group coverage is not as common .

in 2014 , approximately 38.3% of individuals living in puerto rico had private insurance .

about 27.6% of individuals had group coverage , and 10.9% had non - group coverage .

in comparison , in the 50 states and dc in 2014 , approximately 66.4% of the population received coverage through private insurance .

about 54.2% of the population had group coverage , and 12.8% had non - group coverage .

the aca includes a number of provisions , collectively referred to as market reforms , that apply to group and non - group health insurance plans ; impose requirements on sponsors of coverage ( such as employers ) ; and establish a federal floor with respect to access to coverage , premiums , benefits , cost sharing , and consumer protections .

for example , nearly all private health insurance plans must extend dependent coverage to children under the age of 26 , and some private health insurance plans have to cover a defined set of benefits called the essential health benefits .

hhs determined the applicability of the market reforms to puerto rico in 2010 and then revisited and changed its determination in 2014 .

according to the revised determination , the market reforms included in title i of the aca as amendments to the public health service ( phs ) act are governed by the definition of state included in title i of the aca , which does not include the territories ( i.e. , puerto rico ) .

as such , hhs takes the position that the market reforms do not apply to non - group and group health insurance issuers in the territories .

however , hhs indicates its analysis applies only to health insurance governed by the phs act and that the market reforms could still apply to group health plans: our analysis applies only to health insurance that is governed by the phs act .

it does not affect the phs act requirements that were enacted in the affordable care act and were incorporated into the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) and the internal revenue code ( code ) and apply to group health plans ( whether insured or self - insured ) , because such applicability does not hinge on , or rely upon the term "state" as it is defined in either the phs act or in the affordable care act .

similarly , it also does not affect the phs act requirements that were enacted in the affordable care act and apply to non - federal governmental plans .

as a practical matter , therefore , phs act , erisa , and code requirements applicable to group health plans continue to apply to such coverage and issuers selling policies to both private sector and public sector employers in the territories will want to make certain that their products comply with the relevant affordable care act amendments to the phs act applicable to group health plans since their customers - the group health plans - are still subject to those provisions .

this position also is described in a preamble to a proposed rule .

in the preamble , hhs lists the sections of the phs act ( as added by title i of the aca ) with which non - group and group health - insurance issuers in the territories do not have to comply .

in the preamble hhs reiterates that its position applies only to health insurance governed by the phs act and indicates that , as a practical matter , any market reforms applicable to group health plans still apply .

table 2 shows the market reforms that do not apply to non - group and group health insurance issuers in puerto rico but may still apply to group health plans in puerto rico .

no , puerto rico has not established an aca health insurance exchange .

under section 1323 of the aca , puerto rico , as well as other territories , could elect to establish an exchange but was not required to do so .

such an election was required to be made by october 1 , 2013 .

territories , including puerto rico , electing to establish exchanges could receive federal funding .

the funds had to be used for premium and cost - sharing assistance for individuals who enroll in the exchange .

section 1323 provides $1 billion to be available for this purpose beginning in 2014 and ending in 2019 .

the aca directs the hhs secretary to allocate $925 million to puerto rico and divide the remaining $75 million among american samoa , guam , the northern mariana islands , and the virgin islands .

if a territory did not establish an exchange , section 1323 provides that the territory is entitled to an increase in medicaid funds .

since puerto rico did not establish an exchange , it is entitled to the increased medicaid funds .

 ( see " did the aca provide additional medicaid funding for puerto rico ? .

for additional information. ) .

under the aca , individuals who purchase coverage through an exchange may be eligible for premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies .

this assistance is directed at lower - income individuals to help with the cost of purchasing and using health insurance coverage .

puerto rico did not establish an exchange , so the aca's premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies are not available .

as noted above , if puerto rico had established an exchange , it could have received federal funds to be used for premium and cost - sharing assistance for individuals who enroll in the exchange .

puerto rico would have had flexibility in how to provide such premium and cost - sharing assistance , subject to a section 1323 agreement with hhs .

small businesses purchasing coverage through a small business health option program ( shop ) exchange may be eligible for a small business health insurance tax credit .

the credit is intended to help make small - group coverage more affordable for certain small businesses .

puerto rico has not established an exchange ( including a shop exchange ) , so the small business tax credits are not available .

if puerto rico had established an exchange , puerto rican businesses are treated as foreign businesses for u.s. tax purposes , which means they are taxed only on their u.s. source income .

foreign businesses may claim the general business credit ( of which the small business health insurance tax credit is part ) against their u.s. tax liability , if they have any .

under the aca , certain large employers are subject to a shared - responsibility provision .

this provision does not explicitly mandate that a large employer offer health insurance to its employees ; instead , it has the potential to impose penalties on large employers that do not provide affordable and adequate coverage to their full - time employees and their employees' dependents .

as hhs has observed , certain tax provisions , including the employer mandate , generally do not apply in puerto rico and the other territories .

furthermore , because puerto rico is a non - mirror territory , there is no requirement that puerto rico implement a provision comparable to the employer mandate under its own tax code .

as of january 1 , 2014 , the aca requires most individuals to maintain health insurance coverage or otherwise pay a penalty .

some individuals are exempt from this individual mandate and the penalty .

the individual mandate generally does not apply to puerto rico because statute provides that bona fide residents of the territories are treated as having coverage that complies with the individual mandate .

furthermore , because puerto rico is a non - mirror territory , there is no requirement that puerto rico implement a provision comparable to the individual mandate under its own tax laws .

