the appointment of a supreme court justice is an event of major significance in american politics .

each appointment to the nine - member court is of consequence because of the enormous judicial power that the court exercises , separate from , and independent of , the executive and legislative branches .

while "on average , a new justice joins the court almost every two years," the time at which any given appointment will be made to the court is unpredictable .

appointments may be infrequent ( with a vacancy on the court occurring only once or twice , or never at all , during a particular president's years in office ) or occur in close proximity to each other ( with a particular president afforded several opportunities to name persons to the court ) .

the procedure for appointing a justice to the supreme court is provided for in the u.s. constitution in only a few words .

the "appointments clause" ( article ii , section 2 , clause 2 ) states that the president "shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint .. .

judges of the supreme court. .

while the process of appointing justices has undergone some changes over two centuries , its most essential feature — the sharing of power between the president and the senate — has remained unchanged: to receive appointment to the court , one must first be formally selected ( "nominated" ) by the president and then approved ( "confirmed" ) by the senate .

although not mentioned in the constitution , an important role is also played midway in the process — after the president selects , but before the senate as a whole considers the nominee — by the senate judiciary committee .

since the end of the civil war , almost every supreme court nomination received by the senate has first been referred to and considered by the judiciary committee before being acted on by the senate as a whole .

for the president , the appointment of a supreme court justice can be a notable measure by which history will judge his presidency .

for the senate , a decision to confirm is a solemn matter as well , for it is the senate alone , through its "advice and consent" function , without any formal involvement of the house of representatives , which acts as a safeguard on the president's judgment .

traditionally , the senate has tended to be less deferential to the president in his choice of supreme court justices than in his appointment of persons to high executive branch positions .

the more exacting standard usually applied to supreme court nominations reflects the special importance of the court , coequal to and independent of the presidency and congress .

senators are also mindful that , as noted earlier , justices receive what can amount to lifetime appointments .

on june 27 , 2018 , justice anthony kennedy announced his retirement from the court , effective july 31 , 2018 .

this report will be further updated upon the selection of a nominee by president trump .

under the constitution , justices on the supreme court hold office "during good behaviour," in effect typically receiving lifetime appointments to the court .

once confirmed , justices may hold office for as long as they live or until they voluntarily step down .

such job security in the federal government is conferred solely on judges and , by constitutional design , is intended to insure the independence of the federal judiciary , including the supreme court , from the president and congress .

a president has no power to remove a supreme court justice from office .

a justice may be removed by congress , but only through the process of impeachment by the house and conviction by the senate .

only one justice has ever been impeached ( in an episode which occurred in 1804 ) , and he remained in office after being acquitted by the senate .

many justices serve for 20 to 30 years and sometimes are still on the court decades after the president who nominated them has left office .

as discussed above , the need for a supreme court nominee arises when a vacancy occurs on the court due to the death , retirement , or resignation of a justice ( or when a justice announces his or her intention to retire or resign ) .

it then becomes the president's constitutional responsibility to select a successor to the vacating justice , as well as the constitutional responsibility of the senate to exercise its role in providing "advice and consent" to the president .

while the precise criteria used in selecting a supreme court nominee vary from president to president , two general motivations appear to underlie the choices of almost every president .

one is the desire to have the nomination serve the president's political interests ( in the partisan and electoral senses of the word "political," as well as in the public policy sense ) ; the second is to demonstrate that a search was successfully made for a nominee having the highest professional qualifications .

an important part of the selection process involves investigating the background of prospective nominees .

in recent years the investigative effort generally has followed two primary tracks — one concerned with the public record and professional credentials of a person under consideration , the other with the candidate's private background .

the private background investigation , which includes examination of a candidate's personal financial affairs , is conducted by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) .

the investigation into a candidate's public record and professional abilities ordinarily is headed by high justice department officials , white house aides , or both , working together .

the investigative process may be preliminary in nature when the objective is to identify potential candidates and consider their relative merits based on information already known or readily available .

the investigations become more intensive as the initial list is narrowed .

the object then becomes to learn as much as possible about the prospective nominees — to accurately gauge their qualifications and their compatibility with the president's specific requirements for a nominee , and , simultaneously , to flag anything in their backgrounds that might be disqualifying or jeopardize their chances for senate confirmation .

for help in evaluating the backgrounds of court candidates , presidents sometimes also have enlisted the assistance of private lawyers , legal scholars , or , on rare occasions , the american bar association ( aba ) .

near the culmination of this investigative effort , the president might want to personally meet with one or more of the candidates before finally deciding whom to nominate .

during the pre - nomination phase , presidents vary in the degree to which they publicly reveal the names of individuals under consideration for the court .

sometimes , presidents seek to keep confidential the identity of their court candidates .

such secrecy may allow a president to reflect on the qualifications of prospective nominees , and the background investigations to proceed , away from the glare of publicity , news media coverage , and outside political pressures .

other times , the white house may , at least in the early pre - nomination stage , reveal the names of supreme court candidates being considered .

such openness may be intended to serve various purposes — among them , to test public or congressional reaction to potential nominees , please political constituencies who would identify with identified candidates , or demonstrate the president's determination to conduct a comprehensive search for the most qualified person available .

an administration , of course , need not wait until a vacancy occurs on the court to begin investigating the backgrounds of potential nominees .

immediately after president george w. bush was sworn into office in 2001 , according to a recent book on supreme court nominations , "his staff began putting together a list of potential nominees and conducting extensive background research on them. .

the book continued: officials believed [chief justice william h.] rehnquist was likely to retire in the summer of 2001 , and they were determined to be ready .

each young lawyer in the white house counsel's office , most of whom had clerked on the supreme court , was assigned a candidate and made responsible for writing a lengthy report about him or her .

in the late spring , then - white house counsel alberto gonzalez and his deputy tim flanigan began secretly interviewing some of those possible replacements .

the advance work was designed to ensure that george w. bush would be prepared when a justice stepped down .

the early in - depth research and interviews with prospective nominees were important in ensuring bush would have coolheaded advice , removed from any external political pressure to select a particular nominee in the hours after a retirement .

 figure 2 shows the number of days that elapsed between the date on which it was publicly known that a justice was leaving the court and the date on which the president publicly identified a nominee to replace the departing justice .

note that the figure only shows those vacancies on the court , since 1975 , which required only one nomination to be filled .

consequently , the vacancy created by the death of justice scalia is not included in figure 2 ( since more than one nomination was made to fill it ) .

when a justice steps down from the court ( or announces his or her intention to do so ) , presidents sometimes move quickly , selecting their nominee within a week of the vacancy being announced .

presidents reagan and george h. w. bush , for instance , selected most of their supreme court nominees quickly , within days of the vacating justices publicly announcing their retirements from the court .

president clinton , in contrast , took more time in selecting his two supreme court nominees , nominating ruth bader ginsburg on june 22 , 1993 , nearly three months after the retirement announcement of justice byron r. white , and nominating stephen g. breyer on may 17 , 1994 , approximately five weeks after the retirement announcement of justice harry a. blackmun .

likewise , president george w. bush's first two supreme court selections were not made immediately upon the heels of a justice's retirement announcement: president bush announced his choice of john g. roberts jr. to succeed sandra day o'connor 18 days after she submitted her retirement letter to the president , and he announced his choice of harriet e. miers to succeed justice o'connor 28 days after withdrawing the aforementioned roberts nomination .

president bush did , however , move much more swiftly in selecting a nominee to succeed chief justice william h. rehnquist , announcing his choice of john g. roberts jr. for that office two days after the death of chief justice rehnquist on september 3 , 2005 .

most recently , president obama's three supreme court selections were made within approximately one month of an incumbent justice departing the court .

he selected sonia sotomayor 25 days after justice david souter announced he was leaving the court ; elena kagan 31 days after justice stevens announced his retirement ; and merrick garland 32 days following the death of justice scalia .

on 12 occasions ( most of them in the 19 th century ) , presidents have made temporary appointments to the supreme court without submitting nominations to the senate .

these occurred when presidents exercised their power under the constitution to make "recess appointments" when the senate was not in session .

historically , when recesses between sessions of the senate were much longer than they are today , recess appointments served the purpose of averting long vacancies on the court when the senate was unavailable to confirm a president's appointees .

the terms of these recess appointments , however , were limited , expiring at the end of the next session of congress ( unlike the potentially lifetime appointments court appointees receive when nominated and then confirmed by the senate ) .

despite the temporary nature of these appointments , every person appointed during a recess of the senate , except one , ultimately received a later appointment to the court after being nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate .

recess appointments , when they do occur , may cause controversy , in large part because they bypass the senate and its "advice and consent" role .

the last president to make a recess appointment to the court was dwight d. eisenhower .

of the five persons whom he nominated to the court , three initially received recess appointments and served as justices before being confirmed by the senate — earl warren ( as chief justice ) in 1953 , william brennan in 1956 , and potter stewart in 1958 .

the senate , on august 29 , 1960 , adopted s. res .

334 "expressing the sense of the senate that the president should not make recess appointments to the supreme court , except to prevent or end a breakdown in the administration of the court's business , and a recess appointee should not take his seat on the court until the senate has 'advised and consented' to the nomination. .

the resolution was adopted by a vote of 48-37 , largely along party lines .

senate proponents of the resolution contended , among other things , that judicial independence would be affected if supreme court recess appointees , during the probationary period of their appointment , took positions to please the president ( in order not to have the president withdraw their nominations ) or to please the senate ( in order to gain confirmation of their nominations ) .

it also was argued that senate investigation of nominations of these recess appointees was made difficult by the oath preventing sitting justices from testifying about matters pending before the court .

opponents , however , said , among other things , that the resolution was an attempt to restrict the president's constitutional recess appointment powers .

opponents also argued that recess appointments were sometimes called for in order to keep the court at full strength to handle the court's large and complex case load , as well as to prevent evenly split rulings by its members .

additionally , opponents argued that the resolution "not only went beyond the 'advise and consent' powers of congress , but that it was a reflection against [eisenhower] , as well as chief justice earl warren , and justices william j. brennan jr. and potter stewart , who were recess appointees during the eisenhower administration. .

because of the criticisms of judicial recess appointments in recent decades , the long passage of time since the last supreme court recess appointment in 1958 , and the relatively short duration of contemporary senate recesses ( which might diminish the need for recess appointments to the court ) , a president in the 21 st century might hesitate to make a recess appointment to the court and do so only under unusual circumstances .

additionally , recent supreme court jurisprudence involving the recess appointments clause might , under certain circumstances , constitutionally limit a president's ability to make recess appointments to the court .

