during the last week of august 2016 , the 10,000 th syrian refugee was admitted to the united states in fy2016 .

the obama administration had pledged to admit at least 10,000 syrian refugees in fy2016 .

while some policymakers are celebrating the syrian admissions , others have raised concerns about the refugee admission process , particularly security vetting procedures .

some policymakers have urged the obama administration to stop admitting syrian refugees for now and a number of governors have expressed an unwillingness to accept syrian refugees in their states .

to assist congress in addressing issues related to syrian refugees and u.s. refugee policy generally , this report details the u.s. refugee admissions process and the placement and resettlement of arriving refugees in the united states .

the admission of refugees to the united states and their resettlement here are authorized by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as amended by the refugee act of 1980 .

the 1980 act had two basic purposes: ( 1 ) to provide a uniform procedure for refugee admissions ; and ( 2 ) to authorize federal assistance to resettle refugees and promote their self - sufficiency .

the intent of the legislation was to end an ad hoc approach to refugee admissions and resettlement that had characterized u.s. refugee policy since world war ii .

prior to the enactment of the refugee act , refugees were admitted through a variety of mechanisms in immigration law , such as parole .

the ina defines a refugee as a person who is outside his or her country and who is unable or unwilling to return because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

in special circumstances , a refugee also may be a person who is within his or her country and who is persecuted or has a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

under ina section 207 , the maximum annual number of refugee admissions ( refugee ceiling ) and the allocation of these numbers by region of the world are set by the president after consultation by cabinet - level representatives with members of the house and senate judiciary committees .

ina section 207 ( a ) ( 3 ) further directs that "admissions ... shall be allocated among refugees of special humanitarian concern to the united states. .

typically , the administration submits a refugee proposal before the start of the new fiscal year that serves as the basis for the congressional consultations .

the law requires congressional consultation but not congressional approval .

following the consultations , the president issues a presidential determination that sets the refugee ceiling and regional allocations for that fiscal year .

once the presidential determination for a fiscal year has been issued , ina section 207 also allows for additional refugee admissions in response to an "emergency refugee situation. .

in such a situation , the president may , after congressional consultations , issue an emergency presidential determination providing for an increase in refugee admissions numbers .

for fy2016 , the obama administration initially proposed a refugee ceiling of 75,000 and held consultations with congress on that proposal .

the proposal reportedly included an allocation of 33,000 for the near east / south asia , the region that includes syria .

the administration subsequently announced that the united states would admit at least 10,000 syrian refugees in fy2016 .

on september 29 , 2015 , the obama administration released the presidential determination on refugee admissions for fiscal year 2016 .

it sets the fy2016 refugee ceiling at 85,000 , with 79,000 admissions numbers allocated among the regions of the world and 6,000 admissions numbers comprising an unallocated reserve .

the allocation for the near east / south asia region is 34,000 .

in addition to meeting the ina definition of a refugee , a prospective refugee must meet other requirements enumerated in ina section 207 ( c ) ( 1 ) in order to be eligible for admission to the united states .

these requirements are that the individual is not firmly resettled in another country , is determined to be of special humanitarian concern to the united states , and is admissible under the ina .

these statutory requirements are implemented through the refugee processing system , as detailed below .

successful applicants are admitted to the united states in refugee status .

after one year in the united states , refugees must apply to adjust to lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status .

refugees of all nationalities who are accepted for u.s. resettlement are placed in communities throughout the united states .

in fy2016 , arriving refugees have been placed in 47 states and the district of columbia .

the initial placement of refugees has received increased attention since the november 2015 attacks in paris , as some governors have expressed an unwillingness to accept syrian refugees in their states .

these announcements , in turn , have raised a number of legal questions .

regardless of where refugees are initially resettled , however , they are free to relocate at any time .

once admitted to the united states , refugees are eligible for initial and longer - term resettlement assistance .

 ( see appendix for data on placement of syrian arrivals in fy2016 , by state. ) .

the placement of arriving refugees in communities in the united states and the provision of initial resettlement assistance to them is the responsibility of dos's reception and placement program .

under this program , prm funds cooperative agreements with domestic resettlement agencies .

the placement process works as follows: every week , representatives of each of [the resettlement] agencies meet to review the biographic information and other case records sent by the overseas resettlement support centers ( rsc ) to determine where a refugee will be resettled in the united states .

during this meeting , the resettlement agencies match the particular needs of each incoming refugee with the specific resources available in a local community .

if a refugee has relatives in the united states , he or she is likely to be resettled near or with them .

otherwise , the resettlement agency that agrees to sponsor the case decides on the best match between a community's resources and the refugee's needs .

under the ina , the director of the office of refugee resettlement at the department of health and human services and the agency administering the reception and placement program are required to "consult regularly ( not less often than quarterly ) with state and local governments and private nonprofit voluntary agencies concerning the sponsorship process and the intended distribution of refugees among the states and localities before their placement in those states and localities. .

there is no statutory requirement , however , for state approval .

the resettlement agencies provide services to refugees in their first 30 to 90 days in the united states .

these services include reception upon arrival in the united states ; basic needs support ( eg , housing , furnishings , food , and clothing ) for at least 30 days ; and referrals to health , employment , education , and other services , as needed .

the department of health and human services' office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) , within the administration for children and families ( acf ) , administers a transitional assistance program for refugees , cuban / haitian entrants , and other specified groups .

the orr - funded resettlement assistance activities are authorized in ina section 412 .

they include refugee cash and medical assistance , social services to help refugees become socially and economically self - sufficient , and targeted assistance for impacted areas .

orr assistance is provided mainly through state - administered refugee resettlement programs .

as explained by orr: "states provide transitional cash and medical assistance and social services , as well as maintain oversight for the care of unaccompanied refugee minors. .

ina section 412 sets conditions on state receipt of resettlement assistance .

to receive assistance , a state is required to submit a plan to orr with specified components , meet orr standards and goals to assure effective resettlement of refugees , and submit an annual report to orr on use of provided funds .

states are not required to administer a refugee resettlement program .

if they choose not to participate in whole or in part , however , orr regulations provide for the designation of a replacement .

under orr regulations at 45 c.f.r .

ยง400.301: ( a ) in the event that a state decides to cease participation in the refugee program , the state must provide 120 days advance notice to the director before withdrawing from the program .

 ( b ) to participate in the refugee program , a state is expected to operate all components of the refugee program , including refugee cash and medical assistance , social services , preventive health , and an unaccompanied minors program if appropriate.... ( c ) when a state withdraws from all or part of the refugee program , the director may authorize a replacement designee or designees to administer the provision of assistance and services , as appropriate , to refugees in that state... .

as of august 31 , 2016 , 10,740 syrian refugees have arrived in the united states in fy2016 .

these refugees were placed in 40 states , as shown in the following table .

