the m - 1 abrams tank , the m - 2 / m - 3 bradley fighting vehicle ( bfv ) , and the m - 1126 stryker combat vehicle are the centerpieces of the army's armored brigade combat teams ( abcts ) and stryker brigade combat teams ( sbcts ) .

abcts and sbcts constitute the army's "heavy" ground forces ; they provide varying degrees of armored protection and mobility that the army's light , airborne ( parachute ) , and air assault ( helicopter transported ) infantry units that constitute infantry brigade combat teams ( ibcts ) do not possess .

these three combat vehicles have a long history of service in the army .

the first m - 1 abrams tank entered service with the army in 1980 ; the m - 2 / m - 3 bradley fighting vehicle in 1981 ; and the stryker combat vehicle in 2001 .

under current army modernization plans , the army envisions all three vehicles in service with active and national guard forces beyond fy2028 .

congress is concerned with the long - term military effectiveness of these vehicles .

it is also sensitive to the economic aspect of abrams , bradley , and stryker modernization and recapitalization which are necessary to keep these vehicles operationally effective and in service .

recapitalization and modernization also have an economic impact on the defense industrial base in terms of keeping depots and maintenance facilities operational as abrams and bradleys are no longer being manufactured .

in order to keep the abrams , bradley , and stryker operational and effective over a prolonged period , a variety of activities have been undertaken over the lives of these vehicles .

the most common terms used to describe these activities are modernization , recapitalization , and reset .

although there is a lack of formal dod and army definition for these terms , the following descriptions can be considered representative of how the army uses these terms: upon comparison , it might appear these terms describe somewhat similar activities .

it has been a common criticism by some that the army frequently uses these terms interchangeably when describing its efforts and activities related to these and other weapon systems .

this indiscriminate use of terminology and lack of specific definitions can cause confusion , particularly when conducting oversight of funding .

traditionally , modernization and recapitalization efforts are funded by operations and maintenance ( o&m ) funds , while reset has been funded as part of overseas contingency operations account .

the army reportedly intends to begin testing active protective systems ( aps ) on a number of its combat vehicles , including the abrams , bradleys , and strykers , before fy2019 .

the army's program , designated the modular active protection systems ( maps ) , will initially focus on "soft - kill" technologies such as vehicle obscurants and electronic defeat systems and then progress to "hard - kill" technologies like the ability to shoot down missiles fired at vehicles .

as part of developing maps , the army is looking at existing , non - developmental aps technologies both domestically and foreign - produced , such as israel's trophy aps currently in use with israeli forces .

as part of the army's fy2017 budget proposal , the army reportedly will experiment with commercially available aps systems as part of abrams , bradley , and stryker survivability enhancements .

the army's equipment program in support of the president's budget 2015 describes the abrams , bradley , and stryker as part of the operational force until at least fy2029 and perhaps beyond .

regarding the abrams and stryker , army plans call for an upgraded m - 1a3 abrams and an upgraded stryker vehicle .

the army , however , is planning for a successor to the bradley — the future fighting vehicle ( ffv ) .

the ffv succeeds the army's previous attempt at a bradley successor — the ground combat vehicle ( gcv ) — which was deemed too heavy and impractical by many defense analysts and cancelled by the defense department in early 2013 .

the ffv could be either a completely new vehicle design or could come in the form of an upgraded bradley .

the army reportedly plans to relax its previous gcv requirement that the proposed vehicle carry an entire nine - man infantry squad — a requirement many believe made the gcv too large , too heavy , and potentially unaffordable .

in may 2015 , bae systems and general dynamics land systems received contracts — $28.9 million and $28.3 million , respectively — to develop design concepts for the ffv .

according to the army , "foreign military sales is a form of security assistance authorized by the arms export control act ( aeca ) [public law‎ ‎94-329] .

under section 3 of the aeca , the u.s. may sell defense articles and services to foreign countries and international organizations when the president of the united states formally finds that to do so will strengthen the security of the u.s. to promote world peace. .

according to the army , fms is important because: foreign military sales are vital and beneficial in supporting u.s. national security and foreign policy objectives by allowing allies to promote peace and stability in their region ; fms allows for weapon system interoperability between allies which can be valuable during joint operations ; and industry benefits from fms by keeping production lines warm when there is a decrease or gap in production from u.s. government sales .

the viability of the army's combat vehicle industrial base is a crucial consideration for dod , the army , and congress .

dod's 2013 annual industrial capabilities report to congress notes: the department has not acquired new combat tracked vehicles for many years , instead choosing to remanufacture and update legacy platforms .

the army upgrades and maintains its existing fleet of tracked vehicles using a combination of organic capabilities and the private sector .

as a result , the average age of refurbished abrams tanks and bradley fighting vehicles is only a couple of years .

with the drawdown of the military , there are few requirements to continue remanufacturing these platforms , with the possible exception of foreign military sales .

unlike combat tracked vehicles , the stryker combat wheeled vehicle is still in production , but its quantities have also dropped off — from 292 in 2011 , to 100 in 2012 , to 58 in 2013 .

despite a lack of operational requirements , the army is considering the need to bear the cost of continuing abrams , bradley , and stryker production lines at a minimum sustainment rate ( msr ) to maintain manufacturing capabilities and to avoid shutdown and startup costs resulting from a three - year production gap .

abrams ecp [engineering change proposal] 1 ( fy17-fy18 ) and bfv ecpii ( fy17 ) will help to revitalize the combat vehicle industrial base .

congress has an enduring interest in the oversight of the army's combat vehicle industrial base , particularly in light of decreased production of combat vehicles .

a june 2015 government accountability office ( gao ) report details their response to decreased production: in response to questions raised over the effect of this planned decrease in production , the senate armed services committee and conferees for the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 directed the army to report on the status of the combat vehicle industrial base in october 2012 , the army issued a contract with a.t. kearney , a private independent management consulting firm , to complete an assessment of the combined commercial and government combat vehicle industrial base that supports the united states army and delivered the final report to the congressional defense committees in april 2014 .

gao's report summarizes the kearney report's findings as: there is excess capacity in facilities with the ability to machine large , complex metal structures for the ground combat vehicle industrial base ; unique capabilities exist at each production and sustainment facility within the combat vehicle industrial base , but there is a significant overlap of similar capabilities across the facilities ; a small number of skills such as armor steel welding are critical to the production and sustainment of combat vehicles ; there are a small number of high - risk critical and fragile suppliers , such as those that provide certain engines and transmissions , and the risk to these suppliers can be mitigated by individual company action or limited army intervention ; production and sustainment demand is the factor that has the most impact on the industrial base ; and there is a lower financial impact to the army for potential production breaks — specifically , stopping all bradley fighting vehicle production work at a particular facility — than previously identified by the original equipment manufacturer in a 2012 report .

these findings suggest a relatively healthy army combat vehicle industrial base provided the existence of adequate production and sustainment demand .

the question then becomes what is considered adequate if the only production of m - 1s , m - 2s , and m - 3s is for military sales or newer vehicle versions ? .

as previously noted , the army reportedly is considering upgrading the lethality of the entire stryker fleet .

if the army does eventually "up - gun" the stryker fleet , congress might wish to consider a number of questions , including but not limited to the following: what is the estimated total program cost ? .

how long would it take upgrade the entire stryker fleet ? .

what modifications to the basic stryker vehicle would be required to accommodate proposed lethality upgrades and how will these changes affect vehicle operational capabilities ? .

how would the stryker lethality modifications affect the deployability of stryker brigade combat teams ( sbcts ) ? .

would additional maintenance and support units / troops be needed in stryker units to accommodate proposed lethality upgrades ? .

is the decision to upgrade stryker lethality — as opposed to upgrading for protection and maneuverability — consistent with current and future threats ? .

the successful development and deployment of "soft - kill" and "hard - kill" aps technologies has the potential to significantly change current and future designs of armored fighting vehicles .

by integrating aps into abrams , bradleys , and strykers , as well as future fighting vehicles , the potential exists to not only increase survivability but also to reduce armor protection and vehicle weight .

adopting aps for use might also present challenges in terms of vehicle power sufficiency to run the aps , physical space ( internal and external ) requirements to mount the aps , and possibly enhanced vehicle vulnerability if the aps fails to operate as intended .

before the army embarks on a more ambitious effort to develop and field aps , congress might wish to examine with the army the potential benefits and risks associated with adopting aps for operational use on abrams , bradley , and stryker fighting vehicles .

