the united republic of tanzania is an east african country of nearly 54 million people that is about twice as large as california .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) estimates it to have been the 31 st - poorest country globally in 2016 when ranked by per capita gross domestic product ( gdp ) , which stood at $970 in 2016 .

the country has substantial natural resource wealth and agricultural potential , however , and multiple socioeconomic development indicators have generally improved in recent years .

its relative political stability and government reforms have attracted substantial official development aid , although there are abiding concerns regarding corruption and a difficult business climate .

despite such challenges , some sectors of the economy , most notably the extractive industries , are attracting private investment .

president john magufuli was elected in 2015 and is serving his first five - year term in office .

u.s. - tanzanian ties have generally been cordial and u.s. aid expanded significantly under the last two u.s .

administrations .

since the 2015 elections , however , u.s. concerns about tanzania's governance have raised some tensions .

such concerns have centered on the nullification of the 2015 election results ( and the subsequent rerun in 2016 ) in the semiautonomous coastal region of zanzibar , restrictions on civil liberties , and similar issues .

citing such concerns , in march 2016 , the u.s. millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) board announced it would suspend its partnership with tanzania , deferring a vote on the country's continued eligibility for a potential second large development compact ; this effectively ended , for the time being , the development of a second mcc compact with tanzania , following its completion of an initial compact between 2008 and 2013 .

the mcc had previously authorized and helped fund initial research and concept design activities focused on the development of a second compact , which had been expected to center on the electrical power sector — and in mid - 2015 had informed congress of its intent to negotiate such a compact tanzania .

these developments ran counter to a prior narrative of improving governance and economic development in tanzania and closer u.s. ties , underscored by former president obama's july 2013 visit to the country , during which he highlighted such progress , as well as growing u.s. trade and investment ties .

despite the later tensions , the obama administration described bilateral ties as being characterized by a "strong" partnership focused on a "shared vision of improving the quality of life for all tanzanians" in its fy2017 state department / u.s .

agency for international development ( usaid ) foreign aid budget submission to congress .

how bilateral ties may proceed under the trump administration and during the 115 th congress has yet to be determined , but they appear likely to remain on a positive track .

an april 26 , 2017 , press release issued under the name of secretary of state rex tillerson characterized the u.s. - tanzanian relationship as "strong," and "marked by a collaborative effort toward shared goals and close cooperation on a variety of programs and initiatives , from health and education , promoting economic growth and democratic governance , and advancing regional security," and projected similar trends in the future .

tanzania may also benefit from the fact that mark green , the new usaid administrator , is a former u.s. ambassador to the country ( 2007 to 2009 ) .

in recent years , tanzania has been the second - or third - largest annual recipient of such aid in sub - saharan africa , with funding reaching a high of $634.1 million in fy2015 and a low of $546.6 million in fy2017 ( provisional current estimate ; see table 1 ) .

the trump administration has requested $535 million for tanzania in fy2018 , the second - highest level requested for a country in the region and a minimal 2% drop relative to the current fy2017 estimate for tanzania .

this decrease would be modest compared to the roughly one - third decrease in overall global aid levels proposed by the trump administration .

the bulk of u.s. development aid for tanzania in recent years has been provided under obama administration presidential development initiatives , including feed the future ( ftf ) , the global health initiative , the global climate change initiative , power africa , and trade africa .

in 2014 tanzania was selected as one of six initial partner countries under the obama administration's african peacekeeping rapid response partnership ( aprrp ) .

it was also chosen to be a partnership for growth ( pfg ) country , one of four worldwide .

 ( see assistance section , below , for more on these efforts. ) .

while most u.s. aid has focused on health and economic growth , bilateral security cooperation has also increased .

tanzania is a top african contributor of personnel to international peacekeeping operations .

while there is generally little tanzania - focused congressional activity or legislation , some members of congress occasionally travel to the country and periodically host visits from tanzanian leaders , such as that of former president jakaya kikwete during the august 2014 u.s. - africa leaders summit .

some members have sponsored legislation advocating protections for albinos , who are the target of attacks , as discussed below .

tanzania , formed in 1964 , is a union of tanganyika , the mainland territory , which gained independence from britain in 1961 , and the zanzibar archipelago .

zanzibar , which gained independence from the united kingdom in 1963 , remains semiautonomous , with its own government .

julius nyerere , tanzania's president from 1964 until 1985 , remained influential until his death in 1999 .

under nyerere , tanzania was governed as a socialist state , but maintained cordial , albeit sometimes tepid relations with the west .

nyerere advanced a set of national social policies known collectively as ujamaa ( "socialism" in swahili , the lingua franca ) , which centered on rural , village - based collectivism and self - reliance and the nationalization of key industries .

u jamaa had a decidedly mixed record .

at a national level , central state control of economic policy failed to spur transformative growth and industrialization and inhibited market - based economic transaction efficiencies and private sector growth , while at the village level , collectivization faced increasing resistance .

such factors , together with a range of global ones ( eg , the oil crisis of the 1970s and poor commodity prices for tanzania's core agricultural exports ) led the country to seek credit and technical cooperation with international financial institutions in the mid - 1980s .

this led to the gradual liberalization of the economy and later of the state .

in contrast to the economic effects of ujamaa , nyerere's leadership and policies are widely seen as having united an ethnically and religiously diverse population under a strong shared national identity .

his leadership , by many accounts , spared the mainland from the ethnic tensions that have inhibited national unity or destabilized some other african countries .

zanzibar , however , has experienced some internal ethnic and religious frictions .

since the mid - 1990s , successive governments have taken steps to further liberalize the economy , but tanzania's business environment remains challenging , due , in part , to the enduring effects of state - centric policies and bureaucratization during the socialist period .

a 2016 state department assessment observed that "in certain sectors the legacy of socialist attitudes has not fully dissipated , sometimes resulting in suspicion of foreign investors and slow decision making. .

despite a stated commitment to reform , corruption and poor service delivery have hampered tanzania's efforts to curb widespread poverty and reduce reliance on subsistence agriculture .

as is common in the region , tanzania's aging infrastructure has suffered from chronic underinvestment .

nevertheless , the obama administration viewed the tanzanian government as committed to development and governance reform , and provided substantial aid to spur progress in these areas , and to invest in infrastructure .

tanzania's ruling party , chama cha mapinduzi ( ccm , swahili for party of the revolution ) , was created by nyerere in 1977 through the merger of the ruling parties of the mainland and zanzibar .

it has dominated tanzanian politics since its inception , a key point of criticism by opposition parties .

in the first multiparty elections in 1995 , the ccm won a landslide victory in voting marred by irregularities .

the party has continued to enjoy considerable electoral success on the mainland , in part due to the powers of incumbency , but opposition parties have won a growing share of legislative seats in successive elections .

still , opposition parties reportedly face periodic harassment and de facto restrictions on their activities .

increased political pluralism may distribute political power more widely , but it may also hold the potential to spur increasing ethnic , regional , and / or religious divisions , which the ccm long sought to avert .

recent years have seen a rise in the harassment of opposition political figures and restrictions on their activities .

in september 2017 , tundu lissu , a member of parliament and parliamentary chief whip of the opposition chadema party ( chama cha demokrasia na maendeleo , the party for democracy and progress ) , was shot by unknown assailants and seriously wounded .

lissu , who is also the president of the tanganyika law society , is a fierce critic of president magufuli and his government , but also a long - standing critic of corruption who may face hostility from many quarters .

lissu has often been arrested for his long - standing criticism of the government .

the shooting was preceded by a firebombing of a local blue chip law firm , immma advocates , a local affiliate of the u.s. firm dla piper , which lissu alleged police were involved in .

other opposition parliamentarians also face frequent duress from police .

in late september 2017 , police arrested a chadema mp after a party event , and another complained that police were prohibiting his meetings with constituents , as had another in august .

such events have been preceded by many similar ones in recent years , notably during electoral periods .

similarly , newspapers have faced suspension or other sanction for coverage seen as critical of the government .

most recently , in september 2017 , the publication of two newspapers was banned , in one case for 90 days and in another for two years , three months after another publication was also shuttered for two years .

the strength of electoral challenges to the ccm has grown during the past two national elections , in 2010 and in 2015 ( see below ) , notably from chadema , which was formed prior to the 2000 elections .

in 2014 , opposition parties boycotted the process of drafting of a new constitution , claiming the ccm had refused to include opposition proposals to limit the power of the executive and establish a federal government system .

the ccm - majority legislature then adopted a draft charter and the government scheduled a nationwide referendum for april 2015 , but later postponed it indefinitely .

opposition parties had called for a referendum boycott and had legally challenged the reform process .

rivalry between the ccm and ukawa ( an opposition alliance made up of chadema , the civic united front [cuf] , and two smaller parties ) remains a key focus of politics .

tanzania's gdp stood at about $47.2 billion in 2016 , and has grown at an estimated 6.6% annually , on average , over the past decade .

this growth has been based largely on earnings from agricultural exports , such as coffee , tea , and cotton ; tourism , which has steadily increased and is a key source of hard currency ; and exports of gold , the price of which rose over the past decade and spiked in 2011 , but has since declined .

gradual diversification into manufacturing is occurring , and development of uranium and gemstone mining is underway .

industry contributes about 26% of gdp .

tanzania also has coal , iron , and nickel resources , as well as a newly discovered massive reserve of helium , which remains critical to numerous technologies despite depleted worldwide supplies .

the communications , transport , financial services , construction , and retail sectors are also growing rapidly .

services contribute about 43% of gdp .

agriculture , however , remains a mainstay of the economy , contributing about 31% of gdp .

roughly 68% and by some estimates up to 77% of the workforce engaged in agriculture in 2014 , but agricultural growth has been relatively slow , at 3.1% between 2010 and 2015 .

the benefits of growth often have not reached the large rural population or been evenly distributed .

tanzania's per capita gdp , estimated at $970 in 2016 , ranks low globally but higher than roughly half of countries in sub - saharan africa .

nearly 47% of tanzanians live on $1.90 or less per day .

key barriers to economic development include poor infrastructure , low productivity growth , a high population growth rate , and a cumbersome and uncertain regulatory environment that generally deters foreign investment .

tanzania ranked 132 nd out of 190 countries surveyed in the world bank's 2017 doing business index , notwithstanding marked recent improvements in ensuring access to credit .

tanzania's overwhelmingly youthful population , 71% of which is under the age of 30 , poses a major challenge , as growing demand for health and education services could stir unrest .

u.s. - tanzanian ties are robust and have grown in recent years , despite tensions since 2015 related to tanzanian governance patterns , as discussed in this report's introduction .

another irritant in bilateral relations has been a contract dispute between tanesco , the national power utility , and symbion power , a u.s. firm .

along with partners , symbion received more than $110 million in mcc procurement awards to help improve tanzania's electrical power sector and later reportedly expanded its business beyond its initial mcc contract .

notwithstanding these tensions , as of late 2016 , the state department portrayed the bilateral relationship as "an established partnership characterized by mutual respect , shared values , and aspirations for a more peaceful and prosperous future. .

such sentiments had been reflected in cordial high - level engagements over several years .

former president kikwete was the first african head of state to meet with former president obama after obama took office in 2009 .

later , in 2013 , then - president obama visited tanzania , and in 2014 , president kikwete attended the u.s. - africa leaders summit .

president obama's 2013 trip followed prior high - profile visits ( eg , by then - secretary of state hillary clinton in 2011 and then - president george w. bush in 2008 ) .

how u.s. - tanzanian relations may change under the trump administration , if at all , has yet to be determined but , as noted in the introduction of this report , they appear set to remain on a generally positive track .

tanzania is likely to remain a generally stable but poor developing country for the foreseeable future .

increasing multiparty competition may contribute to gradual growth in demand for political change , democratic accountability , improved governance , and greater political pluralism — but potentially also to increased political tension .

growing access to information , notably via mobile phones , may spur similar trends by increasing exposure to information on current events , and global social and governance norms .

it may also contribute to market growth through increased information to pricing data and improved social services .

such changes , along with continuing infusions of foreign assistance , including from the united states , and gradually improving public infrastructure and government services , are likely to spur increasing economic activity , production , and trade , thus improving quality of life for the tanzanian people .

the united states , while expressing periodic concern over issues such as corruption , appears likely — as suggested by bilateral relations trends and aid levels in recent years — to continue to support the strengthening of tanzania's democratic system and the socioeconomic development of its people , and to look to tanzania as a key development partner in east and southern africa .

