the increasing costs of health care have focused congressional attention upon both the development and public availability of prescription drugs .

congress has long recognized that the patent system has an important role to play in the pharmaceutical industry in each respect .

the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 , commonly known as the hatch - waxman act , in part reformed both the patent and food and drug laws in order to balance incentives for inno vation and competition within the pharmaceutical industry .

recently , congressional attention has been directed towards two practices within the pharmaceutical industry .

the first pertains to "reverse payment" or "pay - for - delay" settlements of patent litigation .

under this scenario , a generic firm agrees to neither challenge the brand - name company's patents nor sell a generic version of the patented drug for a period of time .

in exchange , the brand - name drug company agrees to compensate the generic firm , often with substantial monetary payments over a number of years .

because the payment flows counterintuitively , from the patent owner to the accused infringer , this compensation has been termed a "reverse" payment .

another widely followed practice has been termed "product hopping. .

the introduction of new medicines ordinarily serves the public interest .

however , some stakeholders have accused brand - name firms of releasing new , patent - protected versions of existing drugs — while simultaneously discontinuing an earlier drug that is near patent expiration — with the primary goal of delaying generic entry into the marketplace .

because the hatch - waxman act presupposes the existence of a brand - name drug in order for a generic version to enter the market , product hopping can potentially delay generic competition .

complaints over product hopping are often accompanied by suspicions over the therapeutic benefits of the newly released drug .

but they may raise delicate questions over the competing values of public availability of marginally superior drugs versus lower cost medications .

two notable judicial opinions have subjected these practices to antitrust scrutiny .

in its 2013 decision in federal trade commission v. actavis , inc. , the u.s. supreme court held that the legality of reverse payment settlements should be evaluated under the "rule of reason" approach .

under this approach , courts consider whether conduct was reasonable by balancing the anticompetitive consequences of a challenged practice against its business justifications and potentially procompetitive impact .

the 2015 decision of the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit in new york ex rel .

schneiderman v. actavis plc applied the rule of reason to product hopping , concluding that this activity may indeed violate the antitrust laws .

in response to these recent judicial developments , this report introduces and analyzes innovation and competition policy issues associated with the pharmaceutical industry .

it begins with a review of the hatch - waxman act and its implications upon the availability of generic substitutes for brand - name medications .

the report then turns to a basic review of the antitrust law .

it then addresses judicial developments with respect to reverse payment settlements and product hopping .

the report closes with a summary of congressional issues and possible alternatives .

the primary legal mechanism for addressing conduct alleged to be anti - competitive — including reverse payment settlements and product hopping — consists of the antitrust laws .

the antitrust laws consist of the sherman act , the clayton act , the federal trade commission act , and other federal and state statutes that prohibit certain kinds of anticompetitive economic conduct .

although a complete review of the antitrust laws exceeds the scope of this report , other sources provide more information for the interested reader .

section 1 of the sherman act declares "[e]very contract , combination in the form of trust or otherwise , or conspiracy , in restraint of trade ... to be illegal. .

the courts have long interpreted this language as applying only to unreasonable restraints of trade .

the determination of whether particular conduct amounts to an unreasonable restraint of trade is commonly conducted under the "rule of reason. .

under this approach , "the finder of fact must decide whether the questioned practice imposes an unreasonable restraint on competition , taking into account a variety of factors , including specific information about the relevant business , its condition before and after the restraint was imposed , and the restraint's history , nature , and effect. .

the rule of reason essentially calls upon courts to reach a judgment of reasonableness by balancing the anticompetitive consequences of a challenged practice against its business justifications and potentially procompetitive impact .

other sorts of restraints are deemed unlawful per se .

per se illegality is appropriate "[o]nce experience with a particular kind of restraint enables the court to predict with confidence that the rule of reason will condemn it. .

the supreme court has explained that "there are certain agreements or practices which because of their pernicious effect on competition and lack of any redeeming virtue are conclusively presumed to be unreasonable and therefore illegal without elaborate inquiry as to the precise harm they have caused or the business excuse for their use. .

among the practices that have been judged per se violations include price fixing , group boycotts , and market division .

in some circumstances , courts apply an antitrust standard that falls between the per se illegality standard and the rule of reason .

the so - called "quick look" or "truncated rule of reason" approach applies when the plaintiff demonstrates that the defendant has engaged in practices similar to those previously held to be subject to per se treatment .

in these circumstances , the defendant must then demonstrate that the practice has pro - competitive justifications in order to avoid liability for an antitrust violation .

as discussed previously , a generic firm's filing of a paragraph iv anda may result in a patent infringement suit brought by a brand - name drug company .

in such litigation , if the nda holder demonstrates that the independent generic firm's proposed product would violate its patents , then the court will ordinarily issue an injunction that prevents the generic drug company from marketing that product .

that injunction will expire on the same date as the nda holder's patents .

independent generic drug companies commonly amend their andas in this event , replacing their paragraph iv certifications with paragraph iii certifications .

on the other hand , the courts may decide in favor of the independent generic firm .

the court may conclude that the generic firm's proposed product does not infringe the asserted patents , or that the asserted patents are invalid or unenforceable .

in this circumstance , the independent generic firm may launch its product once the fda has finally approved its anda .

in addition to the issuance of final judgment in favor of either the brand - name drug company or generic firm , another resolution of pharmaceutical patent litigation is possible .

this legal situation led to a number of cases with varying details , but a common core fact pattern .

upon filing a paragraph iv anda , a generic firm would be sued for patent infringement as provided by the hatch - waxman act .

the nda holder and generic applicant would then settle their dispute .

the settlement would call for the generic firm to neither challenge the patent nor produce a generic version of the patented drug , for a period of time up to the remaining term of the patent .

in exchange , the nda holder would agree to compensate the anda applicant , often with substantial monetary payments over a number of years .

this compensation has been termed an "exclusion" or "exit" payment or , because the payment flows counterintuitively , from the patent proprietor to the accused infringer , a "reverse" payment .

congress intended both the patent laws , on one hand , and the food and drug laws , on the other , to promote the development of new drugs .

fda approval of a new medication would therefore appear to promote the public interest .

antitrust enforcers have become increasingly concerned , however , that new drugs may be developed and marketed for the principal purpose of delaying generic entry .

in particular , some stakeholders have accused brand - name drug companies of introducing new , patented drugs while contemporaneously removing off - patent drugs from the marketplace .

this practice has been termed "product hopping," at least by its detractors .

the reasons that product hopping deters generic competition are more subtle than may first appear .

merely because a brand - name firm withdraws its products from the market , accompanied by removal of the drug from the orange book , would not prevent a generic firm from filing an anda rather than an nda .

the fda has expressly concluded that an anda "that refers to ... a listed drug that has been voluntarily withdrawn from sale in the united states must be accompanied by a petition seeking a determination whether the listed drug was withdrawn for safety or effectiveness reasons. .

put differently , an anda applicant need only demonstrate that a withdrawn reference product was not removed from the market for safety or effectiveness reasons in order to obtain marketing approval .

the principal reason that product hopping is a potentially effective generic exclusion strategy has more to do with state drug substitution laws .

under the laws of all 50 states and the district of columbia , pharmacists are either permitted or required to dispense a therapeutically equivalent generic drug in place of a brand - name drug unless the prescribing physician has stipulated otherwise .

most states and the district of columbia have adopted the fda's definition of "therapeutically equivalent" — namely , a generic drug must be designated as "ab" - rated within the orange book to be deemed therapeutically equivalent to a brand - name drug .

generic drug companies commonly compete with brand - name firms through state drug substitution laws .

as a result of this situation , when a brand - name firm "product hops" by withdrawing an off - patent drug and introducing a new , patented medication , generic firms may not be deemed therapeutically equivalent to the new drug under state law and therefore will not be substituted for brand - name prescriptions .

until 2015 , judicial precedent addressing product hopping was sparse and limited to decisions of the federal district courts .

the watershed decision of the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit in new york ex rel .

schneiderman v. actavis plc considerably altered the judicial landscape , providing that product hopping may indeed violate the antitrust laws .

for sake of clarity , this report will refer to the second circuit's effort as the namenda decision .

issued two years after the supreme court groundbreaking decision in actavis , the namenda opinion will likely embolden both government enforcers and the private plaintiffs' bar to pursue additional product hopping cases .

namenda involved two versions of the alzheimer's drug , namenda ir and namenda xr .

namenda ir is a twice - daily drug that neared the end of patent protection during july 2015 .

as a result , actavis introduced a new , once - daily extended release version called namenda xr .

according to the attorney general of new york , actavis initially embarked upon a "soft switch" strategy by continuing to market both drugs but actively promoting namenda xr .

by early 2014 , actavis shifted to a "hard switch" approach by notifying the fda it would discontinue namenda ir , with one limited exception .

actavis also requested that the centers for medicare and medicaid services remove namenda ir from their formularies , with the result that medicare health plans would not cover it .

the new york attorney general responded by bringing an antitrust suit against actavis , asserting that it had violated state and federal antitrust laws .

the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york issued a preliminary injunction requiring that actavis continue to market namenda ir until 30 days after july 11 , 2015 , the date of generic entry .

actavis then appealed to the second circuit , which affirmed the grant of the injunction .

writing for a three - judge panel , judge walker acknowledged that innovation generally benefits consumers .

however , he concluded that the namenda product hop was both anticompetitive and exclusionary .

in particular , the second circuit found that actavis had crossed the line from permissible "soft switch" persuasion to impermissible "hard switch" coercion .

the court of appeals also believed that the removal of namenda ir would substantially reduce competition .

judge walker found that withdrawal of namenda ir would necessarily convert patients to namenda xr with little probability of their switching back to namenda ir once a generic version became available .

judge walker also found little evidence of procompetitive justifications for withdrawing namenda ir from the market .

he cited evidence that actavis intended to delay generic competition and further found no evidence that antitrust scrutiny would meaningfully deter innovation .

the second circuit concluded "that the combination of withdrawing a successful drug [ir] from the market and introducing a reformulated version of that drug [xr] , which has the dual effect of forcing patients to switch to the new version and impeding generic competition , without a legitimate business justification , violates §2 of the sherman act. .

the namenda decision leaves open a number of issues that future litigation might resolve .

first , the second circuit seems to imply that a "soft switch" approach of aggressive marketing , but maintaining the older product on the market , would not run afoul of the antitrust laws .

the sorts of activities that , in the words of the court of appeals , "crosses the line" to impermissible conduct remains to be seen .

second , many critics of product hopping have suggested that newly introduced products do not provide much of an improvement over the old .

in circumstances where the new medicine is superior to its predecessor , perhaps the courts will prove more sympathetic to product hopping .

finally , the extent to which brand - name firms must actively support their generic competitors by keeping older products on the market may prove a divisive issue .

in the absence of explicit congressional guidance , the federal courts have applied general principles of antitrust law to address reverse payment settlements and product hopping .

several options are available for congress .

one possibility is to await further judicial developments in view of the actavis and namenda decisions .

another option is to regulate the settlement of pharmaceutical patent litigation in some manner .

in the 114 th congress , the fair and immediate release of generics act ( s. 131 ) , introduced by senator bingaman , would make a number of changes to the hatch - waxman act in order to discourage reverse payments settlements .

in particular , s. 131 would grant any generic firm the right to share the 180-day regulatory exclusivity if it wins a patent challenge in the district court or is not sued for patent infringement by the brand company .

the legislation would also oblige generic firms to abide by any deferred entry date agreed to in their settlements with brand - name firms , even if relevant patents were struck down previously .

finally , brand - name firms would be required to make a decision to enforce their patents within 45 days of being notified of a patent challenge by a generic firm under the hatch - waxman act .

in addition , the preserve access to affordable generics act ( s. 2019 ) , introduced by senator klobuchar , would declare that certain reverse payment settlements constitute acts of unfair competition .

in particular , that bill would amend the federal trade commission act to provide that an agreement "shall be presumed to have anticompetitive effects and be unlawful if — ( i ) an anda filer receives anything of value ; and ( ii ) the anda filer agrees to limit or forego research , development , manufacturing , marketing , or sales of the anda product for any period of time. .

certain exceptions apply — for example , the payment of reasonable litigation expenses not exceeding $7.5 million is not unlawful .

that "quick look" presumption would not apply if the parties to the agreement demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the procompetitive benefits of the agreement outweighed the anticompetitive effects of the agreement .

s. 2019 includes a list of factors to be weighed by the courts in such circumstances .

a third bill , s. 2023 , the prescription drug affordability act of 2015 , was introduced by senator sanders .

title iv of this legislation would act similarly to s. 2019 .

it would also create a presumption that reverse payment settlements violated the federal trade commission act , subject to certain exceptions .

however , unlike s. 2019 , the parties to the agreement cannot overcome this presumption by showing that its procompetitive benefits outweighed the anticompetitive harms .

congress has yet to consider legislation with respect to product hopping .

if the current situation is deemed satisfactory , then no action need be taken .

another alternative is to encourage more active antitrust enforcement in this area in view of the namenda decision .

and although the rules governing generic substitution are currently a matter of state law , federal oversight of these principles could also discourage product hopping .

the interaction between brand - name and generic firms forms an important component of the public health system of the united states .

the u.s. patient population relies upon brand - name drug companies to develop new medicines , but it also relies upon generic firms to increase access to such medications once they have been developed .

the hatch - waxman act provides for patent litigation between these two traditional rivals , as well as generic substitution , as the mechanisms through which these competing demands are mediated .

when concluded in a manner that comports with antitrust principles , these practices may further the public policy goals of encouraging the labors that lead to medical innovation , but also distributing the fruits of those labors to consumers .

