the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa ; p.l .

113-28 ) , which succeeded the workforce investment act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-220 ) , is the primary federal legislation that supports workforce development .

wioa was e nacted to bring about increased coordination and alignment among federal workforce development and related programs .

wioa replaced wia in the 113 th congress after passing the senate on june 25 , 2014 , by a vote of 95-3 and the house on july 9 , 2014 , by a vote of 415-6 , and being signed into law on july 22 , 2014 .

most of its provisions went into effect on july 1 , 2015 .

p.l .

113-128 authorizes appropriations for wioa programs from fy2015 through fy2020 .

wioa includes five titles: title i — workforce development activities — authorizes job training and related services to unemployed or underemployed individuals and establishes the governance and performance accountability system for wioa ; title ii — adult education and literacy — authorizes education services to assist adults in improving their basic skills , completing secondary education , and transitioning to postsecondary education ; title iii — amendments to the wagner - peyser act — amends the wagner - peyser act of 1933 to integrate the u.s. employment service ( es ) into the one - stop system authorized by wioa ; title iv — amendments to the rehabilitation act of 1973 — authorizes employment - related vocational rehabilitation services to individuals with disabilities , to integrate vocational rehabilitation into the one - stop system ; and title v — general provisions — specifies transition provisions from wia to wioa .

workforce development programs provide a combination of education and training services to prepare individuals for work and to help them improve their prospects in the labor market .

in the broadest sense , workforce development efforts include secondary and postsecondary education , on - the - job and employer - provided training , and the publicly funded system of job training and employment services .

this report focuses on the workforce development activities that the federal government supports through wioa , which are designed to increase the employment and earnings of workers .

this includes activities such as job search assistance , career counseling , occupational skills training , classroom training , or on - the - job training .

the primary focus of this report is on title i of wioa , which authorizes programs to provide job search , education , and training activities for individuals seeking to gain or improve their employment prospects , and which establishes the one - stop delivery system .

in addition , title i of wioa establishes the governing structure and the performance accountability for all programs authorized under wioa .

the programs and services authorized under title i are covered in detail in this report , while the programs and services authorized under titles ii and iv are not discussed in this report .

title iii , which amends the wagner - peyser act of 1933 , is discussed briefly in this report because of the integral role that the employment service ( es ) plays in the one - stop system .

title ii of wioa is the adult education and family literacy act ( aefla ) .

aefla supports educational services , primarily through grants to states , to help adults become literate in english and develop other basic skills necessary for employment and postsecondary education , and to become full partners in the education of their children .

title iii amends the wagner - peyser act of 1933 , which authorizes the employment service ( es ) , to make the es an integral part of the one - stop system amended by wioa .

because the es is a critical part of the one - stop system , it is discussed briefly in this report even though it is authorized by separate legislation .

title iv of wioa amends the rehabilitation act of 1973 and authorizes funding for vocational rehabilitation services for individuals with disabilities .

most programs under the rehabilitation act are related to the employment and independent living of individuals with disabilities .

following a brief history of federal workforce development programs , this report provides a discussion of the provisions and characteristics of wioa title i programs and services .

next , there is a description of the one - stop delivery system and workforce development boards ( wdbs ) , previously called workforce investment boards ( wibs ) .

this section includes an overview of the employment service .

following that , the report covers the services provided by the state formula grant programs and the national programs authorized under title i of wioa .

the section on title i concludes with a discussion of funding and performance accountability .

appendix a provides a glossary of selected key terms in wioa .

the tables in appendix b provide future authorization levels for programs authorized under titles i , ii , iii , and iv of wioa .

title i of wioa authorizes programs and activities that support job training and related services to unemployed and underemployed individuals .

title i programs are administered by the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) , primarily through its employment and training administration ( eta ) .

wioa authorizes appropriations for wioa programs from fy2015 through fy2020 .

in fy2015 , programs and activities authorized under title i of wioa were funded at $4.8 billion , comprising 53% of all wioa appropriations .

title i funding includes $2.6 billion for state formula grants for youth , adult , and dislocated worker training and employment activities ; $1.7 billion for the job corps program ; and $500 million for national programs .

title i of wioa — workforce development activities — authorizes job training and related employment services to unemployed or underemployed individuals and provides the governing structure for all titles of wioa .

in addition to state formula grant programs and job corps , wioa authorizes a number of competitive grant - based programs to provide employment and training services to special populations .

section 116 of wioa sets forth state and local "performance accountability measures" that apply "across the core programs to assess the effectiveness of states and local areas in achieving positive outcomes for individuals served by those programs. .

the wioa performance accountability system is designed around the "primary indicators" of performance for the "core programs" and takes effect starting in py2016 ( july 1 , 2016 – june 30 , 2017 ) .

the performance accountability system in wioa consists of two main components — indicators of performance and levels of performance .

performance indicators are the objective variables on which states and localities must report and are specified in statute , while performance levels are the numerical score for indicators and are negotiated between states , localities , and the departments of labor and education .

under wioa , "primary indicators of performance" consist of the required measures described in section 116 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( a ) and any additional indicators identified by individual states .

the six primary indicators of performance in wioa are the percentage of program participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the program ; the percentage of program participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the fourth quarter after exit from the program ; the median earnings of program participants who are in unsubsidized employment during the second quarter after exit from the program ; the percentage of program participants who obtain a recognized postsecondary credential ( or secondary school diploma or equivalent ) during participation or within one year after program exit ; the percentage of program participants who are in an education or training program that leads to a recognized postsecondary credential or employment and who are achieving measurable skill gains toward such a credential or employment ; and the indicators of effectiveness in serving employers established by the secretaries of labor and education .

programs that use the primary indicators of performance are listed in table 4 below .

in addition to the indicators listed in table 4 , states may identify additional indicators of performance and identify these in the state plan required under section 102 .

for each of the primary indicators of performance described above , each state is required to establish a "state adjusted level of performance" in the state plan .

that is , the indicators are identified in wioa section 116 , but the levels are determined through negotiation between states and the secretaries of labor and education .

in the state plan , states must identify the expected ( adjusted ) level of performance for each of the primary indicators for the first two program years of the state plan , which covers four program years .

these agreed - upon levels then become the "state adjusted level of performance" that is incorporated into the plan .

the negotiation between governors and the secretaries that leads to an agreement on adjusted levels of performance must be based on the following four factors: the relative levels across states ; the application of an objective statistical model developed by the secretaries of labor and education that helps make adjustments for actual economic conditions and characteristics of program participants ; the impact of agreed - upon levels on promoting "continuous improvement" in performance and ensuring "optimal return on investment" ; and the extent to which the adjusted levels of performance assist states in meeting performance goals set by the secretaries of labor and education .

as part of the process for determining adjusted levels of performance , wioa requires the development and use of a statistical adjustment model .

the objective statistical model is intended to assist states in setting performance levels and in revising state adjusted levels of performance by taking into account the differences among states in actual economic conditions and the characteristics of participants served .

in practice , this means an individual state sets its performance goals based on the relative ( to other states ) economic conditions and characteristics of participants and revises its performance levels at the end of a program year based on the actual economic conditions and characteristics of participants served .

glossary of selected wioa terms areas of substantial unemployment ( asu ) — this concept is used in the title i state formula grants for youth and adult activities .

as defined in sections 127 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) and 132 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( v ) ( iii ) , an asu is "any area that is of sufficient size and scope to sustain a program of workforce investment activities carried out under this subtitle and that has an average rate of unemployment of at least 6.5 percent for the most recent 12 months. .

states submit potential asu designations and dol approves asus once each fiscal year .

additional guidance from the employment and training administration defines an asu as a "contiguous area with a current population of at least 10,000 and an average unemployment rate of at least 6.5 percent for the 12-month reference period. .

if a state has a statewide unemployment rate of at least 6.5% , the entire state will be designated as an asu for allocation purposes .

economically disadvantaged — this concept is used in one of the factors for the title i state formula grants for youth and adult activities .

for the state formula grants for youth activities , "disadvantaged youth" is defined ( in section 127 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( c ) ) as an "individual who is age 16 through 21 who received an income , or is a member of a family that received a total family income , that , in relation to family size , does not exceed the higher of the poverty line or 70 percent of the lower living standard income level. .

similarly , a "disadvantaged adult" is defined ( in section 132 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( v ) ( iv ) ) in the same way as a disadvantaged youth with the exception that the individual is age 22 through 72 .

excess unemployment — this concept is used in one of the factors for the title i state formula grants for youth , adult , and dislocated worker activities .

for the state formula grants for youth and adult activities , excess unemployment is defined ( in sections 127 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( d ) and 132 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( v ) ( vi ) ) as the higher of "the number that represents the number of unemployed individuals in excess of 4.5 percent of the civilian labor force in the state" or "the number that represents the number of unemployed individuals in excess of 4.5 percent of the civilian labor force in areas of substantial unemployment in such state. .

for the state formula grant for dislocated worker activities , excess unemployment is defined ( in section 132 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ( iii ) ) as "the number that represents the number of unemployed individuals in excess of 4.5 percent of the civilian labor force in the state. .

for example , in a state with a civilian labor force of 100,000 and an unemployment rate of 8.0% ( which would equal 8,000 unemployed individuals ) , the "excess unemployment" would be 3,500 ( 8.0% - 4.5% = 3.5% ; 3.5% of 100,000 is 3,500 ) .

long - term unemployment — this concept is used in one of the factors for the title i state formula grants for dislocated worker activities .

for these grants , long - term unemployment is defined ( in section 132 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) ( ii ) ( iii ) ) as the number of individuals in a state who have been unemployed ( as measured by the bureau of labor statistics ) for at least 15 weeks .

relative number / share — this concept is used in the state formula grants for youth , adult , and dislocated worker activities .

each formula consists of three equally weighted factors .

the factors themselves are based on the concept of the "relative number" or "relative share" of that factor compared to the analogous number in all of the states .

an example from the dislocated worker activities formula — based on the factors of regular unemployment , excess unemployment , and long - term unemployment — will demonstrate this .

in the py2015 state formula allotments for dislocated workers , nevada had the following factor values: regular unemployment = 112,565 ; excess unemployment = 50,878 ; and long - term unemployment = 64,000 .

for each of these factors , nevada's "relative share" was calculated by dividing the number of individuals in nevada by the number of individuals in all states .

for example , nevada's relative share of regular unemployment was 1.10% ( 112,565 / 10,231,705 ) ; its share of excess unemployment was 1.58% ( 50,878 / 3,212,642 ) ; and its share of long - term unemployment was 1.25% ( 64,000 / 5,128,900 ) .

multiplying each of these individuals by 1 / 3 and summing the results would give nevada a total share of 1.31% ( ( 1.10%*1 / 3 ) + ( 1.58%*1 / 3 ) + ( 1.25%*1 / 3 ) ) .

finally , multiplying nevada's share , 1.31% , by the total dislocated worker state funding for all states ( $1,012,728,000 ) yields $13,272,377 , which nevada received in py2015 .

authorized and appropriated funding for programs authorized under wioa table b - 1 , table b - 2 , table b - 3 , and table b - 4 below show the authorized level of appropriations for every program authorized in wioa .

unlike its predecessor , the workforce investment act , which authorized "such sums as may be necessary" for its programs , wioa sets specific authorization levels for fy2015 through fy2020 .

actual appropriations are included in the tables too for each year they are available , as they may differ from the levels authorized .

