t he internet of things ( iot ) is a complex , often poorly understood phenomenon .

the term is more than a decade old , but interest has grown considerably over the last few years as applications have increased .

the impacts of the iot on the economy and society more generally are expected by many to grow substantially .

this report was developed to assist congress in responding to some commonly asked questions about it: " what is the internet of things ( iot ) ? .

" how does the iot work ? .

" what impacts will the iot have ? .

" what is the current federal role ? .

" what issues might affect the development and implementation of the iot ? .

" what actions has congress taken ? .

" where can i find additional resources on this topic ? .

when people talk about the internet , they are usually referring to the electronic network that permits computers around the world to communicate with each other .

what , then , is the iot ? .

there is no universally agreed - upon definition , but generally , the term is used to describe networks of objects that are not themselves computers but that have embedded components that connect to the internet .

"things" may include , for example , smart meters , fitness trackers , personal vehicles , home appliances , medical devices , and even clothing used by individual consumers .

they may also include embedded devices in roadways and in other components of infrastructure such as electric grids , manufacturing plants and other buildings , farms , and virtually any other object , element , or system for which remote communications , control , or data collection and processing might be useful .

while fixed and mobile computing devices such as desktop computers , smartphones , and tablets are generally not considered to be iot objects , smartphones in particular have features such as motion and position sensors that blur the distinctions .

some smartphone applications , for example , enable them to be used in fitness tracking and other health monitoring .

in other words , the iot potentially includes huge numbers and kinds of interconnected objects .

in practice , iot refers not to a simple or uniform network of objects but rather to a complex collection of objects and networks .

specific dimensions of the iot may be referred to by terms such as smart grid , connected cities , and industrial internet .

other terms may also be used in the context of iot to denote related concepts such as cyber - physical systems and the internet of everything .

the iot is often considered the next major stage in the evolution of cyberspace .

the first electronic computers were developed in the 1940s , but 40 years passed before connecting computers through wired devices began to spread in the 1980s .

the first decade of the 21 st century saw the next stage , marked by the rapid spread of smartphones and other mobile devices that use wireless communications , as well as social media , big - data analytics , and cloud computing .

building on those advances , connections between two or more machines ( m2m ) and between machines and people are expected by many observers to lead to huge growth in the iot by 2020 .

the iot is not separate from the internet , but rather , a potentially huge extension and expansion of it .

the "things" that form the basis of the iot are objects .

they could be virtually anything — streetlights , thermostats , electric meters , fitness trackers , factory equipment , automobiles , unmanned aircraft systems ( uass or drones ) , or even cows or sheep in a field .

what makes an object part of the iot is embedded or attached computer chips or similar components that give the object both a unique identifier and internet connectivity .

objects with such components are often called "smart" — such as smart meters and smart cars .

internet connectivity allows a smart object to communicate with computers and with other smart objects .

connections of smart objects to the internet can be wired , such as through ethernet cables , or wireless , such as via a wi - fi or cellular network .

to enable precise communications , each iot object must be uniquely identifiable .

that is accomplished through an internet protocol ( ip ) address , a number assigned to each internet - connected device , whether a desktop computer , a mobile phone , a printer , or an iot object .

those ip addresses ensure that the device or object sending or receiving information is correctly identified .

what kinds of information do iot objects communicate ? .

the answer depends on the nature of the object , and it can be simple or complex .

for example , a smart thermometer might have only one sensor , used to communicate ambient temperature to a remote weather - monitoring center .

a wireless medical device might , in contrast , use various sensors to communicate a person's body temperature , pulse , blood pressure , and other variables to a medical service provider via a computer or mobile phone .

smart objects can also be involved in command networks .

for example , industrial control systems can adjust manufacturing processes based on input from both other iot objects and human operators .

network connectivity can permit such operations to be performed in "real time" — that is , almost instantaneously .

smart objects can form systems that communicate information and commands among themselves , usually in concert with computers they connect to .

this kind of communication enables the use of smart systems in homes , vehicles , factories , and even entire cities .

smart systems allow for automated and remote control of many processes .

a smart home can permit remote control of lighting , security , hvac ( heating , ventilating , and air conditioning ) , and appliances .

in a smart city , an intelligent transportation system ( its ) may permit vehicles to communicate with other vehicles and roadways to determine the fastest route to a destination , avoiding traffic jams , and traffic signals can be adjusted based on congestion information received from cameras and other sensors .

buildings might automatically adjust electric usage , based on information sent from remote thermometers and other sensors .

an industrial internet application can permit companies to monitor production systems and adjust processes , remotely control and synchronize machinery operations , track inventory and supply chains , and perform other tasks .

iot connections and communications can be created across a broad range of objects and networks and can transform previously independent processes into integrated systems .

these integrated systems can potentially have substantial effects on homes and communities , factories and cities , and every sector of the economy , both domestically and globally .

the iot may significantly affect many aspects of the economy and society , although the full extent and nature of its eventual impacts remains uncertain .

many observers predict that the growth of the iot will bring positive benefits through enhanced integration , efficiency , and productivity across many sectors of the u.s. and global economies .

among those commonly mentioned are agriculture , energy , health care , manufacturing , and transportation .

significant impacts may also be felt more broadly on economic growth , infrastructure and cities , and individual consumers .

however , both policy and technical challenges , including security and privacy issues , might inhibit the growth and impact of iot innovations .

there is no single federal agency that has overall responsibility for the iot , just as there is no one agency with overall responsibility for cyberspace .

federal agencies may find the iot useful in helping them fulfill their missions through a variety of applications such as those discussed in this report and elsewhere .

each agency is responsible under various laws and regulations for the functioning and security of its own iot , although some technologies , such as drones , may also fall under some aspects of the jurisdiction of other agencies .

various agencies have regulatory , sector - specific , and other mission - related responsibilities that involve aspects of iot .

for example , entities that use wireless communications for their iot devices will be subject to allocation rules for the portions of the electromagnetic spectrum that they use .

the federal communications commission ( fcc ) allocates and assigns spectrum for nonfederal entities .

in the department of commerce , the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) fulfills that function for federal entities , and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) creates standards , develops new technologies , and provides best practices for the internet and internet - enabled devices .

the federal trade commission ( ftc ) regulates and enforces consumer protection policies , including for privacy and security of consumer iot devices .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) is responsible for coordinating security for the 16 critical infrastructure sectors .

many of those sectors use industrial control systems ( ics ) , which are often connected to the internet , and the dhs national cybersecurity and communications integration center ( nccic ) has an ics cyber emergency response team ( ics - cert ) to help critical - infrastructure entities address ics cybersecurity issues .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) also has responsibilities with respect to the cybersecurity of internet - connected medical devices .

the department of justice ( doj ) addresses law - enforcement aspects of iot , including cyberattacks , unlawful exfiltration of data from devices and / or networks , and investigation and prosecution of other computer and intellectual property crimes .

relevant activities at the department of energy ( doe ) include those associated with developing high - performance and green buildings , and other energy - related programs , including those related to smart electrical grids .

the department of transportation ( dot ) has established an intelligent transportation systems joint program office ( its jpo ) to coordinate various programs and activities throughout dot relating to the development and deployment of connected vehicles and systems , involving all modes of surface transportation .

dot mode - specific agencies also engage in its activities .

the federal aviation administration ( faa ) is involved in regulation and other activities relating to unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) and commercial systems ( uas ) .

the department of defense was a pioneer in the development of much of the foundational technology for the iot .

most of its iot deployment has related to its combat mission , both directly and for logistical and other support .

in addition to the activities described above , several agencies are engaged in research and development ( r&d ) related to the iot .

like nist , the national science foundation ( nsf ) engages in cyber - physical systems research and other activities that cut across various iot applications .

the networking and information technology research and development program ( nitrd ) , under the office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) coordinates federal agency r&d in networking and information technology .

the nitrd cyber physical systems senior steering group "coordinates programs , budgets and policy recommendations" for iot r&d .

other agencies involved in such r&d include the food and drug administration ( fda ) , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the national institutes of health ( nih ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , and several dod agencies .

the white house has also announced a smart - cities initiative focusing on the development of a research infrastructure , demonstration projects , and other r&d activities .

the internet of things is often lauded for its potentially revolutionary applications .

indeed , iot devices are today being implemented in many different sectors for a vast array of purposes .

however , it is still unclear how iot will progress due to challenges associated with both technical and policy issues .

for additional assistance on the iot and related topics , see crs report r44225 , the internet of things: crs experts , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

congressional offices may also contact crs by placing a request via telephone or online through the crs website ( see http: / / www.crs.gov / aboutcrs / contact - us ) .

