federal advisory committees are designed to collect a variety of viewpoints and to provide advice or recommendations to the executive and legislative branches of the federal government from nonfederal sources .

congress , the president , or agency heads may establish advisory committees , which render independent advice or make recommendations to their affiliated departments or agencies , and in some cases make recommendations to the president or congress .

congress can also statutorily authorize an agency to create an advisory committee ( leaving the final determination of whether to establish the advisory committee at the agency's discretion ) .

in 1972 , congress passed the federal advisory committee act ( faca ) in response to the perception that existing advisory committees were duplicative , inefficient , and lacked adequate control or oversight .

faca sets structural and operational requirements for advisory committees , including formal reporting and oversight procedures .

faca requires that committee membership be "fairly balanced in terms of the points of view represented," and that the advice provided by committees be objective , independent , and accessible to the public .

additionally , faca requires that committee meetings be open to the public , unless the material discussed meets certain requirements .

pursuant to faca , the general services administration ( gsa ) promulgates regulations and produces management guidelines for federal advisory committees .

gsa also maintains the faca database , a database of information concerning faca committee membership , operations , and costs .

federal advisory committees can be effective tools for gathering expertise from a variety of federal and nonfederal experts .

the data discussed and analyzed throughout this report show that advisory committees have certain commonalities , but each committee has a unique structure , operation , and mission .

despite these differences , faca provides a common framework through which these committees communicate with the public and ultimately offer policy recommendations to federal officials .

congress could decide to amend faca in ways that might affect costs or operations associated with faca administration .

this section discusses some potential policy options for congress .

as discussed earlier in this report , gsa requires committees to report certain data elements ( eg , the number of members serving on the committee or the total costs incurred by the committee ) .

gsa asks for , but does not require , other data elements — such as subcommittee titles , membership , and costs .

within the faca database , therefore , some advisory committees offer detailed information about their subcommittees while others do not .

congress , for example , could consider whether the public should have access to data that identify the membership and costs of advisory body subcommittees .

this information could make the operations of faca committees more transparent .

such reporting requirements , however , might increase the amount of time committees spend reporting such information .

requiring subcommittees to report costs and member data could also cause some confusion over costs because it may be unclear whether data reported by the full committee represent both the full committee and its subcommittees or only the full committee .

gsa would need to provide clear guidelines on how committees are to report data for full committees and subcommittees as well as make clear to those who use the dataset how the data were collected and are reported .

member names and affiliations are available in the faca database .

database users are able to enter a member's first or last name into the database search engine and will be brought to an online list that includes every name that matches their request .

despite the usefulness of this feature , concerns exist over the consistency of member name inputs .

for example , certain members may serve on multiple committees .

according to the faca database , health and human services secretary sylvia burwell served on the greatest number of committees in fy2014 ( 29 ) .

although burwell's name was easy to identify as a unique member , the name "john williams" is not .

in fy2014 , "john williams" appears on the membership rosters of 6 committees .

it is unclear whether this is the same "john williams" in each case or if there is more than one "john williams" serving as a member of an advisory committee .

in another example , a single member could be input in the database under multiple variations or misspellings of their name and title .

in that case , database users may not be able to determine that it was the same person serving on all of those committees .

the faca database , therefore , may not be optimally helpful in allowing the public to determine who from the private sector or from other levels of government is given multiple opportunities to advise policymakers .

congress may have an interest in requiring gsa to clarify requirements for inputting faca member names and affiliations .

legislation introduced in the 113 th congress ( h.r .

3316 , the grant reform and new transparency act of 2013 ( grant act ) ) would have , among other things , required committee members be assigned "unique identifiers. .

as of this writing , similar legislation has not been introduced in the 114 th congress .

creating a unique identifier could demonstrate a person's service and influence over time without identity confusion .

the unique identifier could be used in lieu of a name or other personal detail .

in that way , a unique identifier may provide anonymity for peer reviewers who need their identities to be kept secret for fear they may be subject to criticism by peers who disagree with their recommendations .

congress may , however , decide that making such a change to data entry practices could add time and costs to operating and maintaining the faca database .

in addition , the public identification of each member on grant - making committees could make it difficult to attract qualified and appropriate members to the committee .

some academic communities are small enough so most practitioners know one another's work .

if a grant applicant was provided access to a meeting in which he learned a colleague voted against his or her grant application , that scholar may seek to harm the future work or reputation of the advisory board member .

some level of anonymity for grant reviewers , therefore , may be warranted .

congress , however , may decide that the identity of anyone who serves on a federal advisory committee should be public at all times .

in fy2015 , faca committee data demonstrated that the federal government paid nonfederal members of federal advisory committees $37.3 million .

in addition to pay , nonfederal members are eligible to receive travel and per diem costs .

in fy2015 , faca committees reported that nonfederal members received $46.6 million in travel and per diem costs .

in some cases , these members may be appointed to the committee specifically to serve as representatives of a private industry ; state , local , or tribal government ; or a nonprofit organization .

in these cases , the federal government may be paying employees of private sector organizations or other levels of government to serve on a federal advisory committee as advocates for nonfederal entities .

according to crs analysis , in fy2015 , 10 faca committees reported providing compensation — in addition to travel and per diem — to a total of 659 members who were designated as representatives .

the data show that most representatives who received compensation in addition to travel costs and per diem were affiliated with universities or research institutions .

it is unclear why these members were designated as representatives .

regardless , this designation allows the members to provide advice to the federal government without complying with many ethics requirements placed on other federal employees .

these members , therefore , do not have to recuse themselves from any recommendation — regardless of whether they may benefit from it financially or otherwise .

congress may choose to consider whether faca committee members appointed to serve as representatives should receive compensation from the government for their service .

moreover , congress may choose to consider amending faca to clarify whether the federal government should pay any nonfederal member of an advisory body — regardless of member designation .

most members receive pay to cover their travel costs as well as a payment for per diem expenses .

congress may decide it is unnecessary to provide compensation to members in addition to travel and per diem .

such an amendment to faca would have reduced faca implementation costs in fy2015 by nearly $37.3 million .

on the other hand , congress may conclude that paying members of federal advisory bodies will attract a more qualified membership .

certain representatives or scholars from outside of the federal government may choose not to participate on a federal advisory committee unless they believe they are receiving what they perceive to be fair compensation for their time and expertise .

the analysis of faca data suggests several categories in which grant review committees and special emphasis panels appear to operate differently than faca committees with other functions .

the most notable example of these differences is the percentage of closed meetings grant review committees and special emphasis panels hold .

more than 99.5% of grant review committee meetings and 99.9% of special emphasis panel meetings were closed to the public in fy2015 .

as noted earlier , if grant review committees and special emphasis panels are removed from the analysis of open and closed meetings in fy2015 , 73.5% of faca committee meetings would be open , as opposed to 24.8% when they are included .

grant review committee and special emphasis panel meetings are likely closed to the public for a variety of reasons .

for example , a subject matter expert may join a faca committee to provide his or her honest expert advice on which academic studies are the most qualified to receive a federal grant .

the expert may not be able to provide an opinion in a public forum without fear of retaliation or other response .

additionally , meetings may be closed to protect proprietary information that a grant applicant may supply in his or her grant proposal .

faca was enacted to make federal advisory committee meetings more transparent and accessible to the public .

it may be argued , therefore , that including committees whose primary function requires closed meetings under faca may not appropriately fit faca's aims .

grant review committees and special emphasis panels also have , on average , more meetings and more members than federal advisory committees with other functions .

this characteristic arguably demonstrates further that the operations and use of grant - review committees and special emphasis panels appear substantively different from those of other federal advisory committees .

congress might consider removal of grant review committees and special emphasis panels from the jurisdiction of faca .

removing those committee functions from the faca database would demonstrate faca's efforts to make federal meetings more transparent and accessible .

removing grant review committees from the faca dataset could , however , make oversight of advisory committees more difficult for congress and the public because the information on such committees would no longer be available in a single , centralized database .

congress could also consider removal of grant review committees and special emphasis panels from the jurisdiction of faca while requiring those committees to continue to report certain data elements to gsa .

legislation in the 114 th congress ( h.r .

2347 , the federal advisory committee act amendments of 2015 ) , as reported in the house , would amend faca in several ways .

among the amendments would be a requirement to clearly designate each nonfederal member of an advisory committee as either a representative or a special government employee .

h.r .

2347 would also require agencies to provide "interested persons an opportunity to suggest potential committee members. .

currently , agencies are not required to solicit public input on their advisory committee membership , provided their selections adhere to federal law .

furthermore , h.r .

2347 would require agencies to designate advisory committee management officers to supervise advisory committees and ensure that information pertaining to advisory committees and their activities is made available on the agency's website .

h.r .

2347 would also require the government accountability office to conduct reviews of agency compliance with faca .

legislation similar to h.r .

2347 was introduced in the following previous congresses: 113 th congress ( h.r .

1104 ) ; 112 th congress ( h.r .

3124 and h.r .

1144 ) ; 111 th congress ( h.r .

1320 ) ; and 110 th congress ( h.r .

5687 ) .

appendix a .

raw data used to create figures crs used data from the faca database to create the figures provided in this report .

this appendix provides the raw data used in the crs analysis .

appendix b. administratively inactive committees appendix c. committee membership and meeting .

