o ver the past decade , the size and growth of college and university endowments has attracted the attention of academicians and policymakers .

in 2008 , senator chuck grassley and representative peter welch convened a roundtable discussion entitled "maximizing the use of endowment funds and making higher education more affordable. .

more recently , discussion of endowments featured heavily in a house ways and means committee hearing on "the rising costs of higher education and tax policy. .

in 2016 , the house committee on ways and means held a hearing focusing exclusively on tax - exempt college and university endowments .

the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 ) included a new excise tax on the net investment income of certain college and university endowments .

at the end of fy2017 , endowment balances for the 809 institutions included in the national association of college and university business officers ( nacubo ) - commonfund study of endowments totaled $566.8 billion .

in inflation - adjusted terms , endowment balances trended upwards through most of the 1990s and 2000s .

endowment balances declined sharply during the financial crisis that began in 2008 , but subsequently recovered .

strong investment returns have contributed to this growth in endowment balances .

for 2017 , endowments earned an average return of 12.2% .

over time , an increasing proportion of endowment funds have been invested in "alternative strategies," including private equity and hedge funds .

large endowments are more likely than smaller endowments to have their funds invested in alternative strategies .

spending , or payouts , from endowments supports various higher education activities .

the spending rate , or payout rate , has fluctuated over time .

for 2017 , the payout rate for nacubo institutions was 4.4% .

on average , in recent years , institutions with the largest endowments have tended to have payout rates that exceeded average payout rates for institutions with smaller endowments .

this report begins by providing background information on college and university endowments , and discussing their current - law tax treatment .

the report then reviews available data and trends related to endowment balances , payout rates , and investment returns .

the report concludes with a discussion of several policy options to change the current tax treatment of college and university endowments .

a college or university's endowment fund — often referred to simply as an endowment — is an investment fund maintained for the benefit of the educational institution .

endowments may also hold cash or property .

income from the endowment is used to cover the cost of the college or university's operations and capital expenditures , to fund special projects , or for reinvestment .

typically , a college or university endowment includes hundreds , if not thousands , of individual funds that are the result of various agreements between donors and the recipient institution .

there are several types of endowment funds .

donors may give funds to a true endowment , or permanent endowment .

oftentimes , donors impose restrictions on the institutions spending the principal balance of true endowments .

donors may also impose restrictions on the use of income earned on true endowments .

true endowments may contain funds that the donors have dedicated to scholarships or faculty support , for example .

a term endowment is an endowment where funds may be restricted by the donor for some period of time .

after the set period of time has passed , unused funds or principal may become unrestricted .

institutions may also put other unrestricted funds , such as those from general gifts or bequests , in the institution's endowment .

these funds are typically referred to as a quasi - endowment .

typically , when looking at the total value of an institution's endowments , true endowments , term endowments , and quasi - endowments are included .

of the $566.8 billion in endowment assets reported to nacubo in 2017 , $255.3 billion ( 45% ) was in a true endowment , while $135.4 billion ( 24% ) was in a quasi - endowment .

of the true endowment balance , $233.3 billion was donor restricted ( 41% of total endowment market value ) .

the reported term endowment balance was $12.3 billion ( 2% ) .

endowments are tax - exempt for one of two reasons .

either they are part of a university which is tax - exempt as a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization or a government entity ( public universities ) , or the endowment itself has 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) tax - exempt status .

contributions to 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) s and government entities are generally tax deductible to the contributor under internal revenue code ( irc ) section 170 .

another benefit of an endowment's tax - exempt status is that , except for the recent excise tax on the net investment income of endowments at certain institutions , the investment earnings are tax free .

the 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status of colleges and universities — and by extension their endowments — is a result of them being organized and operated exclusively for purposes listed in section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) , specifically charitable and educational purposes .

if the return from endowments of colleges and universities were taxed currently at 35% , the revenue gain is estimated at $15.3 billion ; taxed at the new corporate rate of 21% , the amount would be $9.9 billion .

if only private universities and colleges were subject to a tax , the gain would be estimated at $10.4 billion at a 35% rate and $6.4 billion at a 21% rate , since public institutions are responsible for 32% of assets .

this figure can be compared with the estimated value of other tax provisions that directly benefit educational institutions .

these include the deduction for charitable contributions to educational institutions , estimated to reduce revenues by $10.5 billion in fy2017 ( while the deduction is claimed by individuals and corporations , the benefit also accrues to institutions of higher education ) ; private activity tax - exempt bonds for nonprofit educational institutions , estimated at $3.8 billion ; and the share of general obligation tax exempt bonds benefits that accrue to public institutions of higher education , which are estimated at around $1.4 billion .

these benefits total approximately $15.7 billion .

beginning in 2018 , the value of these provisions would be expected to be somewhat smaller under the new tax rules .

there are a number of policy options related to the tax treatment of endowments , should there be a desire to change the status quo .

policy options considered may depend on the overarching policy objective .

for example , is the goal of the policy to encourage colleges and universities to use endowment funds for a specific purpose ? .

or is the objective of the policy to carve back or restrict the tax exemption currently provided to endowments ? .

or is the objective to look at endowments as a source of federal revenue ? .

identifying the goals of endowment - related tax policies may help inform the analysis of specific policy options .

leaving current - law tax treatment of endowments unchanged is also an option .

soon after the 1.4% excise tax on private college and university endowment's net investment income was enacted , legislation was introduced that would repeal the tax .

repeal of the tax is one option .

other policy options include those that would reduce or eliminate the tax in certain situations .

for example , the tax could be reduced or eliminated for institutions that devote a certain portion of endowment returns to financial aid for low - and middle - income students .

alternatively , the tax could be waived for institutions that meet a fixed payout objective ( discussed further below ) or as part of a policy requiring increased reporting related to endowments and uses of endowment funds ( discussed further below ) .

another option would be to repeal the tax , but require that some portion of endowment assets be managed by minority - and women - owned asset management firms .

options to modify or redesign the tax could also be considered .

for example , the tax could be expanded to apply to more institutions , or the cut - off points ( either the per - student or assets per fte thresholds ) changed .

the tax could also be modified to be more punitive in nature .

for example , representative reed has suggested an approach that would require institutions with endowment assets in excess of $1 billion to use at least 25% of investment gains to reduce the cost of attendance for lower - and middle - income students .

institutions not meeting this target would face a tax of 30% of net investment income , with the tax increasing for institutions that do not use endowments to reduce cost of attendance as stipulated over time .

taxing the net investment income of private college and university endowments had been proposed as part of an earlier tax reform effort .

the tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

1 ) , a tax reform proposal introduced in the 113 th congress by then ways and means committee chairman dave camp , proposed a flat excise tax for foundations and extended it to net investment earnings of private universities and colleges .

under this proposal , private colleges and universities with endowments in excess of $100,000 per student would be subject to a 1% excise tax .

the tax on net investment returns of private college and university endowments enacted in the 2017 tax revision ( p.l .

115-97 ) applies to institutions with endowments in excess of $500,000 per student , at a rate of 1.4% .

additionally , the tax only applies to institutions with at least 500 students .

some policymakers have proposed requiring endowments to pay out a minimum amount every year to prevent "an unreasonable accumulation of taxpayer - subsidized funds. .

one option would be to require that endowments have a minimum 5% payout rate , similar to that required of private foundations .

in the face of rising tuition , it has been suggested that to achieve their charitable and educational objectives , colleges and universities should use a greater portion of their endowments to reduce college prices and make a college education more accessible and affordable for students .

there are a number of policy design choices that could be considered when imposing a payout requirement .

while a payout requirement of 5% — the payout requirement for private nonoperating foundations — is one option , some other level ( higher or lower ) could be chosen .

the payout requirement could be restricted to certain endowments , such as those that exceed a certain threshold , either in absolute terms ( $500 million , for example ) or on a per - student basis .

payout requirements could be tied to investment earnings , or capped to not exceed investment earnings in down years .

payout requirements could also be determined on a rolling basis ( 5% over a 3-year period , for example ) .

payouts requirements could also be tied to tuition levels , metrics on student need ( pell grant recipients , for example ) , or students' receipt of federal student aid .

additional nuances could complicate various policy design choices .

for example , if payout requirements were to be imposed in institutions with endowments per student above some predetermined level , what measure of students would be used ( eg , would the measure of students include graduate students ; would the measure of students be fall enrollment , the 12-month unduplicated headcount , full - time equivalents , or some other measure ? ) .

opponents of a payout requirement for endowments say the approach is misguided , and have been critical of various aspects of different payout policy options .

when considering payout policies that target institutions with large endowments , some have suggested that these institutions may be more likely to offer robust financial aid and perhaps more likely to have modest tuition increases over time .

in recent years , institutions with larger endowments have tended to have higher average payouts than institutions with smaller endowments .

thus , a payout requirement applied to all institutions regardless of endowment size could impose a greater burden on institutions with smaller endowments .

some have also questioned whether the 5% payout rate that currently applies to nonoperating foundations would be appropriate for endowments , noting that operating foundations often have lower effective payout rates .

finally , there are concerns that imposing a payout requirement might serve as a ceiling rather than a floor , leading institutions that would have paid out more than 5% ( or whatever rate is required ) to make payouts that meet the requirement but no more .

one issue raised by university representatives is restrictions on endowments imposed by donors ( i.e. , donor - restricted funds , discussed earlier ) .

donor restrictions come in two forms ( which often appear simultaneously ) : a requirement that the principal not be spent ( so as to preserve the fund permanently ) and a requirement that funds be spent for specified purposes .

mary frances mccourt , representing nacubo at a recent hearing , indicated that , in fy2014 , colleges received $7.7 billion in new financial contributions to their endowments .

of those new gifts , 90% were restricted for a specific purpose by the donors .

since most endowments have grown over time , and proposed payout rates tend to be below earnings over time , restrictions on not spending principal could likely be designed to be manageable for most institutions .

if a payout were to be required , payouts might come from quasi - endowments , as opposed to donor - restricted funds .

as noted earlier in this report ( see the " what is an endowment ? .

section ) , in 2017 , 24% of all endowment funds were reportedly held in quasi - endowments , and 25% of endowment funds in a nondefined "other" category .

thus , across endowments as a whole , it could be possible to meet a payout requirement even if a sizable portion of endowment funds is restricted .

what is not clear is how a payout requirement might affect specific institutions , where the proportion of restricted endowment funds may be higher .

restrictions on purposes are unlikely to impose a constraint to increased payouts , either for increasing spending generally or for the purpose of slowing tuition increases , because of the fungibility of money .

that is , if some endowment funds are limited to specific purposes and increased spending for those purposes is not feasible ( eg , supporting an endowed chair ) , increased payouts from other endowments without restrictions or endowments that are devoted to student aid can be used to meet a payout requirement .

providing aid to students is one of the most common restrictions .

nevertheless , any legislation requiring a payout or a payout tied to a particular purpose might need a "safe harbor" so that colleges and universities would not be caught between legal restrictions on donations and payout requirements .

protections from fluctuations in asset values might also be addressed by requiring minimum payout averaged over several years .

another option would be to impose a tax on the value of endowments or impose additional taxes on endowment earnings .

as is the case with the payout option , there are a number of different ways such a policy could be designed .

for example , the tax could only be applied to endowments of a certain size , or to institutions with "large" endowments that have increased tuition at a certain rate ( more than the rate of inflation , for example ) .

endowment earnings could also be subject to tax .

one option would be to impose a tax similar to the current maximum rate of 21% already imposed on tax - exempt entities for earnings from activities not related to their exempt purpose ( the unrelated business income tax , ubit ) .

a tax on endowments or an additional tax on endowment earnings would generate additional federal revenues .

these revenues could be earmarked to provide student aid across all colleges and universities , or could be treated as general fund revenues or used for other purposes .

whether a tax on endowments encourages universities to spend more is unclear: saving via the endowment becomes more expensive ( as the after - tax return is lower ) which would encourage payouts relative to endowment savings and accumulation .

however , with lower after - tax returns , more saving may be needed to meet future endowment accumulation goals .

donors making contributions to endowments can claim the charitable deduction at the time the gift is made , even if the gift is not immediately used for charitable purposes .

gifts to endowments are often spent out over long periods of time .

reducing the value of the charitable deduction for gifts that are spent out over time , or are not immediately used for charitable purposes , could change incentives for giving donations that are related to endowments .

limiting the charitable deduction for restricted gifts to endowments or term endowments would reduce the tax incentive for making this kind of contribution .

taxpayers might choose instead to make nonrestricted contributions , substituting one form of giving for another .

since limiting the deduction would reduce the tax incentive for giving to endowments , overall contributions may fall .

one option for implementing this approach could be to limit the deduction based on when the contribution is expected to be spent .

for example , if the contribution is expected to support educational activities for 10 years , some adjustment could be made to reflect the fact that a dollar spent in the future is worth less than a dollar spent today , as a result of inflation .

since this type of adjustment could become complex , it could be limited to gifts of a certain size .

another option would be to provide an enhanced charitable deduction for certain types of gifts .

for example , taxpayers making charitable donations of funds that would be used to offset tuition for lower - and middle - income students could receive an enhanced charitable deduction for such contributions .

as discussed above , some have noted that the increased share of endowment assets being invested in alternative strategies , particularly hedge funds , raises concerns about the use of offshore blocker corporations to avoid ubit .

the ability to use offshore blocker corporations to avoid ubit creates disparate tax treatment between debt - financed investments made domestically and those made offshore .

some have also expressed concern that current law creates an incentive to borrow to increase the level of the endowment , which could force spending cutbacks in a downturn .

in 2007 , then chairman of the ways and means committee charles rangel introduced a bill , h.r .

3970 , which addressed the disparate tax treatment of domestic and offshore investments by exempting partnership income from the ubit .

following hearings by the senate finance committee in 2007 , a draft proposal by senators grassley and wyden circulated in august 2008 proposed instead to disallow the use of offshore blocker corporations by providing look - through rules to determine the source of earnings .

others have suggested that congress could disallow the use of blocker corporations and expand the scope of ubit rules covering debt - financed investment to apply to all forms of leveraged investment .

another option would be to repeal debt - financed ubit rules , eliminating the incentive created under current law to use offshore blocker corporations .

in 2016 , the chairmen of the senate committee on finance and the house committee on ways and means , along with the ways and means oversight subcommittee chairman , sent a letter to 56 colleges and universities requesting information regarding the operations and status of the institution's endowments .

others have suggested that the irs form 990 be modified to collect additional information on endowment funds .

if endowment spending on financial aid and low - and moderate - income students is an issue of interest , it might be useful to collect additional information on spending on grants and scholarships .

another area of potential concern is administrative expenses associated with managing the endowment , including fees paid to third parties .

it might also be helpful to policymakers to have additional information on the types of endowments held .

for example , are endowments composed of quasi - endowments ? .

or is the use of assets otherwise restricted ? .

policymakers might also seek information on endowment holdings of real property .

collecting additional information on college and university endowments could increase transparency , while also being useful for policymakers in both policy and oversight capacities .

a potential trade - off associated with collecting additional information is increased administrative burden .

appendix a. endowment data reported to the irs by 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) institutions data on endowments of 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) universities and colleges are reported on schedule d of irs form 990 informational returns .

the irs makes available data files that contain a sample of information reported on the form 990s .

the most recent year for which irs microdata files are available is 2014 .

public universities and colleges are not required to file 990s and thus information on nonfiling institutions' endowments is not included in the irs data .

the irs soi 990 sample contains 1,048 observations of higher education entities , including colleges , universities , two - year colleges , and graduate and professional schools .

since the irs soi file is a sample , and not all smaller institutions are included , the sample weights can be used to estimate the population .

overall , this sample represents an estimated 1,782 institutions .

for 2014 , these institutions reported total endowments of $390.2 billion .

in addition to collecting data on endowment balances , the irs collects data on endowment contributions ; net investment earnings , gains , and losses ; grants and scholarships ; other expenditures for facilities and programs ; and administrative expenses .

contributions and positive net investment earnings increase endowment balances .

grants and scholarships , expenditures for facilities and programs , and administrative expenses reduce endowment balances .

in 2014 , $11.3 billion was reported in contributions to 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) higher education endowments ( see table a - 1 ) .

this amount is equal to 3.0% of the endowment balances reported at the beginning of 2014 .

net investment earnings on endowment funds were reported to be $20.3 billion in 2012 , or 5.4% of total endowment funds .

the largest category of endowment spending in 2014 was for facilities and programs , $12.0 billion , or 3.2% of total endowment funds .

grants and scholarships were $4.2 billion in 2014 , or 1.1% of endowment funds .

administrative costs were $1.0 billion , or 0.3% of endowment funds .

data reported by 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) universities and colleges on their irs form 990 can be used to calculate payout rates .

following nacubo , effective spending rates , or payout rates , are calculated as distribution for spending ( spending on grants or scholarships and other expenditures for facilities and programs ) divided by the beginning of year endowment value , net of administrative expenses .

payout rates for different endowment size classes are reported in table a - 2 , in both dollar - weighted and equal - weighted terms .

analysis of the distribution of payout rate for 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) higher education institutions reveals a couple of trends .

first , median payouts tend to be higher for institutions with larger endowments .

second , payout rates for larger institutions are more concentrated .

the difference between the payout rate for institutions at the 25 th percentile and those at the 50 th percentile is greater for institutions with smaller endowments .

appendix b .

top 100 college and university endowments table b - 1 lists the top 100 u.s. college and university endowments reported to nacubo as of fy2017 , including both public and private institutions .

harvard university has the largest endowment , at $36.0 billion .

harvard held 6.4% of all endowment assets reported to nacubo as of fy2017 .

the second - largest endowment was held by the yale university system , at $27.2 billion , or 4.8% of all endowment assets .

taken together , the top 100 institutions listed in table b - 1 held 76.2% of endowment assets as of fy2017 .

appendix c. top 25 private institutions ranked by endowment assets per student table c - 1 includes the top 25 private institutions , ranked according to endowment assets per student .

