the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) is a proposed free trade agreement ( fta ) among 12 asia - pacific countries , which the obama administration casts as comprehensive and high standard , with economic and strategic significance for the united states .

the 12 countries ( including the united states ) announced the conclusion of the tpp negotiations and released the text of the agreement in late 2015 .

trade ministers from the tpp countries signed the final agreement text on february 4 , 2016 , but congress would need to pass implementing legislation for the agreement to enter into force for the united states .

it would be eligible to receive expedited legislative consideration under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , p.l .

114-26 , if congress determines the administration has advanced the tpa negotiating objectives , and has met various notification and consultation requirements .

through the tpp , the participating countries seek to liberalize trade and investment and establish new rules and disciplines in the region beyond those that already exist in the world trade organization ( wto ) .

the fta is envisioned as a living agreement open to future members and new issues and may become a vehicle to advance a wider asia - pacific free trade area .

indonesia , the philippines , and south korea have recently indicated their interest in joining the tpp .

it is also a u.s. policy response to the rapidly increasing economic and strategic linkages among asian - pacific nations and has become the economic centerpiece of the administration's "rebalance" toward the region .

the united states has existing ftas with 6 of the countries participating in the tpp .

views on the likely impact of the agreement vary .

proponents argue that the tpp will boost economic growth and jobs through expanded trade and investment with countries currently accounting for 37% of total u.s. trade , and deepen u.s. trade and investment integration in what many see as the region with the world's greatest economic opportunities .

proponents also argue the agreement allows the united states to "write the rules" of trade and investment in the region , including new disciplines on issues such as digital trade barriers , state - owned enterprises ( soes ) , and regulatory coherence , and to show its strategic engagement and economic leadership in the asia - pacific region .

opponents voice concerns over possible job losses and competition in import - sensitive industries .

they also raise concerns that the proposed tpp will limit the u.s. government's ability to regulate in areas such as health , food safety , and the environment .

throughout the negotiations on tpp , certain aspects of the agreement have proven controversial .

these include select market access issues ( such as on dairy and other agricultural products , autos , and textiles and apparel ) as well as the level of intellectual property protection , the scope and enforcement of environment and worker rights provisions , the treatment of soes , investor - state dispute settlement , access to government procurement , and the potential inclusion of provisions on currency valuation and exchange rates .

this report briefly summarizes some of the key provisions listed generally in alphabetical order .

additional analysis of the agreement will be forthcoming .

there are 30 chapters in the tpp agreement , ranging from market access ( such as the elimination of tariff and nontariff barriers and quotas on agriculture ) , to specific rules on various trade - related issues ( such as intellectual property rights , regulatory issues , and labor and environmental standards ) .

summarized below are some of the key issues in the tpp .

a fundamental element of u.s. and other ftas is a commitment among fta partners to eliminate most , if not all , tariffs and quotas on their trade in industrial goods and agriculture .

current average most - favored - nation ( mfn ) tariff levels for tpp countries range from 0% to nearly 10% .

the united states negotiated market access in tpp on a bilateral basis , so tariff elimination schedules on u.s. imports vary by country .

according to the released elimination schedules , tariffs on all manufactured goods would be eliminated .

some of these tariffs would be removed immediately while others would be phased out over longer periods , up to a maximum of 30 years .

for agricultural goods , tariffs and quotas on some of the most sensitive products would remain in place .

on average across the 11 tpp partner countries , approximately 90% of u.s. tariff lines and 88% of partner country tariff lines would be duty - free when the agreement enters into force , with a lower average ( 86% for u.s. imports and 84% for u.s. exports ) across the five countries without an existing u.s. fta ( brunei , japan , malaysia , new zealand , and vietnam ) .

eventually , on average , approximately 99% of both u.s. and tpp partner country tariff lines will be duty - free .

the tariff schedules included in the agreement detail the degree and timeline of tariff elimination for each country .

other tpp provisions affecting market access for industrial goods and agriculture are discussed below .

the tpp agreement reached in october 2015 would appear to significantly improve market access for many u.s. food and agricultural products , potentially enhancing u.s. competitiveness in a number of tpp markets , while also providing tpp partners with greater access to u.s. product markets .

non - u.s. fta partners japan , vietnam , and malaysia , likely offer the greatest potential for expanding u.s. farm and food exports .

japan is considered the standout opportunity in this group , owing to its highly protected agricultural markets , large population , and high per - capita gdp .

key export expansion opportunities for u.s. food and agriculture interests will be phased in over a period of years , if not decades , and safeguard measures allow for additional tariffs to be imposed on certain sensitive products if imports exceed certain thresholds .

without u.s. implementation of tpp , u.s. producers could lose competitive advantage in some markets .

this could occur as a result of existing preferential tariff arrangements — such as australia's fta with japan — or by ratifying an agreement similar to tpp without u.s. participation .

also , the eu , though not a participant in tpp , is negotiating ftas with japan , malaysia , and vietnam and , if successful , may enhance its competitive position in those markets .

the list that follows includes some of the many product - specific changes in the agreement .

beef .

lowers japanese tariffs on fresh , chilled , and frozen beef from 38.5% to 9% over 16 years , and would lower tariffs on other beef products as well , while vietnam would eliminate such tariffs over three to eight years .

eliminates u.s. tariffs on beef and beef products that range as high as 26.4% in no more than 15 years and in fewer than 10 years in most cases .

pork .

cuts japanese tariff of 4.3% on fresh , chilled , and frozen pork cuts to 2.2% immediately , phasing out the residual over nine years .

a separate duty on pork under japan's "gate price system," which acts as a minimum import price , would be lowered immediately to 125 ( eventually to 50 ) yen per kilogram , from 482 yen now , but subject to a safeguard .

immediately eliminates u.s. tariffs on such products and vietnamese tariffs as high as 34% within 10 years .

poultry .

allows incremental increases to canada's highly protected poultry and egg markets over five years via new duty - free tariff - rate quotas ( trqs ) ranging from 1.5% - 2.3% of domestic production .

thereafter , the quotas would be raised moderately each year until plateauing in year 19 .

eliminates vietnamese tariffs ( currently up to 40% ) within 13 years and u.s. tariffs ( currently up to 18.6% ad valorem equivalent ) within 10 years .

dairy .

allows incremental additional access to canada's highly protected dairy markets amounting to 3.25% of its annual output under trqs phased in over five years , with moderate annual increases thereafter .

increases canadian tpp - wide trqs for products , including milk and butter , for between 14 and 19 years , which then remain fixed .

in - quota dairy products would enter canada duty free .

eliminates canada's over - quota tariff of 208% on whey powder in annual reductions over 10 years .

eliminates numerous japanese tariff lines on cheese imports within 16 years and on whey within 21 years .

gradually phases out u.s. tariffs and establishes u.s. trqs for dairy products from australia and new zealand that would be increased annually .

existing u.s. preferential access for australian dairy products under the u.s. - australia fta would be transferred to perpetual trqs .

establishes new u.s. trqs for canadian dairy products that would be raised gradually until year 19 and fixed thereafter .

rice .

creates a new japanese duty - free quota for u.s. rice at an initial level of 50,000 tons , rising to 70,000 tons in year 13 , and requires japan to allow a broader range of domestic entities to participate in rice tenders .

japanese officials indicate that the "minimum mark - up" japan imposes on rice imports — equivalent to a 15% - 20% duty according to usa rice — would continue to be applied to all imports .

eliminates u.s. rice product tariffs within 15 years .

cotton .

eliminates u.s. cotton tariffs ( up to $0.314 per kg ) by 2022 .

sugar .

establishes new u.s. trqs for sugar and sugar - containing products totaling 86,300 tons , with 65,000 tons allocated to australia , 19,200 tons to canada , and the residual split between japan , malaysia , and vietnam .

both australia's and canada's trqs include the potential for further expansion .

provides new japanese trqs for sugar and sweetener - related processed products on a duty - free or preferential - tariff - rate basis , including chewing gum , chocolates and products containing chocolate , confectionery goods and other such products , and eliminates tariffs on various sweetener products over time .

tobacco .

eliminates u.s. tobacco tariffs ( as high as 350% ) within 10 years , japanese smoking tobacco and cigar tariffs over 11 years , malaysian tobacco and tobacco product tariffs over 16 years , and vietnamese blended tobacco , cigar , and tobacco product tariffs over 16 years .

creates a vietnamese trq of 500 metric tons for unmanufactured tobacco that increases gradually eliminates in - quota tariffs on unmanufactured tobacco over 11 years and on tobacco leaf in 21 years .

eliminates tariffs on autos and auto parts in tpp countries over various phase - out periods , including the 2.5% u.s. auto and 25% u.s. truck tariffs over 25 and 30 years , respectively , with japan - specific safeguards in case of import surges .

special provisions target u.s. - japan trade , requiring japan to address nontariff barriers relating to transparency and distribution among other issues .

eliminates all tpp country import tariffs on textile and apparel products over various phase - out periods .

better access to the u.s. market has been a key interest for vietnam , which would be granted an earned import allowance exempting , up to a given threshold , certain u.s. apparel imports from vietnam from the tpp rule of origin , contingent on a specific quantity of vietnamese imports of certain u.s. fabrics .

access to foreign markets depends on facilitating the movement of goods and services across borders .

tpp includes commitments on efficient release of goods , handling of express shipments , electronic processing of customs documentation , and inspections based on risk - management techniques , as well as enhanced transparency .

tpp contains language that would prohibit countries from blocking cross - border flows of data over the internet , a primary objective of high technology companies opposed to localization requirements that require data or servers to be located in - country .

e - commerce chapters have traditionally provided for nondiscriminatory treatment of digital products .

provisions .

bars customs duties on digital products .

adopts and maintains consumer protection laws against online fraud , measures to stop unsolicited online commercial messages ( spam ) , and protecting online privacy .

prohibits forced disclosure of software source code with governments or commercial rivals .

prohibits forced localization of data centers , and requires that parties "allow the cross border transfer of information by electronic means , including personal information , when this activity is for the conduct of the business of the covered person. .

encourages cooperation on cybersecurity and assistance to smes .

exceptions .

allows data localization requirements and limits on data transfer under limited circumstances .

financial services are not covered , but have explicit provisions on data flows in the financial services chapter ( see below ) .

general and institutional provisions that broadly apply to the agreement include: accession .

includes language addressing how countries may accede to the agreement .

such accession is potentially open to any country but ultimately requires the consensus of each of the current parties and any necessary domestic legal procedures .

dispute settlement .

establishes dispute settlement mechanisms by which tpp commitments are enforced .

all aspects of the agreement are subject to state - state dispute settlement unless specifically excepted .

a separate investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) applies to certain investment and financial services provisions .

entry into force .

requires ratification by all 12 tpp countries within two years of signing for the agreement to enter into force , or , after two years , requires ratification of six countries accounting for 85% of tpp gdp , a condition that would require both u.s. and japanese participation .

congress must pass implementing legislation for the agreement to apply to the united states .

tpp commission / living agreement .

similar to past u.s. ftas , creates a senior - level tpp commission to administer the accession process of new countries and consider potential amendments to the agreement .

requires consensus among the parties and adherence to necessary domestic legal procedures for changes .

government procurement disciplines aim to ensure transparent , predictable , nondiscriminatory treatment toward domestic and foreign firms when a covered government entity makes purchasing decisions above a certain threshold .

they provide for an open tender process , evaluated under clear and transparent rules , and a mechanism to review or appeal a decision .

they provide that technical specifications of a tender are flexible and nondiscriminatory , based on international standards where applicable , to assure nondiscriminatory evaluation .

access .

the united states gains new reciprocal access to the procurement markets of malaysia , brunei , and vietnam with some exceptions and transitional periods .

the united states and the other eight countries of the tpp already have made reciprocal commitments under the wto and bilateral ftas .

canadian companies can participate in procurements by six major regional u.s. power authorities ( such as the tennessee valley authority ) .

tenders .

the united states , canada , and mexico have agreed to harmonize the tendering procedures and procurement thresholds of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) with the tpp .

buy american .

exempts tpp firms from buy american provisions .

however , transportation and infrastructure - related buy america , berry amendment , and other restricted defense and agriculture procurements would continue to be excluded .

new "buy local" provisions would not apply to tpp countries .

u.s. commitments exclude state and local government procurement .

provisions governing ipr protect innovations in various forms .

tpp provisions seek to boost the level of ipr protections beyond current wto provisions in the 1994 trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) agreement , in areas such as patents , copyrights , trademarks , and trade secrets .

some u.s. ftas differ in the scope and strength of their ipr provisions based on the economic development of the fta partner country .

determining the transition mechanism for developing countries with certain ipr obligations in the tpp was reportedly a significant challenge , intersecting with concerns , for example , about access to medicines .

transition periods vary by country and provision , ranging up to 10 years with possible additional extensions for vietnam at the discretion of the parties through the tpp commission .

biologics .

provides countries a choice between an eight - year data exclusivity period for biologic medicines or , alternatively , at least five years with possible additional measures that could "deliver a comparable market outcome. .

pharmaceutical patents .

requires countries to provide a five - year data exclusivity period for pharmaceuticals , patent linkage , and patent term extension in their domestic law , and an additional three years of data exclusivity for new clinical information for an existing drug covering a new indication , formulation , or administration .

includes phase - in periods for developing countries to adopt these provisions and allows countries to take measures to protect public health consistent with the wto trips agreement .

copyright .

increases copyright terms to 70 years with phase - in periods for countries currently providing 50 years of protection .

includes civil and criminal penalties for circumventing tpm ( technological protection measures ) , and prohibits selling devices and services for breaking tpm with exceptions for non - infringing uses .

requires criminal penalties for camcording in movie theatres .

includes nonbinding language encouraging countries to achieve appropriate balance between users and rights - holders in copyright systems — known as "fair use" in the united states .

adopts u.s. - style "notice and takedown" provisions to address internet service provider ( isp ) liability .

for specific countries , allows certain existing alternative systems .

trademarks .

requires ex officio authority for customs agents to seize counterfeit and pirated goods .

provides discretion to authorities to seize "in transit" goods or share information concerning such goods with the country of final destination and to seize goods with "confusingly similar" trademarks .

provides disciplines on the use of geographical indications .

trade secrets .

requires criminal penalties for those gaining unauthorized access to a computer system .

countries may retain provisions relating to good faith law disclosures by whistle - blowers .

in addition to provisions governing goods and services , u.s. ftas include provisions governing investment flows based on the model u.s .

bilateral investment treaty ( model bit ) , and typically include measures related to nondiscriminatory treatment , minimum standard of treatment , rules on expropriation , and prohibitions on performance requirements , among others .

minimum standard of treatment .

defines minimum standard of treatment and clarifies that an investor cannot claim a breach of minimum standard of treatment by showing a frustration of expectation .

screening mechanisms .

establishes preferential monetary screening thresholds for tpp countries maintaining review regimes for significant or sensitive investments .

malaysia is allowed to retain existing "best interest" screening mechanism for financial services investment .

exceptions .

reaffirms a country's right to regulate in the public interest , including to promote prudential or financial stability and protect public health , safety , and the environment ; includes an explicit recognition of the right of public health authorities to adopt tobacco control measures .

permits the imposition of short - term capital controls for balance of payments reasons .

allows denial of benefits to shell companies , companies which lack substantial business interests , from using the provisions of the agreement .

i nvestor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) .

allows private foreign investors to seek international arbitration against host governments to settle claims over alleged violations of the investment provisions .

allows governments to decline to accept isds challenges over tobacco control measures .

provides procedures to allow for transparency of arbitral proceedings , submission of amicus curiae briefs by interested stakeholders , binding joint interpretations , expedited review of frivolous claims and possible awards of attorney fees to the respondent government , joint interpretations of tpp parties binding on the tribunals , interim review of an award by disputing parties , and challenges to tribunal awards .

labor and environment provisions address concerns over the protection of worker rights and the environment that may be affected by ftas .

such provisions have evolved in u.s. ftas .

originally included as side - letters in nafta with their own dispute settlement mechanisms , tpp and more recent u.s. ftas include these provisions within the body of the agreement subject to the same dispute settlement procedures as other aspects of the agreement .

tpp requires parties to affirm obligations , and adopt and enforce laws consistent with relevant international labor principles and certain environmental agreements .

countries shall not fail to enforce labor and environmental laws in a manner affecting trade and investment nor waive nor derogate from such laws to attract trade and investment .

labor .

affirms international labor organization ( ilo ) core labor principles to adopt and maintain laws consistent with internationally recognized labor standards .

includes obligations to adopt and maintain laws and practices related to "acceptable conditions of work. .

sets out separate compliance agreements with vietnam , malaysia , and brunei , countries of particular concern for the unites states in terms of labor protections .

discourages importation of products produced by forced or compulsory labor .

environment .

affirms commitments to implement multilateral environmental agreements to which tpp countries are a party and includes specific obligations for agreements to which all members are a party .

obligates countries to address illegal trade in flora and fauna in their own countries .

prohibits the "most harmful" fisheries subsidies and includes commitments on sustainable use of biodiversity , conservation and management of fisheries , and liberalizes trade in environmental goods and services .

regulatory and nontariff barriers can affect companies' ability to access foreign markets .

tpp includes provisions in various chapters that seek to address these issues by ensuring transparent regulatory processes with notice and public comment periods on proposed new regulations , similar to u.s. practices , and guaranteeing that foreign and domestic companies are treated equally ( national treatment ) .

regulatory coherence .

encourages regulatory consistency across agencies and recognition of trade implications in new regulations .

sanitary and phytosanitary measures ( sps ) .

addresses measures concerning agricultural products and actions taken to protect human , animal , and plant health .

commits parties to base sps measures on international standards or objective scientific evidence and risk management measures that are no more trade - distorting than necessary ; allows for public comment on the development of sps measures ; and provides rapid notification of shipments held on importation .

generally subject to dispute settlement with additional consultative requirements and specific exceptions .

technical barriers to trade .

addresses standard - setting procedures in tpp countries .

provides for transparency in tbt rulemaking , with opportunities for stakeholder participation in development of product standards .

allows for mutual recognition of conformity assessment procedures .

transparency and anti - corruption .

provides measures to assure transparency and provide opportunity for public input with regard to laws and regulations governing market access .

bribery is criminalized in the context of trade and investment .

annex specifically addresses national health care agencies in the listing of new pharmaceutical or medical products , but is not subject to dispute settlement .

tpp rules of origin ( roo ) determine whether a product is eligible for preferential treatment under the agreement .

they can differ by product but generally relate to the degree of transformation a product undergoes in an fta partner country or the share of a product's value that is produced within the fta region .

more restrictive rules of origin generally ensure that tpp tariff benefits accrue primarily to countries inside the agreement , but they may also constrain the tariff benefits for tpp producers by limiting their ability to use diverse supply chains , including non - tpp countries .

general .

provides a single set of rules of origin with cumulation allowed .

textiles and apparel .

applies "yarn - forward" rule of origin to textile and apparel products , requiring components be sourced within the tpp region , including the yarn or fabric .

a short supply list allows exemptions from this rule for products made of yarns and fabrics in limited supply within the tpp region .

autos .

requires 45% or 55% regional value content for finished vehicles , depending on the method of calculation , and 35% - 45% for auto parts .

tpp includes provisions that address services in a number of chapters and annexes , including through greater market access and specific disciplines for trade in financial , professional , e - commerce , telecommunications , and express delivery services , among other provisions .

commitments are generally on a "negative - list" basis ; that is , they apply to all services except those specifically excepted through nonconforming measures .

barriers to services are nontariff in nature , on issues such as licensing , investment restrictions , and the regulatory environment .

cross - border services .

includes core obligations of national treatment , most - favored - nation treatment , market access ( i.e. , prohibitions on requiring joint ventures or limiting number of suppliers ) , and local presence ( prohibitions on in - country establishment requirements to supply services ) with additional commitments on impartial regulation , transparency , and free payment transfers .

express delivery .

prohibits a postal monopoly from cross - subsidizing express delivery services , prohibits universal postal service preconditions for express delivery , requires independent and impartial regulation of express delivery , and maintains current market access .

financial services .

requires national and most - favored - nation treatment of service providers and ensures market access ( i.e. , prohibitions on requiring joint ventures or limiting number of suppliers ) .

incorporates certain investment chapter provisions for access to investor - state dispute settlement and a modified state - to - state mechanism .

requires parties to permit information transfers for data processing , but unlike the e - commerce chapter , which does not apply to financial services , it does not prohibit computing facility localization .

professional services .

provisions on recognition of professional qualifications .

telecommunications .

requires reasonable and nondiscriminatory access to public telecommunications services for tpp country enterprises .

includes requirements for interconnections , number portability , unbundling of network elements , as well as independence , impartiality , and transparency in the regulation of telecommunications services .

for the first time in a u.s. fta , the tpp includes a chapter on state - owned enterprises ( soes ) with provisions regarding activities that affect trade or investment .

they address potential commercial disadvantages to private sector firms from state - supported foreign competitors receiving preferential treatment .

this could necessitate economic reforms in members with substantial state sectors , such as malaysia and vietnam , and may make it more challenging for others , including china , to join at a later date .

definition .

covers designated monopolies and soes principally engaged in commercial activities if the government owns more than 50% of capital share , controls more than 50% of voting rights , or selects a majority of board members .

disciplines .

provides transparency and reporting requirements that aim to ensure soes make purchase and sale decisions in a nondiscriminatory manner and on the basis of commercial considerations .

prohibits noncommercial assistance to soes that adversely impact another tpp party .

requires tpp country courts to have jurisdiction over foreign soes operating in their territory and administrative bodies to regulate in an impartial manner with regard to soes and private firms .

exceptions .

includes numerous exemptions ranging from general exceptions ( such as soes with revenue below a certain threshold , or for a government's supply of goods and services to its own party for government functions ) to various country - specific exceptions in the form of nonconforming designations .

