while the u.s. constitution assigns explicit roles in the supreme court appointment process only to the president and the senate , the senate judiciary committee , throughout much of the nation's history , has also played an important , intermediary role .

from 1816 , when the judiciary committee was created , until 1868 , more than two - thirds of nominations to the supreme court were referred to the committee , in each case by motion .

in 1868 , the senate determined , as a general rule , that all nominations should automatically be referred to appropriate standing committees .

since then , all but seven supreme court nominations , with the most recent being in 1941 , have been referred to the judiciary committee .

since the late 1960s , the judiciary committee's consideration of a supreme court nominee almost always has consisted of three distinct stages — ( 1 ) a pre - hearing investigative stage , followed by ( 2 ) public hearings , and concluding with ( 3 ) a committee decision on what recommendation to make to the full senate .

supreme court nominations since 1949 have routinely received public confirmation hearings before either the senate judiciary committee or a judiciary subcommittee .

in 1955 , hearings on the supreme court nomination of john m. harlan marked the beginning of a practice , continuing to the present , of court nominees testifying in - person before the senate judiciary committee .

additionally , in 1981 , supreme court confirmation hearings were opened to gavel - to - gavel television coverage for the first time when the committee instituted the practice at the confirmation hearings for nominee sandra day o'connor .

a confirmation hearing typically begins with a statement by the chair of the judiciary committee welcoming the nominee and outlining how the hearing will proceed .

other members of the committee follow with opening statements , and a panel of "presenters" introduces the nominee to the committee .

it is then the nominee's turn to make an opening statement , after which begins the principal business of the hearing — the questioning of the nominee by senators serving on the judiciary committee .

typically , the chair begins the questioning , followed by the ranking minority member and then the rest of the committee in descending order of seniority , alternating between majority and minority members , with a uniform time limit for each senator during each round .

when the first round of questioning has been completed , the committee begins a second round , which may be followed by more rounds , at the discretion of the committee chair .

usually within a week of the end of hearings , the judiciary committee meets in open session to determine what recommendation to report to the full senate .

the committee may ( 1 ) report the nomination favorably , ( 2 ) report it negatively , or ( 3 ) make no recommendation at all on the nomination .

a report with a negative recommendation or no recommendation permits a nomination to go forward , while alerting the senate that a substantial number of committee members have reservations about the nomination .

figure 2 shows , for the 15 nominations reported by the judiciary committee since 1971 , whether the nomination was reported favorably ( identified in columns with blue dots ) or other than favorably ( identified in column with orange dots ) .

for nominations reported favorably , the level of support among committee members is indicated as follows: ( 1 ) unanimous support ( i.e. , no opposition by committee members ) ; ( 2 ) almost unanimous support ( opposition by one committee member ) ; ( 3 ) some opposition ( opposition by two or more committee members , but with the nomination also receiving the support of at least two members not belonging to the president's party ) ; ( 4 ) almost party - line opposition ( opposition by all but one committee member not belonging to the president's party ) ; and ( 5 ) party - line opposition ( opposition by all committee members not belonging to the president's party ) .

the number of colored circles at the top of each column indicates the number of nominees in each particular category .

of the 13 nominations reported favorably , 6 were reported with unanimous support ( while another 1 was reported with nearly unanimous support ) .

the most recent nomination to be reported with unanimous support by the committee was that of stephen breyer in 1994 .

none of the five most recent nominations to the court were reported unanimously or almost unanimously .

the roberts nomination was reported with some opposition ( three committee members not belonging to the president's party supported the nomination ) , while the sotomayor and kagan nominations were reported with almost party - line opposition ( one committee member not belonging to the president's party supported the nominations ) .

the nominations of samuel alito and neil gorsuch were reported with complete party - line opposition ( only committee members belonging to the president's party voted to report the nomination favorably ) .

two nominations included in figure 2 were not reported favorably , those of robert bork ( reported unfavorably after the committee defeated a motion , 5-9 , to report the nomination favorably ) and clarence thomas ( reported without recommendation after the committee defeated a motion , 7-7 , to report the nomination favorably ) .

if a majority of its members oppose confirmation , the committee technically may decide not to report a nomination , which would prevent the full senate from considering it .

however , since its creation in 1816 , the judiciary committee's typical practice has been to report even those supreme court nominations that were opposed by a committee majority , thus allowing the full senate to make the final decision on whether the nominee should be confirmed .

this committee tradition was reaffirmed in june 2001 by the committee's then - chair , senator patrick j. leahy ( d - vt ) , and its then - ranking member , senator orrin g. hatch ( r - ut ) , in a june 29 , 2001 , letter to senate colleagues .

the committee's "traditional practice," their letter stated , has been to report supreme court nominees to the senate once the committee has completed its considerations .

this has been true even in cases where supreme court nominees were opposed by a majority of the judiciary committee .

we both recognize and have every intention of following the practices and precedents of the committee and the senate when considering supreme court nominees .

during the 20 th century , the senate usually , but not always , agreed with judiciary committee recommendations that a supreme court nominee be confirmed .

in other words , a favorable recommendation by the committee has , in a few instances ( each occurring during the period 1968 to 1970 ) , not been followed by senate confirmation of the nomination .

historically , unfavorable committee reports , or reports without recommendation , have been precursors to nominations encountering substantial opposition in the full senate , although a few of these nominations have eventually been confirmed by narrow margins .

in recent decades , reporting to the senate frequently has included a printed committee report , although the five most recently reported supreme court nominations were done so without printed reports .

prepared behind closed doors , after the committee has voted on the nominee , the printed report presents in a single volume the views of committee members supporting a nominee's confirmation as well as "all supplemental , minority , or additional views ... submitted by the time of the filing of the report.... " no senate committee , however , is obliged to transmit a printed report to the senate .

instead , the chair of the judiciary committee may file a one - page document reporting a nomination to the senate and recommending whether the nomination should be confirmed .

a printed report may be valuable in providing for senators not on the judiciary committee a review of all of the reasons that the committee's members cite for voting in favor or against a nominee .

a written report , however , might not always be considered a necessary reference for the senate as a whole .

for instance , in some cases , senators not on the judiciary committee might believe they have received adequate information about a nominee from other sources , such as from news media reports or gavel - to - gavel video coverage of the nominee's confirmation hearings .

further , preparation of a written report would likely mean additional days for a nomination to stay with the committee before it can be reported to the senate .

in some situations , this might be viewed as creating unnecessary delay in the confirmation process , particularly if there is a desire to fill a court vacancy as quickly as possible .

