federal agencies issue thousands of regulations every year .

these regulations are often the means through which various government policies and programs are implemented .

many of these regulations are administrative or routine in nature and have little or no compliance cost associated with them .

a number of these regulations can , however , have a substantial effect on the economy in the form of costs , benefits , and transfer payments .

over the past 70 years , congress and various presidents have created a set of procedures agencies must follow to issue these regulations , some of which contain requirements for the calculation and consideration of costs , benefits , and other economic effects of regulations .

federal regulations are the product of delegated legislative authority from congress — agencies may promulgate regulations only with the authority from congress to do so .

as such , congress has shown an interest in conducting oversight of those regulations , both on the individual level for particular regulations and also for the regulatory system as a whole .

one way for congress to conduct oversight of the regulatory system as a whole , some say , is to monitor the total cost and benefits of federal regulation .

comparing the estimated costs against the benefits would provide some insight into the potential tradeoffs of regulation .

in recent years , many members of congress have expressed interest in various regulatory reform efforts that would change the rulemaking process .

proponents of these efforts argue that the system under which agencies currently issue federal regulations is outdated , and that federal agencies should be required to conduct more rigorous economic analysis of their regulations .

opponents of these regulatory reform efforts argue that adding to federal rulemaking requirements could cause fewer regulations to be issued by federal agencies or could create delays in the issuance of federal regulations .

as part of this debate , it has become common for supporters of regulatory reform to comment on the total cost of federal regulation .

estimating the total cost of regulations is inherently difficult .

current estimates of the cost of regulation should be viewed with a great deal of caution .

scholars attempting to identify an estimate for the total cost of regulation have taken two primary approaches that lead to radically different conclusions about the total economic effect of regulation .

in this report , these two approaches are referred to as the "bottom - up" and the "top - down" approaches or methods .

in short , the bottom - up approach aggregates individual cost estimates produced by federal agencies .

the top - down approach relies on macroeconomic modeling to find a causal relationship between larger economic factors , such as gross domestic product ( gdp ) , and a proxy measure intended to represent the overall amount of regulation .

the two approaches use entirely different methods and produce radically different results .

in 2014 , the most frequently cited cost estimates resulting from each of these studies ranged from $57-$87 billion ( using the bottom - up method ) to $2 trillion ( the majority — almost $1.5 trillion — of which was arrived at using the top - down method ) .

this report analyzes these two approaches for estimating the total cost of federal regulations .

in discussing each approach , the report provides an overview of the advantages , a brief case study , and an analysis of the potential issues or inherent problems using the case study to illustrate the concepts .

the objective of this report is not to provide an estimate of the total costs and benefits of federal regulations , but rather , to inform the broader regulatory reform debate by identifying the difficulties in providing such estimates and potential problems inherent in the methods that exist .

the first approach to aggregating the total costs and benefits of federal rules is generally referred to as a "bottom - up" approach .

some scholars have adopted an approach to estimating the costs of rules that is referred to as a top - down approach .

this section explains and analyzes the top - down approach , using a case study as an illustration for several of the concepts discussed .

each of the two main approaches taken to estimate the total costs and benefits of regulations have pros and cons , which tend to mirror one another .

this final section briefly compares the two approaches and provides some perspective on why this issue is of potential interest to congress .

the bottom - up approach to estimating the total costs and benefits of regulations , such as the approach taken by omb in its annual report to congress , has several advantages .

the bottom - up approach involves adding up actual cost estimates calculated by agencies pursuant to rulemaking requirements .

these estimates are conducted on an individual basis for certain regulations , and , although they often contain some uncertainty , are based upon specialized information the agency has regarding expected costs and benefits .

notably , current requirements for agencies to estimate costs and benefits of their rules are intended to assist with agency decisionmaking in individual regulations by more fully informing decisionmakers of the likely outcomes and providing a means of evaluating and comparing regulatory alternatives .

the potential utility of that information when taken out of the context of individual rules and aggregated , however , is greatly reduced .

an individual cost - benefit analysis conducted by an agency and included in the bottom - up aggregated estimate could also suffer from econometric problems similar to those described above in the context of the top - down approach .

however , the individual estimates used in the bottom - up approach can be validated by comparing the ex ante estimates of costs and benefits to ex post estimates .

some such studies exist and are discussed above .

in addition , agencies may — though they are not explicitly required to — revisit the original cost - benefit estimate when conducting a retrospective review of their regulations .

this provides a potential means of validating the results of the bottom - up method , whereas the top - down method does not have a similar opportunity for ex post validation .

the biggest potential problem with the bottom - up approach , however , is that the aggregated estimate is unlikely to represent the costs and benefits of all rules .

not all rules are included in the aggregate , because cost - benefit estimates are not currently conducted or required for all regulations .

furthermore , even for rules in which a cost - benefit analysis is required , monetizing certain types of costs and benefits can be challenging , and any effects of regulations that are not monetized are not able to be included in a bottom - up aggregate .

because of these limitations about what may be missing from the bottom - up estimate , a top - down approach may be more likely to capture fully the overall cost of regulations , as the top - down approach could conceivably provide a way to include in its estimate of indirect costs and effects of regulations that are not included in the bottom - up approach .

however , the top - down approach has several potential problems when it comes to implementation , most of which are conceptual and methodological .

any estimates of the cost of regulation resulting from a top - down approach are entirely reliant on the validity of the model , identification of its components and structure , and the theory behind it .

the validity of an estimate is especially reliant upon the validity of the proxy measure of regulation .

in practice , overcoming these conceptual and methodological hurdles is difficult , if not impossible , meaning that the results of a top - down approach should be treated with a great deal of caution .

finally , the top - down approach does not make a comparison of costs to benefits .

such a comparison appears to be outside the purpose of the top - down approach , but having both estimates of costs and benefits can provide a more complete representation of the cost - effectiveness of a country's regulation .

because of the role congress plays in delegating legislative authority to federal agencies to issue regulations , congress has shown an interest in conducting oversight of those regulations , both for individual regulations and the regulatory system generally .

one way for congress to conduct oversight of the regulatory system as a whole is to monitor the total cost and benefits of federal regulation .

inaccuracies in cost - benefit estimates conducted by agencies could have the effect of undermining public confidence in the regulatory process .

so , too , could a misunderstanding or over - reliance on estimates of the total cost of regulation that are not intended to be considered precise findings .

for the reasons discussed throughout this report , both approaches to estimating the total cost of regulation have inherent — and potentially insurmountable — flaws .

the true cost of regulation is incredibly difficult to estimate for the many reasons discussed in this report , and perhaps others as well .

the discrepancy between the two approaches and their associated estimates raises the question of the utility of using such figures in the regulatory reform debate .

