federal agencies issue numerous rules pursuant to congressionally delegated authority .

these rules have the force and effect of law .

the administrative procedure act ( apa ) generally requires agencies to follow certain procedures when promulgating rules .

the statute's "good cause" exception , however , permits age ncies to forgo section 553's notice and comment requirement if "the agency for good cause finds" that compliance would be "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest" and to bypass its requirement that rules be published 30 days before implementation if good cause exists .

in 2012 , the government accountability office ( gao ) found that between 2003 and 2010 federal agencies issued about 35% of major rules and about 44% of nonmajor rules without a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) .

of those rules issued without an nprm , agencies justified their action most often by invoking the good cause exception .

however , federal courts reviewing this agency practice have varied in their analysis — as to the proper standard of review , whether there are actually two good cause provisions , and what factors justify the exception — resulting in confusion as to precisely what constitutes "good cause. .

this report will examine judicial analysis of the good cause standard and map several factors that lead courts to uphold or reject agencies' invocation of the exception .

the apa imposes procedural requirements on the actions of executive branch agencies .

agencies engaged in "formulating , amending , or repealing" a rule are subject to either the apa's formal or informal rulemaking provisions .

a rule is "an agency statement of general or particular applicability and future effect designed to implement , interpret , or prescribe law or policy or describing the organization , procedure , or practice requirements of an agency. .

if an agency's organic statute requires rulemaking to be "on the record," then the apa's formal rulemaking procedures are required .

otherwise , the informal notice and comment rulemaking provisions of section 553 of the apa apply .

the most common process for issuing rules is under the latter category .

section 553 requires agencies to provide the public with notice of a proposed rulemaking .

the notice must include " ( 1 ) the time , place , and nature of public rulemaking proceedings ; ( 2 ) reference to the legal authority under which the rule is proposed ; and ( 3 ) either the terms or substance of the proposed rule or a description of the subjects and issues involved. .

the public then has an opportunity to submit written comments on the rule .

following consideration of these comments , the agency publishes a final rule with a "concise general statement of [its] basis and purpose. .

such rules must be published in the federal register not less than 30 days before the effective date .

however , the apa contains several exceptions to section 553's procedural requirements .

first , certain subject areas are wholly exempt from the requirements of section 553 .

second , certain "rules" issued by agencies that do not regulate public conduct with the "force and effect of law" are exempt from section 553's notice and comment requirements .

these include rules concerning "agency organization , procedure , or practice," or procedural rules , as well as interpretive rules and general statements of policy , or nonlegislative rules .

such "rules" differ from the substantive , or legislative , rules subject to section 553 that do bind the public's behavior .

third , certain legislative rules are exempt from section 553's notice and comment requirement when an "agency for good cause finds" that issuing a proposed rule and holding a comment period would be "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest. .

finally , the 30-day publication requirement does not apply when an agency finds good cause .

the apa's "good cause" exception ( s ) thus permits agencies to issue substantive rules that bind the public without following section 553's notice and comment requirement and to waive the 30-day publication requirement .

however , the proper standard for invoking the exemption is unclear ; commentators have noted the vagueness of the applicable terms .

federal courts are divided on the proper standard of review when faced with challenges to agencies' use of the exemption to forgo notice and comment procedures .

and judicial analysis of agencies' use of the exception appears to consider a wide range of factors without a clear limiting principle .

further , courts divide as to whether a failure to include a formal statement of reasons in the rule when bypassing section 553's requirements is fatal to the rule's validity .

section 553 ( b ) ( b ) of the apa provides that compliance with notice and comment rulemaking may be bypassed when an "agency for good cause finds" that doing so would be "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest" ; section 553 ( d ) provides that the 30-day publication rule may be waived for good cause .

some courts have indicated that these are two distinct standards ; others do not always distinguish between the two .

courts that do conceptualize them differently note that notice and comment rulemaking allows public participation , while "the purpose of the thirty - day waiting period is to give affected parties a reasonable time to adjust their behavior before the final rule takes effect. .

in making the latter determination , the d.c .

circuit has noted that agencies "should 'balance the necessity for immediate implementation against principles of fundamental fairness which require that all affected persons be afforded a reasonable amount of time to prepare for the effective date of its ruling.' .

in addition , some courts have indicated that the test for good cause to waive notice and comment is more stringent than to waive the 30-day rule .

however , courts sometimes decline to decide whether the two standards are different , ruling that the circumstances do or do not support good cause under both exceptions , or do not acknowledge that the two might differ in substance .

in fact , some courts distinguished between the two in some cases , but not in others .

whether courts distinguish conceptually between the two standards or not , at a functional level , the two can sometimes operate independently .

courts will sometimes find that good cause exists to issue immediately applicable emergency regulations , but conclude that there is no reason the agency cannot make them temporary , subject to notice and comment procedures .

in addition , courts have sometimes found good cause for an agency to issue an immediately applicable interim rule when the agency permits comment on the final rule .

leaving aside disagreements over the proper standard of review , under what circumstances have courts upheld agency invocations of good cause to bypass notice and comment rulemaking ? .

the apa's text limits good cause to an agency finding that compliance with notice and comment rulemaking is "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest. .

however , judicial application of these factors tends to converge .

consequently , leaving aside minor or technical rules where compliance with section 553 is unnecessary , it may be helpful to divide good cause cases into several categories: ( 1 ) emergencies ; ( 2 ) contexts where prior notice would subvert the underlying statutory scheme ; and ( 3 ) situations where congress intends to w aive section 553's requirements .

one potential reason for confusion regarding the issue is disagreement regarding the appropriate standard of review when agencies invoke the good cause exception .

as an initial matter , federal courts appear to agree that the good cause exception is to be "narrowly construed. .

executive agencies bear the burden of persuasion in convincing a court that good cause exists , and the exception is not to be used as an "escape clause" to avoid rulemaking procedures when convenient for the agency .

"bald assertions" by an agency that comments are unnecessary in a particular situation do not create good cause .

otherwise , the exception would swallow the rule .

in other words , agencies must provide courts with a sufficient reason showing why good cause exists in order to justify bypassing section 553's procedural requirements .

courts are divided , however , as to the proper standard of review when an agency does so .

as relevant to agency rulemaking , the apa , in section 706 , direct courts to hold unlawful and set aside agency action , findings , and conclusions found to be — arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion , or otherwise not in accordance with law ; [or] without observance of procedure required by law .

the appropriate remedy when a court rejects an agency's good cause finding can also vary .

the apa provides that courts "shall ... hold unlawful and set aside agency action" that violates "procedure required by law. .

however , it also instructs courts to take "due account" of the "rule of prejudicial error. .

consequently , when courts find that agencies failed to comply with the apa's rulemaking requirements , they will sometimes vacate the rule , but may not do so if the failure to comply with those procedures was harmless .

likewise , when courts reject an agency's good cause finding , the agency's rule may be vacated and remanded to the agency to comply with the apa .

however , in certain circumstances , the court may find that the lack of good cause was harmless , such as when the larger purposes of section 553 of the apa are met despite certain technical compliance errors .

in addition , some courts have found that an agency lacked good cause and remanded to the agency to follow section 553 , but nonetheless left the challenged rules in place pending the completion of new proceedings that comply with the apa .

agency use of the good cause exception can also be important in the context of presidential transitions .

recent outgoing presidential administrations have engaged in "midnight rulemaking," whereby federal agencies increase the number of regulations issued during the final months of a presidential administration .

a subsequent presidential administration of a different party , however , may have different policy priorities .

nonetheless , once a rule is finalized by an agency , repeal of a rule requires compliance with section 553's notice and comment procedures .

further , while courts might uphold a change from one administration to the next in an agency's legal interpretation contained in a rule if the agency receives deference on the matter , if no deference is given to an agency's construction of a statute , then the agency will not be able to adopt a contrary construction in the future .

consequently , in order to gain control of the rulemaking process , some presidents have sought to impose a moratorium on new regulations at the beginning of their administration .

for example , at the beginning of the george w. bush administration , white house chief of staff andrew card issued a memorandum to federal agencies on january 20 , 2001 , instructing them to ( 1 ) "send no proposed or final regulation to the office of the federal register," ( 2 ) withdraw rules that had been sent to the office but not yet published , and ( 3 ) postpone the effective date of regulations that had been published but not yet gone into effect for 60 days .

likewise , early in the obama administration , on january 20 , 2009 , white house chief of staff rahm emanuel issued a similar memorandum to federal agency heads .

in response to both memorandums , agencies that delayed the effective date of rules sometimes justified their actions by arguing that the delay was supported by good cause .

the majority of these invocations were not reviewed by courts ; however , in 2004 , the second circuit court of appeals invalidated a department of energy ( doe ) rule delaying the effective date of certain efficiency standards .

on february 2 , 2001 , doe issued a "final rule," without notice and comment , delaying the effective date of certain efficiency standards .

the agency's final rule cited to the january 20 , 2001 , card memorandum and was effective immediately .

the delay rule also noted that good cause existed to bypass section 553 because the agency wanted more time to consider the standards and because of the imminence of the date the standards would be effective .

various parties challenged , among other things , doe's issuance of this final rule delaying the effective date of the efficiency standards .

in finding that there was no good cause to support bypassing notice and comment procedures in this situation , the court's analysis did not examine the significance ( if any ) of the card memorandum .

instead , the court ruled that "an emergency of doe's own making" cannot constitute good cause .

further , the court noted that no emergency existed , the only thing "that was imminent was the impending operation of a statute intended to limit the agency's discretion ( under doe's interpretation ) , which cannot constitute a threat to the public interest. .

consequently , the court invalidated the rule .

various changes to the apa's good cause exception have been proposed by members of congress and commentators .

during the 114 th congress , a bill was introduced that aims to restructure section 553's requirements .

among other things , the bill would require agencies to provide notice of proposed rulemakings to the public and the office of information and regulatory affairs ; to provide 60 or 90 days , depending on the rule , for comments ; and in certain circumstances , to provide a public hearing for the consideration of certain factual issues .

under this bill , if an agency for good cause finds that compliance with section 553 is unnecessary , then it may issue a final rule .

however , if the agency for good cause finds that compliance is impracticable or contrary to the public interest , the agency may issue an interim rule , but must subsequently engage in notice and comment proceedings before the rule is finalized .

in addition , during the 60 days after a presidential inauguration , agencies may delay implementation of rules that have not been finalized for 90 days for reconsideration .

the bill does not , however , appear to alter the applicable standard of review for good cause , or specify what factors a reviewing court should consider .

