housing and residential mortgage markets in the united states are continuing to recover from several years of turmoil that began with the bursting of a housing "bubble" that peaked in the mid - 2000s and burst in 2007-2008 .

the bubble featured rapidly rising home prices in many areas of the country as well as looser credit standards for obtaining mortgages .

the years of housing market turmoil that followed featured sharp declines in house prices , increased mortgage foreclosures , tighter mortgage credit standards , and lower levels of home sales and homebuilding .

since about 2012 , many national housing market indicators have been improving from their performance during the years of housing market turmoil .

for example , house prices have been rising and negative equity and foreclosure rates have been falling .

however , foreclosure rates and negative equity continue to be higher than is generally considered to be normal , and home sales and mortgage originations have been relatively low .

in addition , housing affordability continues to be an issue for many households in general , and for low - income renter households in particular .

rising home prices impact the affordability of housing for prospective homebuyers , while increasing numbers of renter households and the corresponding effects on vacancy rates and rents have implications for the affordability and availability of rental housing .

the 114 th congress considered a number of housing - related issues against this backdrop .

some of these issues reflected larger questions about policies that could accelerate recovery in the housing and mortgage markets or factors that could be hampering recovery .

for example , congress considered legislation to modify certain mortgage - related laws and regulations that were put in place during the aftermath of the housing downturn , in response to concern that these new rules may be impeding access to mortgage credit .

however , some feel that changes to the rules could weaken consumer protections .

congress also considered certain changes related to two government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) , fannie mae and freddie mac , as well as other housing finance - related issues .

in addition , the 114 th congress considered a number of issues related to affordable rental housing and assisted housing programs administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .

these issues included appropriations for housing programs in a limited funding environment , certain reforms to some hud - assisted housing programs , the reauthorization of the main program of housing assistance for native american tribes , and debate about gse contributions to two affordable housing funds that were created in 2008 but received gse funding for the first time beginning in 2016 .

additional issues of active interest to congress included oversight of hud on the occasion of the department's 50 th anniversary , issues related to enforcement of the fair housing act , and the status of certain housing - related tax provisions .

this report begins with an overview of housing and mortgage market conditions to provide context for the housing issues that the 114 th congress considered , and then discusses major housing issues that were active during the congress .

this report is meant to provide a broad overview of the issues and is not intended to provide detailed information or analysis .

however , it includes references to other , more in - depth crs reports on the issues where possible .

a number of the housing issues that the 114 th congress considered had to do with federally assisted housing programs that are intended to provide affordable housing for eligible lower - income households .

most federal housing programs are administered by hud .

other issues that the 114 th congress considered were related to the housing finance system and the ability of households to obtain mortgages .

two issues related to fair housing have also prompted congressional interest and were active during the 114 th congress .

in the past , congress has regularly extended a number of temporary tax provisions addressing a variety of policy issues , including housing .

this set of temporary provisions is commonly referred to as "tax extenders. .

congress last passed tax extenders legislation on december 18 , 2015 , via division q of p.l .

114-113 — the protecting americans from tax hikes act ( or "path" act ) .

the high levels of lead found in the city of flint's drinking water , and the corresponding public health concerns raised by the elevated blood lead levels detected in children in flint , raised a number of questions for federal policymakers .

many of these questions involve the state of the nation's water infrastructure .

others involve how best to identify and address environmental hazards in the home .

hud's office of lead hazard control and healthy homes ( olhchh ) administers two grant programs designed specifically to address the hazards presented by lead - based paint in homes , an environmental risk for which the federal government has played a significant role in both regulation and remediation .

hud's olhchh also administers a smaller healthy homes demonstration grant program , which provides competitive grants to address housing - related hazards to children beyond lead - based paint .

in light of the situation in flint , several proposals were introduced in the 114 th congress to provide additional funding for the healthy homes program , although none were enacted .

