the level of pay for congressional staff is a source of recurring questions among members of congress , congressional staff , and the public .

in senate committees , the chair and ranking member set the terms and conditions of employment for majority and minority staff , respectively .

this includes job titles and descriptions ; rates of pay , subject to minimum and maximum levels ; and resources available to staff to carry out their official duties .

there may be interest in congressional pay data from multiple perspectives , including assessment of the costs of congressional operations ; guidance in setting pay levels for staff in committee offices ; or comparison of congressional staff pay levels with those of other federal government pay systems .

publicly available information sources do not provide aggregated congressional staff pay data in a readily retrievable form .

data in this report are based on official senate reports , which afford the opportunity to use consistently collected data .

pay information in this report is based on the senate's report of the secretary of the senate , published semiannually , in periods from april 1 to september 30 , and october 1 to march 31 , as collected and organized by legistorm , a private entity that provides some congressional data by subscription .

additionally , this report provides annual data by fiscal year , which allows for observations about the nature of senate committee staff compensation over time .

this report provides pay data for 13 staff position titles that are used in senate committees , and for which sufficient data could be identified .

position titles and the years for which data are available since fy2001 are provided in table 1 .

titles were identified through a two - step process .

the first step identified 302 job titles used in senate committees in fy2014 .

of those titles , 277 , or 91.7% , were filled by only one staff member and excluded .

in the second step , the remaining 25 titles were assessed to determine how many of the 20 senate committees for which data were available employed staff with each title .

twelve position titles that were used by six or fewer panels ( five for minority positions ) were excluded .

pay data were then collected for the remaining 13 positions .

in order to be included , annual pay data for each position needed to be available from at least five committees ( four for minority positions ) .

when committees had more than one staff member with the same job title , data for no more than two staff per committee were collected .

senate committee staff had to hold a position with the same job title in the same committee for the entire fiscal year examined , and not receive pay from any other congressional employing authority for their data to be included .

every recorded payment ascribed in the legistorm data to those staff for the fiscal year is tabulated .

data collected for this report may differ from an employee's stated annual salary due to the inclusion of overtime , bonuses , or other payments in addition to base salary paid in the course of a year .

pay data for staff working in house committee offices are available in crs report r44322 , staff pay levels for selected positions in house committees , 2001-2014 .

data describing the pay of congressional staff working in the personal offices of senators and members of the house are available in crs report r44324 , staff pay levels for selected positions in senators' offices , fy2001-fy2014 , and crs report r44323 , staff pay levels for selected positions in house member offices , 2001-2014 , respectively .

data presented here are subject to some challenges that could affect findings presented or their interpretation .

some of the concerns include the following: given the large number of positions with titles held by one senate employee , data provided here almost certainly do not represent all of the jobs carried out by senate committee staff .

the manner in which staff titles are assigned might have implications about the representativeness of the data provided .

of positions for which data were collected , two broad categories emerge .

the first category identifies position titles that usually apply to one staff member per committee .

since almost all available data were collected for those positions , pay information provided is likely to be highly representative of what senate committees pay staff in those positions .

the second category includes positions for which committees might hire two or more staff members , since pay data were collected for no more than two staff per committee for each position , it is more likely that data for those positions is a sample of staff in those positions rather than nearly complete data , which may be less closely representative of what all staff in those positions are paid .

pay data provide no insight into the education , work experience , position tenure , full - or part - time status of staff , or other potential explanations for levels of compensation .

potential differences might exist in the job duties of positions with the same title .

aggregation of pay by job title rests on the assumption that staff with the same title carry out the same or similar tasks .

given the wide discretion congressional employing authorities have in setting the terms and conditions of employment , there may be differences in the duties of similarly titled staff that could have effects on their levels of pay .

acknowledging the imprecision inherent in congressional job titles , an older edition of the senate handbook states , "throughout the senate , individuals with the same job title perform vastly different duties. .

tables in this section provide background information on senate pay practices , comparative data for each position , and detailed data and visualizations for each position .

table 2 provides the maximum payable rates for senate committee staff since 2001 in both nominal ( current ) and constant 2016 dollars .

constant dollar calculations throughout the report are based on the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) for various years , expressed in constant , 2016 dollars .

table 3 provides the available cumulative percentage changes in median pay for each of the 13 positions , members of congress , and salaries paid under the general schedule in washington , dc , and surrounding areas .

table 4 - table 16 provide tabular pay data for each senate committee staff position .

the numbers of staff whose data were counted are identified as observations in the data tables .

graphic displays are also included , providing representations of pay from three perspectives , including the following: a line graph showing change in pay , depending on data availability , in nominal ( current ) and constant 2016 dollars ; a comparison at 5- , 10- , and 15-year intervals from fy2015 , depending on data availability , of the cumulative percentage change of that position to changes in pay , in constant 2016 dollars , of members of congress and federal civilian workers paid under the general schedule in washington , dc , and surrounding areas ; and distributions of fy2015 pay , when available , in 2016 dollars , in $10,000 increments .

between fy2011 and fy2015 , the change in median pay , in constant 2016 dollars , ranged from a 16.93% increase for professional staff members to a - 16.48% decrease for staff assistants .

of the seven staff positions for which data were available in fy2011 and fy2015 , two positions saw pay increases while seven saw declines .

this may be compared to changes to the pay of members of congress , - 5.10% , and general schedule , dc , - 3.19% , over approximately the same period ( calendar years 2011-2015 ) .

between fy2006 and fy2015 , the change in median pay , in constant 2016 dollars , ranged from a 22.01% increase for senior counsels to a - 26.72% decrease for staff assistants .

of the eight staff positions for which data were available in fy2006 and fy2015 , four positions saw pay increases and four saw declines .

this may be compared to changes to the pay of members of congress , - 10.41% , and general schedule , dc , - 0.13% , over approximately the same period ( calendar years 2006-2015 ) .

between fy2001 and fy2015 , the change in median pay , in constant 2016 dollars , ranged from a 30.88% increase for systems administrators to a - 26.67% decrease for staff assistants .

of seven staff positions for which data were available in fy2001 and fy2015 , five positions saw pay increases while two saw declines .

this may be compared to changes to the pay of members of congress , - 10.40% , and general schedule , dc , 7.36% , over approximately the same period ( calendar years 2001-2015 ) .

