on december 4 , 2015 , president barack obama signed the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ; p.l .

114-94 ) .

the act authorizes spending on federal highway and public transportation programs and surface transportation safety and research activities for five years , through september 30 , 2020 .

the act also authorizes passenger rail programs for five years , through fy2020 .

the act's authorization totals about $305 billion for fy2016 through fy2020 .

this includes $233 billion for highways and highway safety , $61 billion for public transportation , and more than $10 billion for amtrak .

the five - year duration of the act reestablishes the pattern of five - or six - year surface transportation authorization bills ( often bound together by a series of short - term authorization acts ) that dates back to the early 1990s .

the bill also provides sufficient funds for a modest increase in spending for both highways and public transportation over expected inflation .

this is a change from the pattern of declines in real spending for highways since the early 2000s .

on the programmatic side , the changes were small in comparison with the previous reauthorization act , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l .

112-141 ) , which made major changes in programmatic structure and operations but provided for only two years of funding ( fy2013-fy2014 ) .

although the fast act creates several new discretionary programs , well over 92% of spending from the highway trust fund ( htf ) will be distributed by formula under the law .

the fast act makes two important changes in transportation programs .

it is the first surface transportation act to emphasize the national importance of moving freight , and funds two new freight programs .

it is also the first law to treat intercity passenger rail as an integral part of the federal surface transportation program ; previously , amtrak was authorized under separate legislation .

almost all of federal highway funding and about 80% of federal public transportation funding comes from the htf .

the htf is financed from a number of sources , including taxes on fuels , tires , truck and trailer sales , and a weight - based heavy - vehicle use tax .

however , approximately 90% of trust fund revenue comes from excise taxes on motor fuels , 18.3 cents per gallon on gasoline and 24.3 cents per gallon on diesel .

the htf consists of two separate accounts — highway and mass transit .

the highway account receives an allocation equivalent to 15.44 cents of the gasoline tax , and the mass transit account receives the revenue generated by 2.86 cents of the tax .

because the fuel taxes are set in terms of cents per gallon rather than as a percentage of the sale price , their revenues do not increase with inflation .

the fuel tax rates were last raised in 1993 .

sluggish economic growth and improved vehicle efficiency have depressed the growth of fuel consumption and therefore the growth of fuel tax revenue .

since fy2008 , the revenues flowing into the highway account of the htf have been insufficient to fund the expenditures authorized under the federal - aid highway program .

prior to the enactment of the fast act , resolving this discrepancy required seven general fund and other transfers totaling $73.3 billion ( of which $62.5 billion went into the highway account ) over a seven - year period .

without these transfers , fhwa might have faced delays in reimbursing states for completed work .

under the fast act , $70 billion will be transferred from the general fund to the htf to fund the projected difference between htf revenues and authorized spending for fy2016 through fy2020 .

an additional $300 million was provided by transfers from the leaking underground storage tank ( lust ) trust fund .

this mixing of revenue sources lessens the relevance of the arguments that htf funds should be used only on highways .

it also reduces the salience of states' complaints that they are not receiving a fair share of highway spending relative to their highway tax payments to the htf ( the so - called donor - donee state issue ) .

under the fast act , the general fund transfers allow for spending levels for all states that will likely exceed their highway tax payments .

a gap between dedicated htf revenues and outlays is expected to persist after the fast act expires at the end of fy2020 .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that beginning in fy2021 , revenues credited to the highway and transit accounts of the htf will be insufficient to meet the fund's obligations .

cbo projects that over the five years following the expiration of the fast act , from fy2021 through fy2025 , htf receipts will fall $96 billion short of the amount needed to fund highway and public transportation programs at the current level , adjusted only for projected inflation .

congress will face the need to approve some combination of new taxes , an increase in existing dedicated taxes , further general fund transfers , an increase in federally supported debt financing , or reductions in the scope of the federal surface transportation program , if the fast act is to be replaced or extended in 2021 .

the federal - aid highway program ( fahp ) is an umbrella term for the separate highway programs administered by the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) .

these programs are almost entirely focused on highway construction , and generally do not support operations ( such as administrative salaries or fuel costs ) or routine maintenance ( such as mowing roadway fringes or filling potholes ) .

each state is required to have a state transportation improvement plan , which sets priorities for the state's use of fahp funds .

state departments of transportation ( state dots ) largely determine which projects are funded , award the contracts , and oversee project development and construction .

more recently , metropolitan planning organizations ( mpos ) have played a growing role in project decisionmaking in urban areas , but federal project funding continues to flow through state dots .

the fahp , unlike most other federal programs , does not rely on appropriated budget authority .

instead , fhwa exercises contract authority over monies in the htf , and may obligate ( promise to pay ) funds for projects funded with contract authority prior to an appropriation .

once funds have been obligated , the federal government has a legal commitment to provide the funds .

this approach shelters highway construction projects from annual decisions about appropriations .

under the fast act , 92% of fahp funding is distributed through five core programs .

these are the national highway performance program ( nhpp ) , the surface transportation block grant program ( stbg ) , the highway safety improvement program ( hsip ) , the congestion mitigation and air quality improvement program ( cmaq ) , and the national highway freight program .

the stbg was formerly known as the surface transportation program , but was renamed in the fast act .

all five core programs are formula programs , meaning that each state's share of each program's total annual authorization is based on a mathematical calculation set out in the law .

the remaining programs , generally referred to as discretionary programs , are administered more directly by fhwa , but the funding distribution of some of these programs ( such as the construction of ferry boats and ferry terminal facilities program ) is formulaic as well .

the fahp does not provide money in advance .

rather , a state receives bills from private contractors for work completed and pays those bills according to its own procedures .

the state submits vouchers for reimbursement to fhwa .

fhwa certifies the claims for payment and notifies the department of the treasury , which disburses money electronically to the state's bank , often on the same day the voucher is submitted by the state .

after several years of flat funding in terms of nominal dollars , the fast act provides highway funding increases of 4.2% above previous law adjusted for expected future inflation ( see figure 1 and table 1 ) .

the federal - aid highway and research titles authorize an average of $45 billion annually for fy2016-fy2020 .

of this , an average of $41 billion is provided annually for federal - aid highway programs .

the act includes no new congressional earmarks for highway projects .

a major focus of the fast act is the movement of freight .

this is reflected in a new formula freight program , the national highway freight program ( nhfp ) , and a new competitive discretionary grant program , the nationally significant freight and highway projects program ( nsfhp ) .

the freight policy aspects of the fast act are discussed together in a separate section of this report ( see " freight policy " ) .

the fast act directs a portion of federal funds towards highway segments and other projects deemed most critical to freight movement .

it does this by creating a new competitive grant program and a new formula program for distributing federal funds to states .

the stated goals of these two programs are very similar: increase u.s. global economic competitiveness , reduce congestion and bottlenecks , increase the efficiency and reliability of the highway network , and reduce the environmental impact of freight movement .

tolling of non - interstate federal - aid highways has been allowed since 1992 .

totally new interstate highway routes or extensions of existing routes may be built as toll roads .

toll lanes may be added to an existing interstate route as long as the number of "free" lanes is maintained .

under the fast act , public authorities may impose tolls on single - occupant vehicles using high - occupancy vehicle ( hov ) lanes .

this allows cities , towns , counties , or transportation authorities to exercise authority over hov facilities where only state agencies could do so previously .

this could further encourage the use of congestion pricing .

the fast act modifies the interstate system construction toll pilot program , which allows for up to three toll - free interstate highway segments in three states to be subject to tolls when that is the only way to provide funding for rehabilitation or reconstruction .

under a new provision , if the selected states have not started construction within three years of approval , their approval lapses , and other states may apply to participate in the pilot program .

the act also mandates that intercity buses have the same access to toll roads and pay the same tolls as public transportation buses .

as under previous legislation , the federal government does not regulate toll rates .

the fast act cuts the direct authorization of funding for the transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) program from $1 billion in fy2015 to $275 million in both fy2016 and fy2017 , $285 million in fy2018 , and $300 million in both fy2019 and fy2020 .

seen in isolation , this reduces dot's capacity to issue loans by approximately $750 million in fy2016 , assuming a 10% subsidy cost .

tifia loans have been important in financing major surface transportation projects such as the tappan zee bridge replacement in new york state and the east link extension , a 14.5-mile light rail line in seattle .

however , the fast act also allows funding in two other highway programs to pay for the subsidy and administrative costs of credit assistance .

these two programs are the new discretionary nationally significant freight and highway projects program ( nsfhpp ) ( fast act ; §1105 ) , authorized at $800 million in fy2016 and the existing formula national highway performance program ( nhpp ) ( fast act ; §1106 ) , authorized at $22.3 billion in fy2016 .

this has the potential for increasing tifia financing much above the $275 million direct authorization , but at the discretion of state dots .

the fast act also provides authority for a tifia loan to a state infrastructure bank ( sib ) to capitalize a "rural project fund" ; adds transit oriented development ( tod ) infrastructure as an eligible project .

tod infrastructure is a "project to improve or construct public infrastructure that is located within walking distance of , and accessible to , a fixed guideway transit facility , passenger rail station , intercity bus station , or intermodal facility" ( fast act ; §2001 ) ; allows up to $2 million of tifia budget authority each fiscal year to pay the application fees for projects costing $75 million or less instead of requiring payment by the project sponsor ; modifies or sets the minimum project cost thresholds for credit assistance at $10 million for tod projects , the capitalization of a rural project fund , and local government infrastructure projects .

the maximum loan for a rural project fund is $100 million ; provides for a streamlined application process for loans of $100 million or less .

in addition to allowing an sib to receive a tifia loan to capitalize a rural projects fund , the fast act provides authority for states to capitalize sibs with federal highway , transit , and rail funds through fy2020 .

authority to do so had lapsed at the end of fy2009 .

the fast act ( §1109 ( b ) ( 14 ) ) allows stbg funding for the creation of offices that will "assist in the design , implementation , and oversight of public - private partnerships. .

the law made no change to the $15 billion volume cap on tax - exempt , private activity bonds for qualified highway or surface freight transfer facilities .

the fast act ( §9001 ) creates a new national surface transportation and innovative finance bureau within dot to administer federal transportation financing programs , specifically the tifia program , the sib program , the railroad rehabilitation and improvement financing ( rrif ) program , and the allocation of authority to issue private activity bonds for "qualified highway or surface freight transfer facilities" ( 26 u.s.c .

§142 ( m ) ) .

the bureau will also be responsible for establishing and promoting best practices for innovative financing and public - private partnerships ( p3s ) , and for providing advice and technical expertise in these areas .

the bureau will administer the new discretionary nationally significant freight and highway projects grant program and will have responsibilities related to procurement and project environmental review and permitting .

the fast act ( §1441 ) also establishes a new regional infrastructure accelerator demonstration program "to assist entities in developing improved infrastructure priorities and financing strategies for the accelerated development of a project that is eligible for funding under the tifia program. .

the program is designed to make grants to regional infrastructure accelerators that will support and promote innovative financing and public - private partnerships .

the fast act authorizes $12 million in fy2016 from the general fund for the program .

the public transportation provisions of the fast act are contained in title iii of division a , the federal public transportation act of 2015 , which authorizes federal public transportation programs for fy2016 through fy2020 .

subtitle c of the federal - aid highway title includes 18 provisions identified as pertaining to "acceleration of project delivery. .

as in the two most recent long - run reauthorization acts , the safe accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l .

109-59 ) and map - 21 , the provisions primarily involve efforts to expedite surface transportation project delivery by changing how the environmental review process is implemented .

for individual highway and transit projects , that process generally involves preparing documentation and analysis necessary to demonstrate that any project - related impacts to the human , natural , or cultural environment are identified ; that the effects of those impacts are taken into consideration among other factors considered during the decisionmaking process ( eg , economic or community benefits ) ; and that any applicable state , tribal , or federal compliance requirements are met .

provisions in this subtitle will affect the following: nepa implementation — includes changes to elements of fhwa and fta procedures to identify and consider the environmental impacts of a proposal , as required under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) ; section 4 ( f ) 32 prohibitions — includes changes to procedures and requirements associated with the dot's prohibition on the approval of projects that have anything more than a minor impact on historic sites ; and s tate dot action to expedite federal approvals — establishes or changes existing programs that allow state dots to assume federal authority to implement nepa or other federal requirements or to undertake actions intended to expedite federal approvals associated with transportation projects .

title xi of the fast act , section 11503 , "efficient environmental review," amends title 49 u.s.c .

to require dot to apply project development procedures applicable to federal - aid highway projects to railroad projects .

until dot interprets the directives , it is difficult to determine the extent to which the amendments will affect the environmental review process .

the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) is responsible for vehicle safety regulation and for driver safety other than for commercial drivers .

the federal motor carrier safety administration ( fmcsa ) is responsible for the safety of trucks and buses and for commercial driver safety .

the fast act includes authorization of passenger and freight rail transportation programs , thus bringing all surface transportation modes together within a single authorization bill for the first time .

the total amount authorized for all intercity rail programs , including amtrak , increases significantly over the authorization period , with year - over - year increases of 8% - 12% ( see table 6 ) .

however , funding for intercity rail programs is authorized from the general fund , not from the htf , and it is possible that appropriators will not approve the full amounts authorized .

for example , while the total amount authorized for fy2016 was $1.67 billion , the actual amount appropriated for fy2016 was $1.465 billion , $205 million ( 12% ) less than the authorized total .

also , the totals are significantly less than the amount authorized for amtrak alone in the previous intercity rail authorization act .

for fy2013 , the final year of that authorization , amtrak was authorized $2.25 billion but appropriated $1.36 billion , 40% less than the authorized amount .

amtrak operates regular intercity passenger rail service both over infrastructure it owns ( primarily the northeast corridor running from washington , dc , through new york city to boston ) and over the rail network owned by freight rail companies .

some amtrak trains are operated under contract with states , which must cover a portion of any losses on those routes .

it runs an annual deficit of roughly $1 billion , on revenues of roughly $2 billion and expenses of roughly $3 billion , and receives capital and operating support from congress to cover the deficit .

one of the continuing criticisms many have of amtrak is that it does not cover its costs .

amtrak's passenger service in the northeast corridor ( nec ) makes an operating profit each year , but does not cover all costs of maintaining the infrastructure owned by amtrak .

outside the nec , amtrak's long - distance trains run large operating deficits , but have relatively low capital costs ( since the rail infrastructure they operate over is owned by other companies ) .

the fast act requires amtrak to structure its accounts so that all costs and revenues are assigned to either the northeast corridor or the national network ( everything outside of the nec ) in order to clarify the receipts and outlays for each of these two groups of services .

congress also directs amtrak to hire an independent entity to develop methodologies for amtrak to use in determining what routes and services it should provide , and to submit the results to congress by december 2017 .

other provisions include an increase in the cap on claims against amtrak arising from the may 12 , 2015 , derailment in philadelphia , pa , to $295 million , and a provision that the general $200 million cap on claims will be adjusted based on changes in the consumer price index ( which will increase the statutory cap to approximately $295 million ) and readjusted every five years ; a requirement that amtrak implement a plan to eliminate its operating loss on food and beverage service by december 2020 ; a requirement that amtrak develop a pilot program allowing passengers to carry domesticated dogs and cats ; a requirement that dot convene a working group to evaluate restoration of intercity rail passenger service between new orleans , la , and orlando , fl , which was disrupted by infrastructure damage caused by hurricanes in 2007 ; a requirement that dot implement a pilot program allowing bidding for the right to operate up to three long - distance passenger routes ; a requirement that dot promulgate a rule requiring intercity passenger and commuter rail carriers to install inward - and outward - facing audio and image recorders to monitor train operators ; a requirement that dot , amtrak , states and other stakeholders submit a study evaluating the shared use of right - of - way by passenger and freight rail systems ; and statutory language requiring that the recipient of a high - speed rail grant for more than $1 billion must demonstrate that it has funding committed to fulfill the nonfederal share required for the grant , that it has identified nonfederal funding required for any subsequent phases of the project , and that the grant will result in a useable segment that has operational independence .

this appears intended to limit future grants such as to the california high - speed rail project , which received a $2.5 billion federal grant in january 2010 but has not identified local funding for the balance of the proposed rail line between san francisco and los angeles .

appendix a .

estimated highway apportionments appendix b .

estimated public transportation apportionment .

