introduction certain workers who have experienced job loss and retirees whose private pension plans were taken over by the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) may be eligible for the health coverage tax credit ( hctc ) .

the tax credit's purpose is to make the purchase of health insurance more affordable for eligible individuals .

the hctc has a sunset date of january 1 , 2020 .

this report describes the eligibility criteria for the hctc and the types of health insurance to which the tax credit may be applied .

it briefly describes the administration of the hctc program and receipt of the credit by eligible taxpayers .

the report concludes with a summary of the hctc's statutory history .

the hctc covers 72.5% of the premium for certain types of health insurance purchased by an eligible taxpayer .

the taxpayer is responsible for covering the remaining 27.5% of the premium .

eligible taxpayers are only allowed to use the hctc toward the purchase of qualified health insurance ( described below in the " qualified health insurance " section ) .

the hctc is refundable , so taxpayers may claim the full credit amount even if they have little or no federal income tax liability .

the credit also is advanceable , so taxpayers may receive the credit on a monthly basis to coincide with the payment of premiums .

although the internal revenue service ( irs ) administers the hctc program , full implementation entails the participation of several federal and state agencies .

the department of the treasury ( treasury ) is primarily responsible for administering the advance payment system , by providing the hctc on a monthly basis to coincide with payment of insurance premiums .

in addition , the irs reviews tax returns on which the credit is claimed .

dol and the pbgc are responsible for helping treasury identify who may be eligible for the credit .

dol also coordinates the one - stop career center system ; these centers provide a wide range of services to assist job seekers , including providing information about available benefits such as the hctc .

state - level entities include state workforce agencies ( swas ) — dol - funded agencies that administer unemployment and taa benefits .

other relevant state entities include the departments of insurance and health agencies .

dol requests that swas mail hctc information packets to all eligible taa beneficiaries .

included with the information packet is an hctc eligibility certificate , a document that identifies the individual as potentially eligible for the tax credit .

similarly , the pbgc identifies beneficiaries who are potentially eligible for the hctc and provides the beneficiaries' relevant personal information to the irs .

the irs mails program kits to persons whose names are included on the lists provided by the swas and the pbgc .

eligible taxpayers with qualified health insurance may claim the tax credit when they file their tax returns for the year , or they may receive advance payments for the credit , on a monthly basis , throughout the year .

some taxpayers may choose to receive a portion of the credit through advance payments and the remainder after they file their returns .

because the hctc is refundable , taxpayers may receive the full amount for which they are eligible , even if they have little or no tax liability .

other tax credits for which individuals are eligible have no effect on their eligibility for the hctc , nor does the hctc affect other credits , with one key exception: a taxpayer who chooses to receive the hctc is prohibited from being eligible for the premium tax credit established under the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

the irs published relevant summary statistics in its 2014 statistics of income ( soi ) report .

the most current soi data about the hctc is for tax year 2013 , in which 13,693 tax returns claimed the hctc , totaling to approximately $52.3 million .

in addition , preliminary data for the 2016 filing season indicated the submission of 13,015 e - filed tax returns claiming the credit , as of march 10 , 2016 .

taxpayers who choose to claim the hctc after the tax year ends must complete form 8885 and attach it to their standard form 1040 .

taxpayers must include invoices and proof of payment for qualified health insurance .

in this case , the credit amount would be used to reduce the amount of taxes owed for a given taxpayer .

because the hctc is refundable , if the credit amount exceeds the amount of taxes owed , the excess amount is provided to the taxpayer in the form of a tax refund .

to receive advance payments of the hctc , individuals register with the hctc program .

they must be enrolled in a qualified health insurance plan when they register .

the program confirms an applicant's eligibility and sends him or her an invoice for the taxpayer's share of the total monthly premium ( which is 27.5% because the hctc's subsidy rate is 72.5% ) .

individuals send payments for their share plus additional premium amounts for non - qualified family members ( if applicable ) to treasury .

upon receipt of these premium payments , treasury sends payment for 100% of the premium ( comprised of 27.5% from the individual and 72.5% from treasury ) to the individuals' health insurance plans .

