in recent years congress and the administration have taken actions to build a more diverse and representative military workforce .

in the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2009 ( p.l .

110-417 ) , congress mandated the creation of a military leadership diversity commission ( mldc ) tasked with conducting "a comprehensive evaluation and assessment of policies that provide opportunities for the promotion and advancement of minority members of the armed forces , including minority members who are senior officers. .

the commission's final report , from representation to inclusion: diversity leadership in the 21 st - century military , noted that while great strides had been made in developing a diverse force , women and racial / ethnic minorities are still underrepresented in top leadership positions .

in may 2011 , the commission's report was released , and in august 2011 president barack obama issued an executive order ( eo 13583 ) calling for a coordinated government - wide initiative to promote diversity and inclusion in the federal workforce .

in section 528 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 ( p.l .

114-92 ) , congress reaffirmed a commitment to maintaining a diverse military stating: diversity contributes to the strength of the armed forces... .

it is the sense of congress that the united states should — ( 1 ) continue to recognize and promote diversity in the armed forces ; and ( 2 ) honor those from all diverse backgrounds and religious traditions who have made sacrifices in serving the united states through the armed forces .

military manpower requirements derive from national military strategy and are determined by the military services based on the workload required to deliver essential capabilities .

the 2015 national military strategy highlights the importance of diversity in acquiring those capabilities , stating: to enhance our warfighting capability , we must attract , develop , and retain the right people at every echelon .

central to this effort is understanding how society is changing… therefore , the u.s. military must be willing to embrace social and cultural change to better identify , cultivate , and reward such talent .

in this regard , dod's pursuit of a diversity management program is one means to broaden the potential pool of high - quality recruits and to retain those individuals who can best fill required roles at every level .

dod's definitions of diversity and equal opportunity have changed over time , as have its policies towards inclusion of various demographic groups in military service and occupational assignments .

in some cases , these changes have come about in response to changes in law .

under article 1 , section 8 of the u.s. constitution , congress has the authority to raise and support armies ; provide and maintain a navy , and to provide for organizing , disciplining , and regulating them .

in the past , congress has used this authority to establish criteria and standards for recruiting individuals into the military , promoting them , and separating or retiring them from military service .

throughout the history of the armed services , congress has established some of these criteria based on demographic characteristics such as race , sex , and sexual orientation .

the gradual integration of different demographic groups into the military has continued since the 19 th century ; however , in the past decade there have been rapid changes to laws and policies with regard to diversity , inclusion , and equal opportunity in the armed forces .

since 2009 , dod policy changes and congressional actions have allowed individuals who are gay to serve openly and recognized their same - sex spouses as dependents , opened all combat assignments to women , and , as of june 30 , 2016 , changed policies that restricted transgender troops from serving .

some feel that these changes are happening too quickly or should not happen at all citing potential negative impacts on military readiness and unit cohesion .

others argue that dod's shifting policies reflect broader societal , cultural , and demographic shifts within the united states , and will create a stronger , more effective force .

this report starts by giving an overview of recent research on diversity and organizational management to demonstrate why organizations value diversity and what the findings on diversity mean in a military context .

the next sections outline dod's military personnel policies , processes and organizational structure for managing diversity , inclusion , and equal opportunity .

following that , the report examines how the concept of diversity and inclusion has evolved over the history of the armed forces and provides a snapshot of the current demographic composition of the military relative to the u.s. civilian population .

finally , the report addresses some of the current legislative and policy issues related to diversity in the armed forces .

diversity is often defined as the variation of traits within groups of two or more people and may include both visible ( eg , sex , age , race ) and invisible ( eg , knowledge , culture , values ) traits .

an internet search on "diversity initiatives in the workplace," produces more than 1 million results .

given the emphasis placed on diversity by modern organizations it is important to understand why workforce diversity is valued and what that means in the context of military personnel management .

many argue that diversity is a core value of an egalitarian and multicultural society and organizations should seek diversity regardless of its relationship with performance metrics .

from a human resource perspective , diversity is typically studied with regard to its impact on group dynamics and other factors that contribute to organizational performance .

two key factors that have been studied in both the civilian and military context are cohesion: commitment to other members of the group and the group's shared objectives ; and effectiveness: the ability of the group to efficiently meet its objectives .

studies on the impact of diversity on these factors have had mixed findings , leading some to argue that diversity is beneficial to organizational success , and others to suggest that it might be harmful .

diversity , inclusion , and equal - opportunity initiatives often go hand - in - hand in workforce management .

although the three terms are often used interchangeably , there are some key differences in how they are interpreted and applied .

while "diversity" is primarily used to discuss the variations in visible and invisible traits among employees in an organization , "inclusion" or "inclusiveness" is typically used to discuss the culture of organizations .

an inclusive organization is often described as one with policies that promote respect for differences , enable individual contributions , and instill a sense of organizational belonging .

"equal opportunity" is used in the context of legal protections for individuals or groups of individuals from forms of discrimination in the workplace .

policies that promote diversity and equal opportunity are typically complementary and may build an organizational culture of inclusiveness .

in june 2015 , dod revised its policies and definitions for diversity and equal opportunity .

dod's current polices expand classes of protected individuals covered by the military equal opportunity definition to include sexual orientation .

diversity management and equal opportunity programs are overseen by dod and implemented by the military departments .

programmatic components include research and data collection , training , and processes and procedures for military equal opportunity complaint resolution .

dod's current definition of military equal opportunity protects servicemembers from unlawful discrimination on the basis of race , color , national origin , religion , sex or sexual orientation .

however , throughout the history of the armed forces , these currently protected classes have been excluded to varying degrees from military participation and occupational assignments by policy and statute .

the history of integration in the military is detailed and often dependent on the political , social , and cultural context of the time .

this section describes selected policy and statute changes made by congress and the military that affected the treatment of various demographic groups over time .

the following sections will also provide a snapshot of the current demographic profile of the armed forces .

in the past , congress has used its constitutional authority to establish criteria and standards that must be met for individuals to be recruited into the military , to advance through promotion , and to be separated or retired from military service .

throughout the history of the armed services , congress has established some of these criteria based on demographic characteristics such as race , gender , and sexual orientation .

recent legislative efforts have focused on improving the reporting of demographic diversity data for recruitment , retention and promotion of servicemembers ; developing and improving processes for managing , reporting and responding to harassment and discrimination ; and developing standards for the inclusion of women into new occupations and unit assignments .

in recent years , congress and the administration have taken actions to build a more diverse and representative military workforce in parallel with efforts to diversify the federal civilian workforce .

today's armed forces are more inclusive and have a higher percentage of women and racial minorities in service and in leadership roles than at any time in history .

in addition , policies , processes , training and structures have been put into place to monitor and reduce instances of discrimination and to improve and expand upon military equal opportunity .

this has led some to ask if there is more to be done to promote diversity , inclusiveness and equal opportunity in the military , or whether the military has gone too far in some cases .

proponents of expanding diversity initiatives contend that a more diverse force has the potential to be a better performing and more efficient force .

they point out that the nature of modern warfare has been shifting , requiring a range of new skills and competencies , and that these skills have to be developed from a shrinking pool of eligible candidates .

some note that the demographic characteristics of the nation have been rapidly shifting and that the pool of eligible candidates for military service will become increasingly racially and ethnically diverse over the next few decades .

meanwhile , women have increased their workforce participation rates and educational attainment , thus increasing the pool of skilled women eligible for recruitment .

many believe that it has always been in the best interest of the military to recruit and retain a military force that is representative of the nation as a "broadly representative military force is more likely to uphold national values and to be loyal to the government — and country — that raised it. .

in this regard , some say , in order to reflect the nation it serves the military should strive for diversity that mirrors the shifting demographic composition of civil society .

those who advocate for continued focus on equal opportunity initiatives in the military contend that historically underrepresented or discriminated - against demographic groups are still at a disadvantage , particularly in their ability to ascend to the highest leadership positions .

proponents of equal opportunity protections argue that if the military is to remain competitive with private sector employers in recruiting a skilled workforce , dod should offer the same level of rights and protections as civilian employers .

in addition , some argue that even though equal protections may exist in policy , more needs to be done to ensure that servicemembers do not experience discrimination or ostracism on the basis of , for example , religious beliefs or sexual orientation .

some are concerned about how diversity and equal - opportunity initiatives might be implemented and whether they could harm military effectiveness .

some feel that diversity initiatives such as actual or perceived quotas could hurt the military's merit - based system .

others contend that a military that is representative of the nation should also reflect the social and cultural norms of the nation .

in this regard , they argue that the popular will for social change should be the driving factor for dod policies .

some express concerns that that the inclusion of some demographic groups is antithetical to military culture and could affect unit cohesion , morale , and readiness — particularly in elite combat units .

in terms of equal opportunity , some point out that the military's mission is unique and , as such , protections that apply in the civilian workplace are not relevant in the military context .

in that regard , they contend that eligibility for military service or certain occupations within the military necessitates some exclusion based on these special demands .

as congress continues in its historic role of oversight , these are among the issues it will likely face as it establishes the ongoing standards for the u.s. armed forces of the 21 st century .

