the hollings manufacturing extension partnership ( mep ) , a program of the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) , is a national network of centers that provide custom services to small and medium - sized manufacturers ( smms ) to improve production processes , upgrade technological capabilities , and facilitate product innovation .

the mep mission is "to enhance the productivity and technological performance of u.s .

manufacturing. .

the mep program executes this mission through "state and regional centers [that] facilitate and accelerate the transfer of manufacturing technology in partnership with industry , universities and educational institutions , state governments , and nist and other federal research laboratories and agencies. .

funding for the mep centers is provided on a cost - shared basis between the federal government and nonfederal sources , including state and local governments and fees charged to smms for center services .

the mep program received $140.0 million for fy2018 , $10.0 million ( 7.7% ) more than in fy2016 and fy2017 .

in his fy2019 budget , president trump has requested no funding for mep centers .

in contrast , both the house and senate committee - reported appropriations bills ( h.r .

5952 and s. 3072 , respectively ) would provide $140.0 million for mep in fy2019 .

the mep has a staff of 50 employees at nist in fy2018 , and the centers have just over 1,300 field staff with technical and business expertise .

mep recently completed a system - wide competition that awarded one center to each state and puerto rico ; previously some states had more than one mep center .

nist served more than 26,313 smms in fy2017 .

in a survey performed by an independent third - party for nist mep , the companies served by mep centers reported $12.6 billion in new and retained sales , $1.7 billion in cost savings and investment savings , $3.5 billion in new client investment , and the creation and retention of more than 100,000 jobs in fy2017 .

in the mid - 1980s , congressional debates on trade focused attention on the critical role of technological advance in the competitiveness of individual firms and long - term national economic growth and productivity .

reflecting these ideas , the omnibus trade and competitiveness act ( p.l .

100-418 ) established a public - private program , now known as the hollings manufacturing extension partnership , to assist u.s. - based smms in identifying and adopting new technologies .

the focus on smms derived from policymakers' perceptions of their contribution to job creation , innovation , and manufacturing .

research at that time indicated that smms produce 2.5 times more innovations per employee than large firms .

program advocates noted the efforts of other nations to provide technical and business assistance to their manufacturing communities through the establishment of manufacturing extension centers ( see text box , "mep - like programs of other countries" ) .

in 2015 , there were 248,000 smms in the united states .

these firms accounted for 98.5% of the nation's manufacturing enterprises and employed approximately 5.2 million people in 2015 , approximately 44.4% of total u.s. manufacturing employment .

the improved use of technology by smms is seen by policymakers and business analysts as important to the competitiveness of american manufacturing firms .

how a product is designed and produced often determines costs , quality , and reliability .

lack of attention to process technologies and techniques may be the result of various factors , including company finances , insufficient information , equipment shortages , and undervaluation of the benefits of technology .

a key purpose of the mep program is to address these issues through outreach and the application of expertise , technologies , and knowledge .

nist requires regular reporting by the centers , including the number and types of projects completed .

according to nist , from mep's inception through fy2017 , the program has worked with 94,033 manufacturers , leading to $111.3 billion in sales and $18.8 billion in cost savings , and has helped create more than 985,317 jobs .

according to nist mep , for every dollar of federal investment , the mep generates nearly $27.30 in new client investment and $27.20 in new sales growth for smms .

nist also asserts that mep creates or retains one manufacturing job for every $1,291 in federal investment .

a 2018 study performed by the w.e .

upjohn institute for employment research using a constrained model ( which assumes competition or displacement between firms ) , estimated that the services and activities of the mep center added more than 219,000 jobs to the u.s. economy and $22.0 billion to gdp , producing a return of 14.5:1 to the u.s. treasury , based on data provided by mep clients .

the mep program was originally established in 1988 as the "regional centers for the transfer of manufacturing technology. .

over time , the program was referred to by a number of different names , including the manufacturing technology centers program and the manufacturing extension partnership program .

the america competes reauthorization of 2010 codified the name of the program as the "hollings manufacturing extension partnership" and the centers as the "hollings manufacturing extension centers. .

from its inception through the mid - 1990s , the mep's principal emphasis was on establishing the national network — making sure there was a center within reach of all the nation's manufacturers and linking those centers to one another so they could learn from and teach each other about how best to work with manufacturers .

the first three centers were established in 1989 .

four more were added in 1991 and 1992 .

in 1994 , the number of mep centers expanded substantially when nist took over support of extension centers originally funded by the department of defense's technology reinvestment project .

this brought the number of centers to 44 .

nist awarded additional centers in 1995-1996 , increasing the total to 70 centers .

subsequent consolidation of centers in new york and ohio brought the number of centers down to 60 , including centers in each state and puerto rico .

while the focus on helping smms has remained constant , the methods and tools used by mep have evolved since its creation .

an intent of the legislation that created the manufacturing extension effort was to provide cutting - edge technology developed by nist and other federal laboratories to smms .

royalties and licensing fees paid to the centers by the smms for the use of these technologies were expected to make the centers self - sufficient after the initial six years of operation .

advanced , federally funded technology , however , did not prove to be what most smms needed .

rather , their needs proved to be much more basic , including off - the - shelf technologies and business advice on topics such as management information technology , financial management systems , and business processes .

a 1991 assessment of the program by the general accounting office ( gao , now the government accountability office ) concluded that while legislation establishing the manufacturing technology centers program emphasized the transfer of advanced technologies being developed at federal laboratories , the centers have found that their clients primarily need proven technologies .

thus , a key mandate of this program is not realistically aligned with the basic needs of most small manufacturers [emphasis added]... [a]ccording to officials from professional and trade associations representing small manufacturers and the results of key studies on u.s. manufacturing competitiveness , such advanced , laboratory - based technologies are not practical for most small manufacturers because these technologies generally are expensive , untested , and too complex .

in recognition of this situation , the program was reoriented to offer more basic technologies that helped smms to improve their productivity and competitive position .

by the mid - 1990s , mep was providing "a wide range of business services , including helping companies ( 1 ) solve individual manufacturing problems , ( 2 ) obtain training for their workers , ( 3 )  create marketing plans , and ( 4 ) upgrade their equipment and computers. .

as articulated in the nist manufacturing innovation blog , the initial services were focused on solving immediate and short - term problems — point solutions .

the philosophy was an engineering one: 'you have a problem .

we can fix it. .

over time , the mep's focus moved from point solutions to more strategic , integrated services .

in 2010 , the "overarching strategy" for the mep program was to reduce manufacturing costs through "lean , quality , and other programs targeting plant efficiencies" and to increase profitability "through business growth services resulting in new sales , new markets , and new products. .

current mep efforts focus on innovation strategies , commercialization , lean production , process improvements , workforce training , supply chain optimization , and exporting .

one of the key areas of the mep strategy is technology acceleration .

mep defines technology acceleration as integrating technology into the products , processes , services and business models of manufacturers to solve manufacturing problems or pursue opportunities and facilitate competitiveness and enhance manufacturing growth .

technology acceleration spans the innovation continuum and can include aspects of technology transfer , technology transition , technology diffusion , technology deployment and manufacturing implementation .

technology acceleration encompasses mep efforts to assist smms in the improvement of existing products , the development of new products , and the development and improvement of manufacturing processes .

mep assists smms in this regard through a variety of approaches including technology scouting and transfer ; supplier scouting ; business - to - business network pilots ; lean product development ; technology - driven market intelligence ; access to capital ; cooperative research and development activities with nist laboratories ; and use of other federal programs such as the small business innovation research ( sbir ) program , the advanced manufacturing technology ( amtech ) consortia program , and the national network for manufacturing innovation ( nnmi , also known as manufacturing usa ) .

while continuing to offer its services to all smms , mep is emphasizing targeted outreach toward growth - oriented smms and small entrepreneurial startups .

the statutory objective of the mep centers is to enhance productivity and technological performanc e in u.s. manufacturing through the following: the transfer of manufacturing technology and techniques developed at nist to centers and , through them , to manufacturing companies throughout the united states ; the participation of individual s from industry , universities , state governments , other f ederal ag encies , and , when appropriate , nist in cooperative technology transfer activities ; efforts to make new manufacturing technology and processes usable by u.s. - based small - and medium - sized companies ; the active dissemination of scientific , engineering , technical , and management information about manufacturing to industrial firms , including small - and medium - sized manufacturing companies ; the utilization , when appropriate , of the expertise and capability that exists in f ederal agencies and federally sponsored laboratories ; the provision to community colleges and area career and technical education schools of information about the job skills needed in manufacturing companies , including small and medium - sized manufacturing businesses in the regions they serve ; promoting and expanding certification systems offered through industry , associations , and local colleges when appropriate , including efforts such as facilitating training , supporting new or existing apprenticeships , and providing access to information and experts , to address workforce needs and skills gaps in order to assist small - and medium - sized manufacturing businesses ; andthe growth in employment and wages at united states - based small and medium - sized companies .

no direct financial support is available for companies through the centers .

the program offers only technical and managerial assistance , and the cost of that is dependent on the mep center's expenses .

the statutorily authorized activities of centers include the following: the establishment of automated manufacturing systems and other advanced production technologies , based on nist - supported research , for the purpose of demonstrations and technology transfer ; the active transfer and dissemination of research findings and center expertise to a wide range of companies and enterprises , particularly small and medium - sized manufacturers ; and the facilitation of collaborations and partnerships between small and medium - sized manufacturing companies , community colleges , and area career and technical education schools , to help those entities better understand the specific needs of manufacturers and to help manufacturers better understand the skill sets that students learn in the programs offered by such colleges and schools .

the mep program includes an mep program office located at nist ( nist mep ) , an mep advisory board , and the 51 mep centers and their oversight boards .

in fy2017 , nist mep had 47 employees and received appropriations to support 80 fte .

the nist fy2018 budget justification requested authorization for zero fte for mep .

the following sections provide an overview of the criteria used by nist mep in awarding centers and the ongoing system - wide center competition .

center awards are made as cooperative agreements with an initial performance period of five years .

nist may extend an award for an additional five years following an overall assessment of the center , including "programmatic , policy , financial , administrative , and responsibility assessments. .

according to nist , when an application for a multiyear award is approved , funding is usually provided for only the first year of the project ; for subsequent years , recipients are required to submit detailed budgets and budget narratives prior to the award of any continued funding .

the amount of funds awarded after the first year is provided on a noncompetitive basis and may be adjusted upward or downward .

center funding after the first year is contingent upon satisfactory performance , continued relevance to the mission and priorities of the program , and the availability of funds .

continuation of an award to extend the period of performance or to increase or decrease funding is at the sole discretion of nist .

the following sections provide current and historical information on center cost - sharing and term of eligibility for funding .

the mep program has provided additional funding opportunities for a number of activities that support the program's overarching mission .

some of these activities were supported solely by nist , while others were supported by multiple federal agencies .

current activities of this type include business - to - business networks and additional cooperative agreements .

a number of other efforts have been completed , including make it in america challenge , advanced manufacturing jobs and innovation accelerator challenge , and manufacturing technology acceleration centers .

in 2017 , nist mep released its mep national network strategic plan .

among other things , the plan identified mep strategic goals and objectives .

the four goals of the plan are to empower u.s. manufacturers , by assisting them in adopting productivity - enhancing innovative manufacturing technologies , navigating advanced technology solutions , and recruiting and retaining a skilled and diverse workforce ; champion manufacturing , by promoting the importance of a strong manufacturing base to the u.s. economy and protection of national security interests , creating awareness of innovations in manufacturing , creating enabling workforce development partnerships to build a stronger and diverse pipeline , and maximizing awareness of the mep national network ; leverage partnerships , by leveraging national , regional , state , and local partnerships to increase market penetration , identifying mission - complementary advocates to help expand the brand recognition of the mep national network , and building an expanded service delivery model to support manufacturing technology advances ; and transform the network , by maximizing the mep's knowledge and experience to operate as an integrated national network , increasing efficiency and effectiveness by employing a learning organization platform , and by creating a resilient and adaptive mep national network to support a resilient and adaptive u.s. manufacturing base .

for additional information , including the strategic plan's strategic objectives , measures of success , and priorities , download the report at https: / / www.nist.gov / document / mepnationalnetworkplan2017to2022finalpdf .

nist is required to annually produce and submit to congress a three - year programmatic planning document , concurrent with the president's annual budget request .

this report is to include an assessment of the nist director's governance of the mep program .

the latest version of the plan , nist three - year programmatic plan: 201 7 - 201 9 , can be accessed at https: / / www.nist.gov / sites / default / files / documents / director / planning / 3_year_plan_2017-19_web_ready2.pdf .

a number of organizations have reviewed and commented on the program's management and effectiveness , and some have offered recommendations for improving the program .

the following sections discuss some of the findings and recommendations of these organizations .

the following sections provide information on the status of fy2019 appropriations for mep and a longer term perspective on mep budget requests and appropriations from fy2003-fy2019 .

in his fy2018 budget , president trump sought to eliminate the manufacturing extension partnership , requesting $6.0 million "for the orderly wind down" of the program .

the house committee - reported commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2018 ( h.r .

3267 ) would provide $100.0 million for the mep program , down $30.0 million ( 23.1% ) from the fy2017 enacted level and up $94.0 million from the request .

the senate committee - reported commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2018 ( s. 1662 ) rejected the trump administration's proposed elimination of the mep program and proposed funding at the fy2017 level of $130.0 million , $30.0 million more than the house committee - reported bill .

on march 23 , 2018 , congress enacted the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , providing $140.0 million for mep .

president trump has again proposed to eliminate federal funding for the mep centers in his fy2019 budget .

both the house committee - reported bill , h.r .

5952 , and the senate committee - reported bill , s. 3072 , would provide $140.0 million for mep , the same as the fy2018 level .

the mep program has at times enjoyed presidential and congressional support ; at other times , it has been targeted for reductions or elimination .

these changes are visible in the history of presidential budget requests and congressional actions on mep appropriations .

figure 1 illustrates funding levels for the nist mep program , both requested and enacted appropriations , for fy2003-fy2019 ; table 2 provides the requested and enacted appropriations amounts .

while president george w. bush's annual budget requests generally called for substantial reductions in support for mep , congress appropriated generally steady funding except for fy2004 and fy2008 .

in fy2004 , mep funding was cut to $38.6 million , down 62.6% from its fy2003 level of $105.9 million .

however , congress restored mep funding in fy2005 , appropriating somewhat more than it had in fy2003 .

in fy2008 , mep funding was cut to $89.6 million , down 14.4% from its fy2007 level of $104.7 million .

for fy2009 , president bush's final budget proposed to end federal funding for mep , requesting $4 million to allow for "the orderly change of mep centers to a self - supporting basis. .

congress opted instead to provide $110.0 million for mep , an increase of 22.8% above the fy2008 enacted level .

under president obama , mep budget requests equaled or exceeded actual appropriations .

in fy2010 , president obama requested and received $124.7 million for mep .

for the rest of the obama administration , mep budget requests proposed higher funding for mep than was enacted .

president trump proposed the elimination of federal support for the mep centers in fy2018 , requesting $6.0 million "for the orderly wind down" of the program .

congress appropriated $140.0 million for mep for fy2018 .

in his fy2019 budget , president trump proposed again to eliminate federal support for the mep centers , requesting no funding for the program .

between fy2005 and fy2015 , mep enacted appropriations grew at a compound annual growth rate ( cagr ) of approximately 1.6% per year , slightly below inflation .

in response to direction from congress , gao investigated the extent to which the mep program achieves administrative efficiencies .

in its march 2014 report , gao found that of the $608 million spent on the mep program from fy2009 to fy2013 , about $495 million ( 81.4% ) went to center awards .

the balance was spent on contracts , staff , agency - wide overhead charges , and other items , some of which nist considered direct support and some of which nist considered administrative spending .

according to gao , nist estimated that more than 88.5% of federal mep program spending in fy2013 was for direct support , and the remainder ( 11.5% ) was for administration .

continuing financial support for the mep program is part of a larger ongoing debate among federal policymakers about the appropriate role of the federal government in providing assistance to u.s. industry .

the mep program has , at times as it is now , been included in discussions surrounding termination of federal programs that provide direct support for industry .

proponents assert that smms play a central role in the u.s. economy and that the mep system provides information and assistance not otherwise available to smms .

some opponents have asserted that such services are available from other sources and that mep inappropriately shifts a portion of the costs of these services to taxpayers .

nist mep notes that an independent survey of mep clients provides evidence that mep activities bring positive returns to the u.s. treasury .

proponents of the program stress that no direct funding is available to companies .

some opponents assert that activities such as those performed by the mep centers are a state responsibility and that the federal role should have ended as the original legislation envisioned .

in addition , some have questioned whether federal support for the mep centers should continue to be provided indefinitely .

as originally expressed in statute , mep centers were to receive no federal funding after their fifth year of operation , instead deriving necessary revenues from state and local governments as well as from the companies utilizing the centers' services .

in 1998 , congress lifted the prohibition on funding after the fifth year and allowed nist mep to provide up to one - third of center costs after their sixth year of operation indefinitely .

more recently , congress has enacted legislation that allows for federal mep funding to support up to 50% of a center's costs indefinitely .

the debate over whether the federal government should continue to provide financial support to the centers indefinitely and , if so , at what level , may be revisited by congress , especially in light of the trump administration's proposal to defund the mep program in fy2019 .

these and other issues may be debated as congress continues to make appropriation decisions relating to manufacturing extension as it pertains to the role of the federal government in facilitating research and technological advancement .

appendix a. hollings manufacturing extension partnership centers appendix b .

center funding after system - wide competitio .

