in february 2012 , president obama signed the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( fmra ; p.l .

112-95 ) .

the legislation mandated that the federal aviation administration ( faa ) develop a comprehensive plan to integrate unmanned aircraft systems ( uas ) into the national airspace and begin implementing the plan starting in october 2015 .

frma also required faa to issue regulations pertainin g to small commercial drones and develop standards for the operation and certification of unmanned aircraft operated by federal , state , or local government .

deadlines for completing these actions have passed , but faa has not yet finalized its uas regulations and standards .

however , faa is granting approvals to government agencies and commercial operators to operate certain uas on a case - by - case basis .

under a special rule established by fmra , model aircraft and hobby drones operated strictly for noncommercial recreational purposes are permitted to fly below 400 feet so long as they remain within sight of the operator , outside of restricted airspace , and away from airports unless appropriate prior notification has been given to airport operators and air traffic control towers .

under this rule , operations of hobby drones have proliferated , creating significant enforcement challenges for faa .

meanwhile , faa has proceeded slowly and cautiously in complying with the fmra mandate related to government and commercial operations .

it has allowed government agencies and operators of small commercial drones to obtain permits on a case - by - case basis .

in february 2015 , faa proposed regulations allowing for the routine operation of small commercial uas ; these rules are expected to be finalized in april 2016 .

faa's integration plan , developed in response to frma requirements , indicates that procedures allowing public safety uas routine access to airspace are forthcoming .

faa's approach to regulation distinguishes between operations conducted within visual line of sight ( vlos ) and those involving flight beyond ( visual ) line of sight ( blos ) .

this distinction does not depend on aircraft size .

some small uas can achieve basic blos capability using a live feed from an onboard camera presented to the operator on a visual display .

larger uas operated from dedicated control stations achieve blos capability through similar means , but also often include other sensing capabilities such as moving map displays , airborne radar information , and air traffic collision avoidance systems to enhance operator situational awareness .

so far , faa is restricting commercial users and model aircraft operators to vlos operations .

the proposed rule for commercial uas would maintain this restriction , a limitation that would rule out many potential uses of uas , such as aerial surveying and inspections and package delivery .

furthermore , faa requires that each uas be controlled by a dedicated pilot operating one aircraft at a time , just as occurs with manned aircraft .

it has proposed formal training requirements for commercial uas operators similar to the certification process for pilots of manned aircraft .

however , uas technology is rapidly pushing in the direction of greater autonomy and automation .

operational concepts for potential blos applications envision systems that will involve minimal human input and interaction and minimal training to operate .

many of the anticipated uses envisioned for uas , particularly those involving blos operations , will require that unmanned aircraft be integrated with manned aircraft within the national airspace system .

at the current level of maturity , however , most uas are being kept segregated from manned aircraft and controlled airspace through altitude restrictions and the establishment of strict airspace boundaries .

in the future , it is anticipated that some uas will share airspace , and potentially share facilities like airports and helipads , with manned aircraft .

technological innovations , as well as standardized procedures operators must follow , will be needed for full integration .

an unmanned aircraft is a vehicle designed for flight that does not have a human operator , a pilot , on board .

most unmanned aircraft are controlled from a ground station .

the aircraft , its ground station , and command and control radio linkages between the two are collectively known as an unmanned aircraft system .

for small uas , the ground station may be nothing more than a handheld radio control device with manual inputs .

more sophisticated drones have ground control centers that look similar to cockpits of modern airliners .

unmanned aircraft are generally classified based on their size and weight .

faa's initiatives to regulate small unmanned aircraft systems pertain to those weighing less than 55 pounds .

faa has also suggested a possible sub - category called micro - uas , which would be limited to 4.4 pounds ( 2 kilograms ) and thus might pose fewer safety concerns .

unmanned aircraft 55 pounds and greater are categorized as large insofar as they do not meet the statutory or regulatory requirements to be considered small uas .

faa has not proposed regulations relating to large uas .

an unmanned aircraft's size and weight are generally correlated with both its operating altitude and its flight endurance .

small uas operate at the lowest altitudes ( typically below 1,000 feet ) and have comparatively short endurance , usually 30 minutes or less .

many of the consumer drone products that fall into this category are battery - powered , and include rotary - wing designs , such as multi - copter drones , as well as more traditional fixed - wing airplane designs .

some larger designs are gasoline - powered and can operate up to several thousand feet .

more capable gasoline - powered unmanned aircraft originally designed as military systems , like the fixed - wing scaneagle and fire scout helicopter , and larger uas like the predator / guardian and the jet - powered global hawk , can be deployed for several hours , have thousands of miles of effective range , and operate at medium and high altitudes ( see figure 1 ) .

the demand to use uas in domestic airspace has developed differently than many forecasters expected .

the original impetus behind anticipated domestic uas activity was the return of unmanned aircraft used for military and intelligence missions overseas , and the repurposing of those systems for nonmilitary governmental and commercial activities .

industry forecasts assumed that domestic uas activities would develop as those relatively large aircraft were employed in the united states .

since that time , however , technology allowing smaller , low - cost uas has developed quickly , leading to a rapid increase in the number of small hobby drones and commercial uas .

the proliferation of these systems has complicated faa's efforts to develop regulations allowing for the integration of uas into the national airspace .

uas offer a unique capability to provide aerial surveillance and sensing capabilities at a much lower cost than manned aircraft operations .

in addition , small uas can sometimes provide imaging and sensing from a perspective that is not easily achievable using either manned aircraft or land - based systems such as cranes or poles .

flight missions considered to be "dirty , dull , or dangerous" are regarded as prime candidates for the use of unmanned aircraft .

examples include surveillance for homeland security , border protection , and law enforcement ; highway traffic monitoring ; forest fire scouting ; disaster response ; applications of pesticides ; pipeline and transmission line inspection ; surveying and geospatial imaging ; atmospheric and environmental science ; wildlife and natural resources management ; scientific data collection ; and severe storm monitoring .

some industry experts foresee eventual use of unmanned aircraft for cargo transport .

at this point , however , passenger - carrying uas are not on the horizon .

industry analysts anticipate a robust market for unmanned aircraft systems , although the extent to which civilian sales will contribute to this market is highly dependent on how the regulation of civilian drones proceeds .

in 2013 , faa forecasted that 7,500 commercial small uas will be operational within five years after it finalizes proposed regulations on uas .

more recently , faa has backed away from projecting the potential size of the uas market , noting only that once routine operations of small uas are authorized , a surge in commercial uses of uas is anticipated .

already , more than 3,000 small uas have been approved for a broad array of commercial uses under a special exemption process called for under the provisions of fmra .

a market study completed by the department of transportation's volpe center in 2013 concluded that future uas markets are likely to follow an "s" shaped curve of technology adoption with three distinct phases: technological innovation , market growth , and market saturation ( see figure 2 ) .

the study projected that public agencies will operate about 58,000 uas by 2035 , with federal agencies accounting for about 10,000 of those vehicles and the rest being operated by state and local entities .

this market is likely to be driven primarily by state and local public safety agencies seeking to augment or acquire aerial surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities .

additional demand is anticipated from state universities using uas for research , as well as from state highway , natural resource , and environmental protection agencies .

the volpe center study anticipated that market growth for commercial uas will start to expand exponentially as technology advances and regulations evolve to allow expanded access to the national airspace system .

the study estimated that the number of commercial uas in the united states would grow to about 45,000 by 2029 , at which point the number of commercial uas is expected to surpass the number of uas operated by the military , federal , and state and local government entities combined .

at that point , public - sector market growth is expected to taper off while commercial use continues to grow .

the study projected that , by 2035 , almost 250,000 uas will be flying ( not including model aircraft ) , about 170,000 of which would be commercial uas .

the overwhelming majority of these are anticipated to be classified as small or micro - uas , and would be predominantly used for surveillance and imaging applications .

it is widely anticipated that among civilian uses , agriculture , and in particular precision agriculture applications that involve detailed imaging of crops and fields , will be the primary driver for commercial investment in uas technology in the near term .

aerial spraying of small crop fields using radio - controlled helicopters began in japan in the late 1980s , and today is commonplace .

given the size of farm fields in the united states , however , widespread use of uas for pesticide spraying will probably not take off until regulations permit blos operations .

similarly , applications related to surveillance , monitoring , and inspection of infrastructure and utilities , such as highway systems , railways , pipelines , and electric lines , will face significant limitations until blos operations are approved .

current commercial uas applications are confined to visual line of sight , such as aerial photography of properties for sale , aerial videography for motion pictures and television , and aerial surveys of construction sites , infrastructure , and buildings .

faa distinguishes between three distinct classes of unmanned aircraft users: public operations , comprising federal , state , and local government users ; civil operations , comprising primarily commercial entities ; and model aircraft operations , comprising users that fly unmanned aircraft strictly for hobby or recreational purposes .

the regulatory framework for each of these classes of users is unique , reflecting the differing operating characteristics of each of these classes as well as the unique statutory construction of provisions in fmra .

it is notable that this delineation closely parallels distinctions made by faa for manned aircraft operations , which are subdivided into public aircraft operations , civil aircraft operations , and operations by recreational users of single - seat ultralight vehicles that must obey airspace regulations but do not require aircraft or operator certification or registration .

the slow pace of uas regulation in the united states thus far reflects , in part , many of the uncertainties about the potential risks of unmanned aircraft operations .

since uas are new and have not been integrated into complex airspace , the potential safety hazards to manned aircraft and to persons and property on the ground have not been thoroughly evaluated and are difficult to evaluate .

consider the possibility of a drone being ingested into the jet engine of a large commercial airliner .

the extent to which such an event would render the engine inoperable is uncertain , and would likely depend on the size , materials , and construction of the unmanned aircraft , as well as the size of engine and the phase of flight .

the mere presence of drones in congested airspace around major airports raises additional concerns over possible pilot distraction .

numerous airline flight crews have reported sightings of uas in close proximity to airport approach and departure paths , where they may distract pilots during critical phases of flight .

in august 2015 , faa stated that pilots reported 238 sightings of uas in calendar year 2014 and more than 650 through the first seven months of 2015 .

additionally , uas flights in the vicinity of wildfires disrupted aerial firefighting activities and led to the cancellation of some manned flights conducted in support of firefighting activities in the summer of 2015 .

several uas have been spotted over sporting events , and in some instances drones have crashed at public events such as football games and tennis matches .

in some of these instances , operators have faced criminal charges in addition to potential faa enforcement action .

in addition to safety concerns , uas pose a potential threat to security .

small uas can be used by criminals and terrorists for espionage , surveillance , and intelligence gathering at critical government and industrial facilities .

criminals are also using unmanned aircraft to smuggle drugs and contraband across u.s. borders and over prison walls and fences .

somewhat larger uas could be used to carry out terrorist attacks by serving as platforms to deliver explosives or chemical , biological , radiological , or nuclear weapons .

chemical and biological agents pose a particular concern , as uas used for aerial pesticide applications could readily serve as platforms to carry out attacks .

small uas could similarly be used to disperse small amounts of certain agents that may be lethal in minute quantities .

even a hoax attack — for example , releasing a powdery substance and making false claims that it contains anthrax virus — could cause widespread panic .

uas could also be used as platforms for firearms or other weapons .

while many attack scenarios involving uas may sound far - fetched , most are technically feasible with already - available technology , and some have been contemplated in terrorist plots .

in september 2011 , fbi disrupted a homegrown terrorist plot to attack the pentagon and the capitol with large model aircraft filled with explosives .

in 2012 , the investigation culminated in the sentencing of 27-year - old rezwan ferdaus , who had ordered a remote controlled model aircraft from a florida distributor under a false identity and had sought to acquire explosives from an undercover agent .

ferdaus also sought to acquire assault rifles and grenades to be used in a second phase of his attack plot to target personnel evacuating the buildings hit by the explosives - laden model aircraft .

since 2012 , other security incidents have raised concerns over potential security threats posed by uas .

widely publicized drone incidents include an unauthorized flight at a political rally in dresden , germany , in september 2013 that came in close proximity to german chancellor angela merkel ; a january 2015 crash of a small drone on the white house lawn in washington , dc ; and a series of unidentified drone flights over landmarks and sensitive locations in paris , france , in 2015 .

conversely , uas may be vulnerable to attack from the ground .

uas could be targeted by terrorists or cybercriminals seeking to tap into sensor data transmissions or to cause mayhem by hacking or jamming command and control signals .

signal jamming or hacking could result in a crash or hostile takeover , as command and control systems typically use unsecured radio frequencies .

some experts have recommended that unmanned aircraft systems be required to have spoof - resistant navigation systems and not be solely reliant on signals from global positioning system equipment , which can be easily jammed .

while tsa has broad statutory authority to address a number of aviation security issues , it has not formally addressed the potential security concerns arising from unmanned aircraft operations in domestic airspace .

the effort to integrate uas into the national airspace system has highlighted a number of technological challenges .

these include developing capabilities to detect , sense , and avoid other air traffic , including both manned and other unmanned flights ; mitigating risks to persons and property on the ground ; preventing unauthorized use of airspace ; providing adequate and adequately secure radiofrequency spectrum for command and control linkages and sensor payloads ; and addressing human factors considerations including approaches to system automation , human - system interfaces , and operator training and qualification standards .

much of this research is still in its early stages , and while the research is intended to inform faa decisionmaking regarding future operation and regulation of uas in the national airspace , anticipated benefits have not yet been realized .

a key requirement for enabling integrated uas operations is the development of "sense - and - avoid" capabilities to allow unmanned aircraft and unmanned aircraft operators to reliably detect and maneuver around other aircraft , both manned and unmanned .

while "sense - and - avoid" technologies are critical for beyond - line - of - sight operations that are not yet being considered in faa regulations , they may also have application in visual - line - of - sight operations , particularly when the command - and - control links between the aircraft and its ground station are lost .

faa , in partnership with nasa and aerospace companies , has carried out demonstrations of prototype proof - of - concept sense - and - avoid systems .

however , the department of transportation office of inspector general found last year that there is a lack of mature detect - and - avoid technology to avoid collisions , and noted that industry experts consider this "the most pressing technical challenge to integration yet to be mitigated. .

even if suitable technologies are developed , their cost is likely to make them impractical for installation on small hobbyist uas , at least initially .

unmanned aircraft operation in domestic airspace is the subject of a number of bills introduced in the 114 th congress .

the responsible skies act of 2015 ( h.r .

798 ) would require that uas flown under section 333 exemptions remain below 400 feet and more than five miles from the perimeter of any airport that provides scheduled passenger air transportation .

the safe skies for unmanned aircraft act of 2015 ( s. 387 ) would require faa to develop procedures allowing beyond - line - of - sight operations for aeronautical research purposes conducted as public aircraft operations , including atmospheric and natural resources research , meteorological observations , and airborne astronomy .

similar language is contained in h.r .

819 .

the commercial uas modernization act ( s. 1314 ) would establish an interim rule for small commercial uas that would apply until faa finalizes its proposed small uas rulemaking .

the interim policy described in the act would require aircraft registration and operator knowledge testing and certification .

it would restrict operations to visual line of sight , below 500 feet , and away from towered airport controlled airspace without prior permission from air traffic control .

the bill would give faa explicit enforcement authorities and would require operators to report accidents resulting in injury or property damage other than to the small uas itself .

the act would also establish a position of deputy associate administrator for unmanned aircraft within faa that would be responsible for overseeing the integration of uas into the national airspace system , and develop strategies for unmanned aircraft spectrum issues , barriers to operating unmanned aircraft beyond line of sight , barriers to allowing payload carriage , and barriers to utilizing automated uas .

the bill also would direct faa to expedite processing of exemptions to allow certain beyond - line - of - sight operations , programmatic exemptions based on previous analysis , extended visual - line - of - sight and marginal visual flight rules weather conditions , and heavier uas .

the bill also directs faa to establish a joint data collection and analysis program at the william j. hughes technical center in new jersey to analyze test site data , implement an air traffic management pilot program for airspace below 1,200 feet , and create a partnership to test the management of small uas operated at low altitude .

a number of other bills addressing privacy and security concerns of domestic uas operations have also been introduced .

since multiyear authorization for faa programs and funding under fmra expired at the end of fy2015 , many anticipate congressional deliberations on a new comprehensive faa reauthorization measure during the second session of the 114 th congress .

safety , security , and privacy issues regarding domestic uas operations and uas integration are likely to be issues of particular interest in these deliberations .

