in 1970 , the k visa category was created for foreign national fiancé ( e ) s of u.s. citizens .

the first visa within the category , the k - 1 visa , is a nonimmigrant visa that grants temporary admission to the united states for fiancé ( e ) s in order for them to marry their u.s. citizen petitioners .

since the visa's creation , congress has passed additional legislation that has added protections for fiancé ( e ) s and their children .

there were 35,925 k - 1 visas issued by the u.s. department of state ( dos ) in fy2014 .

the k - 1 visa has drawn increased attention due to a mass shooting in san bernardino , ca , on december 2 , 2015 .

one of the suspected shooters , tashneen malik , reportedly came to the united states on a k - 1 visa to marry the other suspected shooter , syed rizwan farook .

the investigation of the couple , after the fact , reportedly brought to light suspicions to the couple's support of violent jihadists .

due to these events , congress and the public have raised questions about the k - 1 visa and its security screening .

for instance , how well are individuals screened for fraud and security risks , and are there any gaps in the screening process ? .

after the shooting , president barack obama asked the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) to review the u.s. visa program .

some members of congress have also called for the inclusion of visa applicants' social media accounts as an added screening measure .

this report will review the k - 1 visa , providing information on the background of the program .

next , the report will cover the requirements of the visa and its application procedures , including the filing of a petition , the application for a visa , and the national security screening .

the following section will describe k - 1 visa holders' admission to the united states and their adjustment of status to lawful permanent residency .

the last section will provide statistics on the issuance of the k - 1 visa and the source countries of visa holders .

p.l .

91-225 established the k nonimmigrant visa category in 1970 for fiancés , fiancées , and the derivative children of the fiancé ( e ) .

the law amended the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) in an effort to address the difficulties faced by u.s. citizens who wished to bring their fiancé ( e ) s to the united states to be married .

there are four subcategories within the k visa category .

p.l .

91-225 created the first two categories ( k - 1 visa and k - 2 visa ) , and in 2000 the legal immigration family equity act ( life act ; title xi of p.l .

106-553 ) created the last two categories ( k - 3 visa and k - 4 visa ) .

the k - 1 visa is for noncitizens seeking to enter the united states to marry a u.s. citizen , and the k - 2 visa is for their children .

the k - 3 visa is for noncitizens who married a u.s. citizen abroad and want to enter the united states while they wait for their immigration petition , or for an immigrant visa to become available , and the k - 4 visa is for their children .

subsequent legislation was enacted in order to provide protections to the fiancé ( e ) ( also referred to as the beneficiary ) .

the international marriage broker regulation act of 2005 ( imbra ; title viii , subtitle d , of p.l .

109-162 ) requires the disclosure of the use of an international marriage broker and the petitioner's criminal convictions for certain crimes , notably sexual crimes .

additionally , imbra provides requirements with regard to international marriage brokers and requires the department of state to provide beneficiaries with a pamphlet containing facts about the k - 1 visa , domestic violence , and their rights .

the adam walsh child protection and safety act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-248 ) further prohibits u.s. citizens from petitioning for a k - 1 visa if they have been convicted of certain offenses against a minor ( unless the secretary of dhs can determine , under his / her sole discretion , that the petitioner poses no risk to the beneficiary ) .

in order for a foreign national to be issued a k - 1 visa , the petitioner who is filing on the fiancé ( e ) 's behalf must be a u.s. citizen and must provide the following evidence: the parties have met in person within two years of the petition's filing , though the secretary of dhs may waive this requirement .

the parties have a bona fide intention to marry .

the parties are legally able and willing to conclude a valid marriage in the united states within 90 days of the fiancé ( e ) 's arrival .

in addition to the determination that a foreign national is qualified for a k - 1 visa , a decision must be made as to whether the foreign national is admissible or excludable under the ina .

if the beneficiary is issued a k - 1 visa , it is normally valid for six months .

dhs customs and border protection ( cbp ) officers inspect all arrivals to the united states at ports of entry and again screen the k visa holder against the various dhs databases and "watch lists. .

once in the united states , the k - 1 nonimmigrant is required to marry the u.s. citizen petitioner within 90 days .

k - 1 visa holders are permitted to work in the united states during this time if they file for employment authorization .

the foreign national is eligible for lawful permanent residence as an immediate relative if the marriage takes place within 90 days and the fiancé ( e ) is otherwise admissible .

this status is conditional for two years .

if the marriage does not occur within 90 days , the k visa expires and the foreign national must depart from the united states .

from fy2000 to fy2014 , dos issued a total of 430,900 k - 1 visas , with an additional 65,833 k - 2 visas issued to the children of k - 1 visa beneficiaries .

since fy2000 , k - 1 visa issuances have fluctuated , though they have experienced an overall rise .

fy2014 was the peak year thus far in the 21 s century for fiancé ( e ) visas , with dos issuing 35,925 k - 1 visas , an increase of 36% from fy2013 .

the lowest number of k - 1 visa issuances in the 21 st century , at 21,471 visas , was in fy2000 .

in terms of source countries for all k visa holders , the philippines led with 8,525 k visas in fy2014 .

in comparison , chinese nationals were issued the second largest number of k visas at 2,177 visas ; and mexican nationals were issued the third largest portion of k visas at 2,101 visas .

in fy2014 , asia was the top receiving region of k visas with 18,864 , or 46% of all k visas issued .

additionally , north america and central america was the second largest source region with 19% of k visas , while europe was the third largest source region with 18% of k visas .

figure 2 presents the regional breakdown of k visas that dos issued in fy2014 , and figure 3 shows the top 12 source countries .

