we must modernize the air force .

this isn't optional .

we must do it .

and it will be painful because we will have to make hard choices. — general mark welsh , chief of staff , u.s. air force we can't – particularly with $17 billion less in 2017 – we're not going to be able to do it all .

 — deborah lee james , secretary of the air force the u.s. air force is in the midst of an ambitious modernization program , driven primarily by the age of its curren t aircraft fleets .

it has undertaken three major programs , repeatedly declared to be the service's top procurement priorities: the f - 35a strike fighter , to replace several aircraft types whose designs date from the 1970s ; the kc - 46a tanker , to replace kc - 135s designed in the 1950s ; the long - range strike bomber ( lrs - b ) , initially to replace b - 52s and b - 1s , whose designs date from the 1950s and 1970s , respectively .

in addition , the air force continues to procure variants of the c - 130 cargo aircraft and a relatively small number of remotely piloted aircraft systems ( rpa , as the air force refers to unmanned aerial systems ) .

together , these five programs account for $67.2 billion over the fy2016-2020 future years defense program ( fydp ) .

in fy2016 , the four procurement programs ( f - 35a , kc - 46 , c - 130 , and rpa ) account for 99% of the air force's aircraft acquisition budget ; lrs - b is 5% of the air force overall research and development ( r&d ) budget , but 60% of the budget for advanced component development & prototypes .

those are not the air force's only modernization requirements .

the fy2016-2020 fydp also includes initial funding for jstars recapitalization , to develop a successor for the e - 8 intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance aircraft , with a projected entry into service of fy2022 ; a new combat rescue helicopter ( crh ) to retrieve downed airmen and other personnel , to succeed the hh - 60g ; a presidential aircraft replacement ( par ) program to develop and acquire a replacement for two vc - 25 aircraft popularly referred to as air force one ; and a new advanced trainer aircraft , called the t - x , to replace t - 38 trainers designed in the 1950s .

perhaps notably , no funded plan exists for recapitalizing the e - 3 awacs fleet , based on the same airframe as the kc - 135 and e - 8 .

the current plan also includes no funding for the long - expected cvlsp helicopter replacement program .

any such programs would add to the outyear funding issue discussed below .

the total investment required for these nine programs , combined with the budgetary restrictions in place as a consequence of the balanced budget act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-67 ) , or bba , poses a significant challenge to air force budgeters .

because defense budget exhibits project only five years into the future , however , that challenge may not be immediately evident .

a more detailed explanation follows .

as figure 1 shows , projected program spending for f - 35a and kc - 46 procurement is substantial and steady , while rpas add a relatively small share and spending on the c - 130 declines over time .

 ( as this report went to press , the air force announced a plan to acquire 75 more mq - 9 reaper rpas ; the cost of that acquisition is not reflected in these figures. ) .

the major r&d programs offer a different picture .

spending for the lrs - b , following its recent contract award and entering its engineering and manufacturing development phase , is projected to triple over the course of the fydp .

the newer programs begin with relatively low spending in the current fydp ; the challenge will come if those programs proceed to advanced development and eventually procurement .

with f - 35a and kc - 46 slated to continue for many years ( and , in kc - 46's case , a successor kc - y programmed to immediately follow ) , procurement spending on established programs will continue to be substantial .

how will the future air force procurement budget accommodate the new programs as well ? .

lrs - b complicates the picture further .

it is funded ( at least through the current fydp ) in the r&d budget , where both the program's size and its increasing budget requirements will place pressure on the newer programs .

at some point , lrs - b may shift from r&d to the procurement budget , but that appears to be somewhere beyond fy2020 at the earliest — which is when crh , par , t - x , and jstars recap might also be expected to move from r&d to procurement , exacerbating the rivalry for resources .

the net effect of starting these new programs atop a full procurement budget is a classic "bow wave" of procurement , with increasing numbers of programs with growing budgets all trying to fit within a fixed budget topline at the same time while building requirements for increased future funding .

one might expect the chart of a procurement "bow wave" to show expenses increasing in the outyears .

figure 1 and figure 2 both show an increase in fy2018 and fy2019 , then a drop for fy2020 .

also , the increases for fy2018 and fy2019 do not appear very large in figure 1 .

if an air force modernization bow wave exists , why doesn't it show more vividly on the charts ? .

there are three reasons .

two are substantive ; one is purely graphical .

first , because the fydp includes only six years' data ( the year currently executed , the requested year , and the following four years ) , the effects of the bow wave are difficult to portray , as the highest development and procurement costs of the new starts and lrs - b would take place after fy2020 .

what is seen in figure 1 and figure 2 can be considered the seeds of the challenge , with the full effects coming in the years beyond the chart .

second , the air force has been managing its current programs to remain under its topline budget cap .

this has the effect of flattening all spending , as programs that might otherwise grow are constrained , extended , and / or delayed ( "moved right," in budget parlance ) to keep the modernization accounts under their caps .

it is not unreasonable to hypothesize that absent the caps , the program budgets might show greater growth .

the purely graphical reason that figure 1 appears to show virtually flat spending is that the sums for the current procurement programs ( f - 35a , kc - 46 , c - 130 , and rpa ) are so large that even significant variations in the smaller programs are visually minimized .

by omitting the larger established programs , figure 2 shows the shape of those newer programs more clearly .

it may be tempting to say that because the air force has been able to fit its current major procurement and r&d programs into its budget , there is no current modernization budget challenge .

in response , one could note that some of those programs , like t - x and crh , have been delayed from when they were initially required , leading to additional costs to keep the older aircraft that would otherwise have been replaced operating past their designed service lives .

those costs come from the operations and maintenance budgets , and are thus not reflected here , but keeping modernization programs under a current cap does result in costs elsewhere in the air force .

perhaps the most significant potential change in the air force's budgetary landscape is the end of the bba - mandated budget caps in fy2021 .

the end of caps does not mean that the air force will get more money , but the r&d programs appear all to be timed such that the bulk of their funding requirements will come after the caps end .

whether this is a deliberate strategy on the part of the air force or a coincidence of timing is unclear , but it appears that the air force is gambling that the budget caps will not be extended or replaced .

even with the current caps , normal program growth and program changes ( like the eventual transfer of lrs - b and other r&d programs from the r&d budget to the procurement budget ) will increase the competition for procurement dollars .

the f - 35a and kc - 46 programs will continue for decades , offering little prospective relief .

and until its possible transfer , the significant growth of lrs - b within the smaller r&d advanced development budget may seriously challenge the newer programs' development schedules .

also , as figure 1 and figure 2 show , current air force plans result in a surge in modernization spending in fy2018 and fy2019 .

recently , the dod comptroller stated that "there'll probably be some slowdowns in some modernization programs" in the fy2017 budget submission from their projected level to accommodate other air force priorities .

a reduction in fy2017 could make the significant increases planned for fy2018 and fy2019 harder to achieve .

when trying to fit growing numbers of growing programs under a fixed budget topline , the broad mechanical choices seem simple: raise the topline or reduce the programs .

however , the details matter , especially in how one reduces programs and which programs are reduced .

with new weapon system development in some cases taking several decades , illustrating the budget in five - or six - year slices makes visualizing future budgetary needs difficult .

congress has mandated that dod provide 30-year plans for shipbuilding and aviation programs , but the differing levels of detail in those plans impair their utility in projecting phenomena like the air force outyear bow wave .

a revision in the fydp from projecting 5 years in the future to 10 years — even if that implies some reduced - fidelity detail in the outyears — could more tangibly illustrate the resource decisions required today to avoid budgetary "train wrecks" in the future .

