congressional authorization of federal assistance to state and local governments can be traced as far back as 1808 , when the first federal grant program was adopted to provide funds to states to support the national guard .

since that time , there has been significant growth in the number of federal assistance programs to state and local government .

there are currently over 2,321 congressionally authorized federal assistance programs .

the growing number , perceived fragmentation , and complexity of these programs create challenges for federal agencies and congressional stakeholders in standardizing various financial and administrative aspects of federal grant program management .

federal agencies administering grant programs face challenges in providing timely , accurate , and detailed information on federal grant awards .

this can be attributed , in part , to the way grant funds are distributed from the federal to the local level .

this may also be attributed to the limitations of the databases used to track the distribution of federal grant funds .

these limitations include questions regarding the validity of the data , and the limited ability to track the distribution of grant funds to the subgrant recipient level .

without complete and valid information about the distribution of federal grant funds , congress may have a diminished capacity to engage in effective oversight of federal grants .

federal grant recipients are currently required to report grant project related information to federal agencies .

this information is contained within a number of federal grant databases with limited public accessibility .

the information reported by grant recipients varies depending on the federal program and the individual grant award .

federal grants are available for a variety of purposes .

federally funded grant projects may include purchasing fire and police equipment , constructing housing for low - income populations , providing disaster recovery assistance and other social services , and funding educational activities .

organizations generally coordinate the application and administration of federal grants , and individuals are beneficiaries of the grant projects and services provided by organizations .

organizations seeking federal grant funds are required to register in federal grant systems prior to applying for federal grants .

once grant funds are awarded , recipients are required to report information to federal agencies regarding the use of the federal grant funds .

the information provided to the federal government by federal grant recipients is contained in several different federal databases .

the general public has access to selected information contained in these databases .

this report provides an introduction to reporting requirements placed on federal grant recipients , including requirements that must be met to seek federal grant funds .

it also describes the types of information collected on grant recipients , the databases containing information about grant awards , and the availability of that information to the public .

the reporting requirements discussed in this report are financial reporting requirements for grant recipients and do not include performance related reporting .

to comply with guidance issued by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , federal agencies that administer federal grant programs must collect and report financial grant data to federal grant databases .

federal agencies collect the grant data by requiring federal grant recipients to submit financial and performance data to the federal agency administering the grant program .

these reporting requirements are set forth in the authorizing statutes and regulations for each individual grant program .

some reporting requirements , such as post - award audit requirements , are set forth in legislation that applies to almost every federal grant program .

a federal grant seeker must provide information about their organization when they obtain a duns number and register with sam .

grant seekers must provide the following information to obtain a duns number: legal name of the company , organization , or entity ; entity headquarters name and address ; secondary , or tradestyle , name of the company or the "doing business as" ( dba ) name ; physical address of the entity including city , street , and zip code ; mailing address ; telephone number ; point of contact name and title ; and , number of employees at the physical location .

to register with sam , grant seekers must provide the following information: duns number ; business information , including the taxpayer identification number ( tin ) ; commercial and government entity ( cage ) code ; business type and organization structure ; financial information including electronic funds transfer ( eft ) information for federal government payment purposes ; answers to executive compensation questions ; and , point of contact ( poc ) information including name , title , physical address , and email address .

federal agencies use a number of systems to track federal grant recipient data .

before a federal grant is awarded , officials seeking federal grants for their organization are required by law to obtain a unique identifier assigned and maintained by dun and bradstreet ( d&b ) .

this unique identifier is known as a data universal numbering system ( duns ) number .

federal agencies use the duns number to identify federal grant applicants .

once a grant seeker obtains a duns number , the organization must register in the system for award management ( sam ) in order to be eligible to apply for federal grants .

federal agencies use sam to collect additional information on potential federal grant recipients .

each federal grant award is assigned a number that is then associated with the grant recipient .

federal agencies use the award number to track grant data in agency grant management and financial management systems .

when congress authorizes a federal grant program , the federal agency administering the grant program reports grant program information to the catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) .

after a federal grant award is made , the federal agency that made the award collects information about the grant recipient and the grant project .

the information provided in a federal grant application is inputted by the federal agency into the grant management system within the agency and a unique grant award number is created .

a single entity who has received more than one award under the same grant program may have several grant award numbers .

additionally , a federal agency may have a separate grant management system for each grant program it administers .

when the grant agreement is executed , the federal agency also creates a grant account in the agency's cash management system for each individual grant award , which may mean that a single entity that receives more than one grant award by an agency may have several different grant account numbers .

federal grant recipients are required to report financial information pursuant to the conditions contained in the grant agreement executed at the time of the grant award .

this information includes financial information , such as expenditures , about the project or services funded by the federal grant award .

the financial information is reported periodically to the federal agency administering the grant program .

financial data on the grant award are reported into several federal grant databases , including the following: federal agency cash management systems ; federal assistance award data system plus ( faads - plus ) ; federal funding accountability and transparency act subaward reporting system ( fsrs ) ; usaspending.gov ; and , federal audit clearinghouse ( fac ) .

as detailed in figure 1 , federal grant data are located in several databases at both the grant recipient and federal government level .

as shown in figure 1 , several databases contain federal grant information .

however , grant data contained within cash management systems , grant management systems , faads - plus , and fsrs are not accessible or searchable by the general public .

the federal government has created several data systems and websites to access the systems that are accessible and searchable by the public .

these include the following: catalog of federal domestic assistance ( http: / / www.cfda.gov ) ; usaspending.gov ( http: / / www.usaspending.gov ) ; dun and bradstreet ( http: / / fedgov.dnb.com / webform ) ; system for award management ( http: / / www.sam.gov ) ; and federal audit clearinghouse ( https: / / harvester.census.gov / fac / ) .

of the above reporting requirements for federal grant applicants , two databases allow opting out of providing publically searchable information: the dun and bradstreet ( d&b ) duns number database and sam .

to avoid having a public duns number , applicants must first obtain a duns number , and then discuss their individual privacy concerns with the d&b government support desk .

d&b can withhold the duns number from their public database .

however , the applicant's duns number remains visible to any institution with a duns business locator subscription , as well as within the required sam grant application record , unless the opt - out process for sam is also completed .

grant applicants can opt out of the requirement that information collected during the sam registration be visible to the public , though the information may still be viewable by certain users: entities that have opted out will be removed only from the sam public search , but will still be visible to users with for official use only data access and will be provided in accordance with freedom of information act ( foia ) requests .

please note that your banking information is treated as sensitive data and will not be displayed to the public regardless of your selection .

