t he national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , an agency of the u.s. department of commerce , manages the u.s. civilian weather satellite system , which consists of polar - orbiting operational environmental satellites ( poes ) and geostationary operational environmental satellites ( goes ) .

for several years , some have expressed concern about the possibility of a "data gap," which could occur if the newest poes satellite , launched in 2011 , fails before its successor is launched and operational sometime in 2017 .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has reported that a polar - orbiting weather satellite data gap would result in less accurate and timely weather forecasts and warnings of extreme weather events , which could endanger lives , property , and critical infrastructure .

poes satellites make 14 orbits per day as the earth rotates 520 miles below , affording a different view with each orbit .

a poes satellite provides two complete views of global weather per day .

in contrast , goes satellites are "parked" 22,300 miles above the equator and orbit at speeds equivalent to the earth's rotation , so they maintain their positions and continually provide the same geographic view .

noaa operates two goes satellites — goes east and goes west — that fully cover alaska , hawaii , the continental united states , and the atlantic and pacific oceans .

combined , the poes and goes provide much of the data used for weather forecasting and for identifying severe weather , including tropical storms , hurricanes , and snow storms .

this report focuses on noaa's poes system , now called the joint polar satellite system ( jpss ) program .

specifically , it focuses on the circumstances that have led to the potential for a data gap over the next several years and the administration's strategies to mitigate a data gap and preserve data continuity .

in its fy2016 budget justification , noaa released a new strategy called polar follow on ( pfo ) that would fund two jpss satellites that would launch in fy2026 and fy2031 , as well as other contingency options to mitigate the consequences of a data gap ( in the jpss program , one satellite is currently in orbit and two satellites are under construction and scheduled to launch in fy2017 and fy2022 ) .

noaa requested $380 million as initial funding for pfo in fy2016 .

house appropriators did not provide any funding for pfo in the house fy2016 appropriations bill for commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( h.r .

2578 ) , and senate appropriators provided $135 million for fy2016 in their bill .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) , however , provided $370 million for pfo in fy2016 .

this report discusses issues surrounding the noaa pfo strategy and next - generation polar - orbiting weather satellites in light of congressional concern over the future of the program .

in the 1990s , the clinton administration merged the military and the civilian polar - orbiting weather satellite systems into a single program: the national polar - orbiting operational environmental satellite system ( npoess ) .

npoess encountered difficulties related to program management , technical challenges , cost growth , and schedule delays .

it was ultimately discontinued in 2010 .

following the demise of npoess , noaa and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) reorganized their next - generation polar - orbiting weather satellite activities to create the jpss program separate from the military weather satellite program .

noaa considers suomi - npp , launched in october 2011 , to be the first next - generation polar - orbiting weather satellite in the jpss series .

suomi - npp was originally intended to be part of the npoess program and was initially called the npoess preparatory project satellite .

it was designed to be a demonstration satellite to evaluate new instruments , spacecraft , and ground data networks that later were to be part of the npoess operational satellites .

with the delay and ultimate cancellation of npoess , suomi - npp took on a different mission and is currently used as an operational satellite , providing weather and climate information as part of the jpss program .

the life - cycle costs for the two jpss satellites currently under construction , jpss - 1 and jpss - 2 , together with suomi - npp , will total approximately $11.3 billion .

a 2013 report issued by a noaa - chartered independent review team ( irt ) stated that the current jpss program is "fragile. .

the report also noted that the future polar program is demonstrably not "robust. .

these terms have specific meanings in the report: "the irt believes that the definition of a robust program is that two failures must occur before a gap is created and an option must be available to return to a 'two failure' condition if a failure occurs. .

conversely , a fragile program is "one spacecraft away from catastrophe. .

the report elaborates somewhat on these terms and their meaning ; for example , the currently fragile jpss program is also described as a "single string system" in which any number of potential failures could result in a gap with a potential duration of months to years .

in contrast , a robust program "requires multiple overlapping spacecraft developed in a manner that allows downstream components and subsystems to be used as spares for the spacecraft being prepared for launch. .

the irt report concludes that the ultimate objective of its recommendations should be to establish a robust polar weather program consistent with other programs of critical national importance .

in one of its findings , the irt report noted that the decision to focus the jpss program on its high - priority weather mission , and to remove instruments that would measure characteristics of the earth's climate rather than its weather , is helpful in minimizing the potential for a data gap .

more specifically , the report stated that the jpss program should focus uniquely on four high - priority weather instruments , noting that "this conviction is based upon the belief that nothing should compromise the uninterrupted acquisition of critical jpss weather data. .

this focus would apply to future polar - orbiting satellites ( i.e. , jpss - 2 , jpss - 3 , and jpss - 4 ) , and the report emphasized that inclusion of any non - weather instruments in the jpss program would create a schedule risk and should not be pursued .

a possible consequence of the focus on weather instruments would be the loss of scientific data applicable to climate studies or other scientific pursuits , although it is unclear how that would affect noaa's overall mission .

the irt observed that the recommendation from its 2012 report to accelerate the schedules for jpss - 1 and jpss - 2 would not be a solution to the possible data gap between suomi - npp's end - of - life date and final on - orbit checkout of jpss - 1 .

instead , the 2013 report recommended a "gap - filler" program .

further , the report recommended that the gap - filler "free - flyer" satellite carry only the atms and cris instruments .

if carried out , "a gap filler would be available to launch before [suomi - npp] reaches the end of its mission life and would cover a potential gap from a jpss - 1 launch or early spacecraft failure. .

additionally , the irt report observed that a gap - filler plan would move the program closer to the objective of being two failures away from loss of afternoon orbit polar weather data , fulfilling the goal of becoming a robust program .

noaa laid out its strategy for addressing the near - term data gap and for achieving long - term continuity of polar - orbiting weather data in its fy2016 budget request .

the proposed polar follow on ( pfo ) program is a line item within the procurement , acquisition , and construction account .

noaa requested $380 million for pfo in fy2016 .

it estimated that out - year costs would total approximately $8.2 billion for pfo through 2038 .

the $380 million initial funding request for pfo outlined a three - part strategy for data - gap mitigation .

to mitigate the possible loss or degradation of the advanced technology microwave sounder ( atms ) on jpss - 1 — one of four key instruments — noaa would initiate development of an advanced microwave sounder satellite called the earth observing nanosatellite - microwave ( eon - mw ) .

eon - mw would provide some of the capabilities of atms to measure atmospheric temperature and moisture , and it would be hosted on a cubesat platform .

cubesats are an existing technology , with the potential for expedited launch timelines and cost savings , among other advantages .

the noaa fy2016 budget request included $10 million for eon - mw .

a second part of the mitigation strategy would address premature failure of jpss - 2 .

if jpss - 2 were to fail before its expected lifetime , the pfo strategy would be to launch jpss - 3 with only two instruments — atms and the cross - track infrared sounder ( cris ) — rather than the planned four instruments .

the two - instrument satellite proposal appears to respond to the irt's recommendation for a two - instrument "gap - filler" mitigation strategy .

should that contingency be exercised , the two - instrument satellite would replace the full jpss - 3 mission .

the other two instruments , the visible infrared imaging radiometer suite ( viirs ) and the ozone - mapping and profiler suite - nadir ( omps - n ) , likely would fly aboard jpss - 4 .

a third component of the mitigation strategy is noaa's proposal to procure six radio occultation ( ro ) sensors as part of the cosmic - 2 mission , a joint mission with taiwan .

data from the ro sensors would help to mitigate the loss or degradation of data from atms or cris sounders on polar - orbiting weather satellites .

in addition to mitigating a potential data gap , noaa states that the cosmic - 2 satellite system is a cost - effective way of obtaining global atmospheric temperature profiles , which would result in more accurate long - range forecasts .

noaa requested an additional $9.9 million in fy2016 to begin purchase of the second set of six sensors to be launched into near - polar orbit in 2019 ( the first set of six sensors have been procured and will be launched into low - inclination orbit in 2016 ) .

during congressional debate on appropriations in response to the budget request pfo proposal , members of the house and senate expressed concerns about the possibility of a data gap in polar - orbiting weather satellites but appeared to take different positions over the best response .

funding the pfo at $370 million in fy2016 appears to reflect congressional support of the pfo strategy for noaa's polar - orbiting weather satellite program .

however , congress likely will continue close scrutiny of the program and oversight of cost and scheduling changes , given the history of npoess and jpss since the mid - 1990s .

in addition to efficient and effective management , the pfo program's success likely will also hinge on congress appropriating funding to meet program needs without disrupting the cadence of the procurement , construction , launch , and on - orbit checkout schedule .

the multiyear satellite development process could be challenged by the annual appropriations process , which in recent years has included one or more continuing resolutions ( crs ) enacted after fiscal year - end on september 30 .

often , the crs maintain funding levels at previous fiscal year levels for months into the new fiscal year .

if that were to occur , appropriators might consider adding language to the cr ( s ) that adjusts funding specifically to meet program needs for satellite development and prevent major delays in program development .

that type of language was included for noaa in the fy2016 crs , for example .

by denying funding for eon - mw in the fy2016 omnibus appropriations bill , congress effectively disagrees with the administration's proposal to build a free - flyer eon - mw satellite to mitigate a possible data gap after the launch of jpss - 1 .

the house appears to favor the use of ro technology as a near - term data - gap mitigation measure .

the next set of ro sensors currently are planned as the cosmic - 2 program ; however , appropriators in the house asked noaa to investigate sources of ro data that could be provided by the private sector .

several hearings conducted in 2015 by the house science and technology committee explored the use of commercial data in the noaa weather enterprise , and noaa appears to be actively examining the feasibility of commercial data services .

if suomi - npp remains fully functional for 11 months past its design life and jpss - 1 launches and passes its on - orbit checkout on the current schedule , there will be no data gap in the afternoon orbit coverage , despite the fragility of the current program .

the path to a robust program , however , will take many years .

if congress continues to support and fund pfo and if noaa implements the program as planned , then the polar - orbiting weather satellite system could achieve robustness by 2023 .

given that the rubric of robustness and fragility threads through the pfo proposal and in congressional report language accompanying appropriations legislation , congressional oversight of the many factors determining robustness versus fragility likely will be a priority for many years .

