numerous federal , state , and local agencies share responsibilities for regulating the safety of the u.s. food supply .

federal responsibility for food safety rests primarily with the food and drug administration ( fda ) and the food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) .

fda , an agency of the department of health and human services , is responsible for ensuring the safety of the majority of all domestic and imported food products ( except for meat and poultry products ) .

fsis , an agency at the u.s. department of agriculture , regulates most meat , poultry , and processed egg products .

the subcommittees on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies of the house and senate appropriations committees appropriate funds for all of fda and fsis .

the fy2016 agriculture appropriation was enacted in december 2015 , as part of an omnibus appropriation ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

including enacted funding provided in the fy2016 agriculture appropriation , combined appropriations and fees collected to cover food safety activities at fda and usda will total an estimated $2.5 billion in fy2016 , more or less split between the two agencies ( table 1 ) .

as such , funding ( and staffing levels ) between fda and fsis is disproportionate to the volume of the food supply that each agency regulates for safety .

fsis is responsible for roughly 10% - 20% of the u.s. food supply , while fda is responsible for the remaining 80% - 90% .

in recent years , congressional appropriators have increased funding for fda food programs , more than doubling funding over the past decade .

largely , that has been in response to comprehensive food safety legislation enacted in the 111 th congress , as part of the fda food safety modernization act ( fsma , p.l .

111-353 ) .

fsma was the largest expansion of fda's food safety authorities since the 1930s .

among its many provisions , fsma authorized increased frequency of inspections at food facilities , tightened record - keeping requirements , extended oversight to certain farms , and also mandated product recalls .

it requires food processing , manufacturing , shipping , and other facilities to conduct a food safety plan of the most likely safety hazards , and to design and implement risk - based controls .

it also mandates improvements to foodborne illness surveillance systems and increased scrutiny of food imports .

fsma did not directly address meat and poultry products under usda's jurisdiction .

fsma also authorized additional appropriations and staff for fda's food safety activities .

it provided limited additional funding through industry - paid user fees .

funding for fsis has remained mostly unchanged in recent years .

staffing levels differ substantially between the two agencies: fsis staff number around 9,000 full - time equivalents ( ftes ) , while fda's food - related staff , who cover more than food safety , number about 3,700 ftes .

although congress authorized funds to be appropriated in fsma , it did not provide the full funding needed for fda to perform these expanded activities under the law .

after fsma was signed into law in january 2011 , concerns were voiced about whether there would be enough money to overhaul the u.s. food safety system and also whether expanded investment in this area was appropriate in the budgetary climate that has since prevailed .

prior to enactment , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that fully implementing fsma could increase net federal spending subject to appropriation by about $1.4 billion over a five - year period ( fy2011-fy2015 ) .

this cost estimate covered activities at fda and other federal agencies and did not include offsetting revenue from the collection of new user fees authorized under fsma .

during the debate leading up to fsma , congress considered imposing a new facility registration fee that might have offset some of the costs of fully implementing the requirements under the new law but ultimately such fees were not enacted .

prior to enactment , cbo estimated that about $240 million in new fees would be collected from fy2011-fy2015 .

taking into account these new fees , cbo estimated that covering the five - year cost of new requirements within fda , including more frequent inspections , would require additional outlays of $1.1 billion .

fda continues to implement regulations under fsma .

according to fda , during the past five years ( fy2011-fy2015 ) , the agency has received increases to its funding base totaling $162 million for enacted changes to its food safety programs , after accounting for permanent base reductions due to sequestration and other differences from enacted amounts as reported by fda .

including enacted increases for other food safety activities , fda's budget authority for food safety and fsma implementation has totaled $168.4 million ( table 2 ) .

previously , fda reported that an additional $400 million to $450 million per year above the fy2012 base is needed to fully implement fsma .

available fda funding for fsma implementation and other food safety activities has been lower than what fda has said it needs to fully implement the law .

fsma also authorized an increase in fda staff , which was expected to reach 5,000 by fy2014 .

fda reports actual staffing levels at 3,700 ftes in fy2015 ( table 1 ) .

fda officials have continued to claim that without additional funding , as requested by the administration , there will be a significant funding gap for fsma implementation .

state agriculture officials and representatives of the national association of state departments of agriculture ( nasda ) have continued to push for full fsma funding so that front - line state officials can prepare for implementation .

food industry groups have asked congressional appropriators for increased budget authority for fda to fully implement fsma , at levels requested by the administration , in order to maintain consumer confidence .

public health and consumer safety groups , as well as victims of food - borne illness , have also continued to call for additional food safety funding .

for fda's food safety activities , including fsma implementation , the enacted fy2016 agriculture appropriation provides for a $104.5 million increase in budget authority , nearly that requested in the administration's budget ( $109.5 million ) .

this increase in budget authority is more than double what the house and senate fy2016 committee bills had previously proposed: the house committee bill ( h.r .

3049 ) would have increased funding for fsma by $41.5 million , whereas the senate ( s. 1800 ) would have increased funding by $45.0 million bill .

both the house and senate committees had noted that these increases and previous increases provided since fy2011 "should assist the fda in preparation for the implementation of fsma prior to the effective dates of the seven foundational proposed rules. .

both committee reports specify budgeted amounts for the following program areas: inspection modernization and training ; the national integrated food safety system ; education and technical assistance for industry ; technical staffing and guidance development ; import safety ; and risk analytics and evaluation .

the enacted fy2016 appropriations provide $987.3 million for fda's foods program — one of the agency's primary program areas focused on food safety activities .

this amount is identical to that requested by the administration ( table 1 ) .

fda's foods program covers the agency's food safety activities , as well as certain other food - related programs .

its budget in fy2015 accounted for about one - third of the agency's total appropriation .

fda's foods program plays a major food safety role .

the program has the primary responsibility for assuring that the nation's food supply , quality of foods , food ingredients , and dietary supplements ( and also cosmetic products ) are safe , sanitary , nutritious , wholesome , and properly labeled .

in recent decades fda's foods program has had to adapt to the increasing variety and complexity of the u.s. food supply , including rising import demand for products produced outside the united states , as well as other market factors including emerging microbial pathogens , natural toxins , and technological innovations in production and processing .

however , fda's total budget for food safety programs and activities extends beyond the agency's foods program , encompassing other food and veterinary medicine programs at fda .

as reported by fda , the agency's budget for food safety activities totaled $1.2 billion in fy2015 .

this amount includes most of fda's food program funding , along with aspects of other fda program areas covering food additives , antimicrobial resistance , nutrition labeling and dietary supplements , cosmetics , and all related user fees , as well as administrative expenses associated with fda headquarters and rent - related expenses .

including the enacted fy2016 appropriation that provides for a $104.5 million increase in budget authority , this could raise the budget authority for fda's food safety activities to more than $1.3 billion annually .

these congressional appropriations would be augmented by existing ( currently authorized ) user fees .

these fees , as authorized under fsma , include food and feed recall fees , food reinspection fees , and voluntary qualified importer program fees .

in recent years these fees have generated less than $18 million per year .

in addition to fsma - authorized user fees , the administration had reproposed a series of new user fees totaling $167.7 million to cover the cost associated with food facility registration and inspection , food imports , international couriers , and food contact notifications .

from fy2012 through fy2015 , the enacted appropriations have not included these proposed user fees .

both the house and senate reported bills explicitly did not include the administration's proposed new fees .

in addition , two members of the house appropriations committee , representatives rosa delauro and sam farr , have repeatedly called on the administration to stop requesting additional user fees but rather to "request the resources [fda] needs to fully implement [fsma]. .

industry representatives also continue to actively oppose such fees .

user fees are generally established in law by the authorizing committees and not by appropriators .

the enacted fy2016 agriculture appropriation provides $1.015 billion to fsis for fy2016 , slightly more than the administration's request of $1.012 billion but less than that enacted for fy2015 ( table 1 ) .

appropriations would be augmented by existing ( currently authorized ) user fees that fsis estimates to be nearly $180 million per year .

fsis appropriations are divided into various subaccounts , and the enacted fy2016 appropriation provides for the following amounts: federal ( $898.8 million ) ; state ( $61.0 million ) ; international inspection ( $16.7 million ) ; codex alimentarius ( $3.8 million ) ; and the public health data communications infrastructure system ( $34.6 million ) .

the enacted law does not include the administration's reproposed user fee of $4 million to cover additional inspection costs associated with performance issues at inspected facilities .

the enacted fy2106 agriculture appropriation does not address the proposal in the administration's fy2016 budget request to establish a single food agency to provide "focused , centralized leadership , a primary voice on food safety standards , and clear lines of responsibility and accountability that will enhance both prevention of and responses to outbreaks of foodborne illnesses. .

the administration's proposal would transfer existing food safety functions into a new agency within hhs .

this proposal differs from legislation introduced in the 114 th congress as part of the safe food act of 2015 ( h.r .

609 / delauro ; s. 287 / durbin ) .

h.r .

609 and s. 287 would create a single independent food safety administration ( fsa ) by transferring and consolidating the food safety authorities at fda and usda , as well as portions of agencies under the department of commerce .

some groups who have traditionally favored the creation of a single food safety agency oppose the administration's plan because it calls for consolidation of food safety operations within hhs .

some contend hhs does not have the necessary expertise or adequate resources to manage an expanded food safety function ; others claim usda has a better record regarding food safety inspection and enforcement and worry that transferring these functions to hhs will lower standards for meat and poultry inspection .

in general , large - scale reorganization of existing agencies is under the jurisdiction of the authorizing committees .

