federal executive branch agencies hold an extensive real property portfolio that includes approximately 295,000 buildings .

these assets have been acquired over a period of decades to help agencies fulfill their diverse missions .

agencies hold buildings with a range of uses , including offices , health clinics , warehouses , and laboratories .

as agencies' missions change over time , so , too , do their real property needs , thereby rendering some assets less useful or unneeded altogether .

health care provided by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) has shifted in recent decades from predominately hospital - based inpatient care to a greater reliance on clinics and outpatient care , with a resulting change in space needs .

similarly , the department of defense ( dod ) reduced its force by 36% after the cold war ended , and has engaged in several rounds of base realignments and installation closures .

agencies are required to dispose of real property that they no longer need , but many continue to hold onto unneeded building space .

in fy2010 — the last year in which cost data were reported — the government spent $1.67 billion operating and maintaining unutilized and underutilized buildings .

federal agencies have indicated that their disposal efforts are often hampered by legal and budgetary disincentives , and competing stakeholder interests .

this report begins with an explanation of the real property disposal process and then discusses some of the factors that have made disposition relatively inefficient and costly .

it then examines key provisions of five real property reform bills introduced in the 114 th congress: the civilian property realignment act ( cpra , s. 1750 ) ; the federal asset sale and transfer act ( fast act , s. 2375 ) ; the federal assets sale and transfer act ( h.r .

4465 ) ; the federal property management reform act ( reform act , s. 2509 ) ; and the public buildings reform and savings act ( h.r .

4487 , savings act ) .

cpra was introduced on july 13 , 2015 , and referred to the committee on environment and public works .

as of february 12 , 2015 , no further action has been taken .

in terms of overarching structure , cpra would draw on the military base realignment and closure ( brac ) model of real property disposal by establishing an independent commission to assess agency portfolios and to recommend actions for reducing the government's inventory of unneeded and underutilized buildings .

these recommendations would need approval by the president and congress in order to be implemented .

the fast act is structured like cpra , in that it would establish a board to develop disposal recommendations .

there are differences between the bills , however .

notably the fast act lacks a mechanism for congressional review and approval of the board's recommendations similar to the one provided under cpra .

the provisions discussed in the following sections are the same for both s. 2375 and h.r .

4465 companion versions of the fast act , unless otherwise noted .

the federal real property management reform act ( property reform act ) would not establish a new process for identifying and disposing of unneeded real property in the manner of cpra or the fast act .

rather , the property reform act would expand existing real property management requirements and guidance , particularly with regard to collocating federal agencies in underutilized space held by the u.s .

postal service .

it would also incentivize the disposal of unneeded property by providing agencies with the authority to retain the proceeds from the transfer , sale , or lease of surplus property .

the public buildings reform and savings act of 2016 ( public buildings act ) was introduced february 8 , 2016 , and reported to the house committees on financial services and transportation and infrastructure the same day .

both committees reported the bill favorably on may 23 , 2016 , and it passed the house the same day .

the bill was received in the senate on may 24 , 2016 .

no further action has been taken .

 table 1 compares key provisions from cpra and the fast act and is followed by an analytical discussion .

agencies have long argued that public benefit conveyance requirements , particularly those that require screening for homeless use , create an administrative burden that delays disposition and drives up maintenance costs .

savings , therefore , may be generated by permitting agencies to bypass screening requirements and move through the disposal process more quickly .

under both cpra and the fast act , the identification of individual properties for specific disposal or realigning actions may permit those properties to bypass certain statutory requirements that may otherwise have applied .

for example , it appears that properties recommended for sale or transfer may not be automatically subject to certain statutory public benefit screening requirements , including screening requirements established under the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act .

cpra and the fast act both propose establishing new entities — the former a commission , the latter a board — that would be responsible for the final list of disposal recommendations .

in addition , the bills would require the president to seek senate confirmation of the chairperson , which could slow down the development of recommendations if there were delays in the nomination or confirmation process .

similarly , the other members of the commission would either be appointed by the president in consultation with congress ( under the fast act ) or appointed by house and senate leaders directly ( under cpra ) , which could enable congress to influence the composition of the commission .

cpra would require a 45-day timeframe for congressional action .

congress would have less than seven weeks to review all of the recommendations — of which there may be hundreds — before deciding whether to pass a joint resolution of disapproval .

this could reduce oversight of major real property actions .

consolidation projects , for example , are often complex , multi - year efforts , with long - term consequences for the agencies and communities involved , and for which congress is asked to provide hundreds of millions , or even billions , of dollars .

for this reason , congress regularly holds hearings on major consolidation proposals .

for example , the effort to consolidate the department of homeland security at st. elizabeth's in the district of columbia ( dc ) is estimated to cost $3.26 billion and has been the subject of several congressional hearings .

the consequences of the consolidation are wide ranging , and include changing traffic patterns in washington , dc , relocating thousands of employees , and ensuring historic preservation requirements are met .

similar issues have been raised regarding the consolidation of food and drug administration headquarters , a project that has received hundreds of millions of dollars since fy2000 .

some might argue that congress would not have sufficient time , under the proposed time constraints , to either approve or disapprove of the recommendations .

requiring congress to approve or disapprove of the entire list of recommended actions could reduce conflict among various stakeholders interested in the properties in question .

some civilian agencies have found their disposal efforts complicated by the involvement of state and local governments , nonprofits , businesses , and community leaders with competing agendas .

in 2002 , for example , the usps identified a number of "redundant , low - value" facilities that it sought to close in order to reduce its operating costs .

as part of the facility closure process , usps was required to formally announce its intention to close each facility and solicit comments from the community .

usps ultimately abandoned its plans to close many facilities it identified — including post offices that were underutilized , in poor condition , or not critical to serving their geographic areas — in part due to political pressure from stakeholders .

by moving the locus of decision making away from executive branch agencies , the amount of pressure that stakeholders exert on the process might be reduced .

the fast act might limit the influence of congress over the recommendation process , at least compared to cpra , because there would be no opportunity for congress to stop the process if it has objections .

under the fast act , the director would approve or disapprove the list of recommendations , and congress would only be notified of his decision .

this model of decision - making would put relatively more authority in the hands of the executive branch .

as discussed earlier in this report , basic data on the federal real property portfolio — including information on how many excess and surplus properties each agency holds — are currently limited .

each bill would enable the bodies that develop recommendations — the commission under cpra and the board under the fast act — to access all information pertaining to the recommendations , including detailed data on each property's age , condition , operating costs , size , history of capital expenditures , sustainability metrics , and the number of employees housed at the property .

similarly , both the commission and the board would be required to post a report on its findings , conclusions , and recommendations on a website , which may result in agency - level data being made public .

cpra would also provide certain congressional committees and legislative agencies access to the frpp .

this could enhance oversight of the federal real property portfolio , since analysts and policymakers would have , for the first time , direct access to comprehensive , government - wide data on agency portfolios , which in turn can be used to track agency disposal actions on an on - going basis and conduct ad hoc analyses .

similarly , h.r .

4465 would establish a publicly accessible database with key information about the costs and level of utilization of federal buildings across the government , which will facilitate increased monitoring of agency portfolios and disposal actions .

neither cpra nor h.r .

4465 included provisions designed to improve the quality of real property data collected from agencies .

as a consequence , the value of expanded data content and access could be limited by ongoing problems with data quality .

the senate bill , s. 2375 , would not address either access to , or the quality of data in the frpp .

the property reform act would not establish a new process for the disposition of surplus federal buildings , but it would establish a publicly accessible database of federal properties .

the property reform act database would encompass a broader range of information than the other proposed databases , including data on the length of time federal properties were in the disposal process , the costs associated with the disposal of each property , and the proceeds received from the disposition .

these data may be helpful in identifying the cause of delays in the disposal process , which is one the primary reasons federal property management is considered a "high risk" area by gao .

the data on costs and proceeds may also enhance estimates of the potential revenue that could be generated through increased disposal activity .

the property reform act would take steps to ensure that federal agencies are aware of their options for leasing space in underutilized postal service buildings .

very little information is available on postal properties , and by requiring the postal service to submit a list of properties with available space to federal agencies , there may be an increase in collocation ( federal agencies leasing space from the postal service ) .

this would simultaneously provide housing for federal agencies that are relocating or consolidating operations , while reducing the inventory of unneeded space at the postal service .

the public buildings act would establish a pilot program to address concerns about the overreliance on costly leasing — another factor in gao's designation of federal real property management as a "high risk" area .

the pilot program would essentially reduce the administrative burden associated with entering into leases , provided the leases meet certain criteria .

these criteria , such as a lease length of at least 10 years and a cost per square foot cap , may result in fewer short - term leases with relatively high costs .

in addition , the bill would provide congress with enhanced oversight of space acquisition projects .

by requiring gsa to notify congress of any increase of 5% or more in the cost of a project , lawmakers may be better positioned to hold gsa accountable for staying within its approved budget .

in addition , by establishing a 5% threshold for notification , congress may be able to sooner identify projects with the potential for significantly higher cost overruns .

