levels of pay for congressional staff are a source of recurring questions among members of congress , congressional staff , and the public .

senators set the terms and conditions of employment for staff in their offices .

this includes job titles and descriptions , rates of pay , subject to minimum and maximum levels , and resources available to them to carry out their official duties .

there may be interest in congressional pay data from multiple perspectives , including assessment of the costs of congressional operations , guidance in setting pay levels for staff in member offices , or comparison of congressional staff pay levels with those of other federal government pay systems .

publicly available information sources do not provide aggregated congressional staff pay data in a readily retrievable form .

the most recent publicly available senate staff compensation report was issued in 2006 , and relied on anonymous , self - reported survey data .

data in this report are based on official senate reports , which afford the opportunity to use consistently collected data from a consistent source .

pay information in this report is based on the senate's report of the secretary of the senate , published semiannually , in periods from april 1 to september 30 , and october 1 to march 31 , as collated by legistorm , a private entity that provides some congressional data by subscription .

additionally , this report provides annual data , which allows for observations about the nature of senators' personal staff compensation over time .

this report provides pay data for 16 staff position titles that are typically used in senators' offices .

the positions include the following: administrative director casework supervisor caseworker chief of staff communications director counsel executive assistant field representative legislative assistant legislative correspondent legislative director press secretary scheduler "specials director," a combined category that includes the job titles director of projects , director of special projects , director of federal projects , director of grants , projects director , or grants director staff assistant state director senators' staff pay data for fy2001-fy2015 were derived from a random sampling of senators' offices in which at least one staff member worked in a position in each year .

for each fiscal year , fy2001-fy2015 , a random sample of 25 senators' offices was taken for each position .

in order to be included , senate staff had to hold a position with the same job title in the senator's office for the entire fiscal year examined , and not receive pay from any other congressional employing authority .

for some positions , it was not possible to identify 25 offices that employed staff for an entire year .

in circumstances when data for 14 or fewer staff were identified for a position , this report provides no data .

every recorded payment ascribed in the legistorm data to those staff for the fiscal year is included .

data collected for this report may differ from an employee's stated annual salary due to the inclusion of overtime , bonuses , or other payments in addition to base salary paid in the course of a year .

generally , each position has no more than one observation per senator's office each fiscal year .

pay data for staff working in house member offices are available in crs report r44323 , staff pay levels for selected positions in house member offices , 2001-2014 .

data describing the pay of congressional staff working in house and senate committee offices are available in crs report r44322 , staff pay levels for selected positions in house committees , 2001-2014 , and crs report r44325 , staff pay levels for selected positions in senate committees , fy2001-fy2014 , respectively .

there may be some advantages to relying on official salary expenditure data instead of survey findings , but data presented here are subject to some challenges that could affect findings or their interpretation .

some of the concerns include the following: data are lacking for first - term senators in the first session of a congress .

the periods of time covered by the report of the secretary of the senate overlap the end of one congress and convening of the next .

this report provides no data for first - term senators in the first nine months of their service .

pay data provide no insight into the education , work experience , position tenure , full - or part - time status of staff , or other potential explanations for levels of compensation .

staff could be based in washington , dc , state offices , or both .

potential differences might exist in the job duties of positions with the same title .

aggregation of pay by job title rests on the assumption that staff with the same title carry out the same or similar tasks .

given the wide discretion congressional employing authorities have in setting the terms and conditions of employment , there may be differences in the duties of similarly titled staff that could have effects on their levels of pay .

acknowledging the imprecision inherent in congressional job titles , an older edition of the senate handbook states , "throughout the senate , individuals with the same job title perform vastly different duties. .

tables in this section provide background information on senate pay practices , comparative data for each position , and detailed data and visualizations for each position .

table 1 provides the maximum payable rates for staff in senators' offices since 2001 in both nominal ( current ) and constant 2016 dollars .

constant dollar calculations throughout the report are based on the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) for various years , expressed in constant , 2016 dollars .

table 2 provides available cumulative percentage changes in pay in constant 2016 dollars for each of the 16 positions , members of congress , and salaries paid under the general schedule in washington , dc , and surrounding areas .

table 3 - table 18 provide tabular pay data for senators' staff positions .

the numbers of staff whose data were counted are identified as observations in the data tables .

graphic displays are also included , providing representations of pay from three perspectives , including the following: a line graph showing change in pay , depending on data availability , in nominal ( current ) and constant 2016 dollars ; a comparison at 5- , 10- , and 15-year intervals from fy2015 , depending on data availability , of the cumulative percentage change in pay of that position to changes in pay , in constant 2016 dollars , of members of congress and federal civilian workers paid under the general schedule in washington , dc , and surrounding areas ; and distributions of fy2015 pay , in 2016 dollars , in $10,000 increments .

between fy2011 and fy2015 , the change in median pay , in constant 2016 dollars , ranged from a 9.86% increase for press secretaries to a - 26.05% decrease for specials directors .

of the 16 positions , half saw pay increases , while the other half saw pay decreases during the five - year period .

this may be compared to changes in the pay of members of congress , - 5.1% , and general schedule , dc , - 3.19% , over approximately the same period ( calendar years 2011-2015 ) .

between fy2006 and fy2015 , the change in median pay , in constant 2016 dollars , ranged from a 15.69% increase for field representatives to a - 18.96% decrease for executive assistants .

of the 16 staff positions , 4 saw pay increases while 12 saw declines .

this may be compared to changes in the pay of members of congress , - 10.41% , and general schedule , dc , - 0.13% , over approximately the same period ( calendar years 2006-2015 ) .

between fy2001 and fy2015 , the change in median pay , in constant 2016 dollars , ranged from a 27.09% increase for state directors to a - 19.64% decrease for press secretaries .

of 15 staff positions for which data were available between fy2001 and fy2015 , 7 positions saw pay increases while 8 saw declines .

this may be compared to changes in the pay of members of congress , - 10.4% , and general schedule , dc , 7.36% , over approximately the same period ( calendar years 2001-2015 ) .

