u.s. borders are complex .

they feature varied terrain , where disparate threats are met with varying levels of federal surveillance and resource allocation .

customs and border protection ( cbp ) , within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , is tasked with securing america's borders and promoting legitimate trade and travel .

within cbp , the u.s. border patrol ( border patrol ) is charged with securing the border between ports of entry .

a reoccurring challenge for dhs and the border patrol has been establishing what a secure border means .

their efforts to develop a measure for this have created a continual evolution of metrics .

metrics can describe important phenomena , such as an estimate of how many unauthorized migrants enter the united states every year and what proportion is apprehended by the border patrol .

these data can help evaluate the effectiveness of border security , influence decisionmaking , and inform congress and the public .

cbp has stated that "securing our borders means first having the visibility to see what is happening on our border , and second , having the capacity to respond to what we see. .

furthermore , "border patrol characterizes a secure border as one of low risk , where there is a high probability of detection coupled with a high probability of interdiction. .

border security can be assessed at both the strategic and operational levels .

at the strategic level , dhs can use performance metrics to provide understanding on whether efforts to secure the border are effective or efficient .

these metrics also hold dhs and its components accountable and can affect its decisionmaking .

at the operational level , border patrol uses the identification of risk and the estimation of its magnitude in its day - to - day operations to secure the border .

such assessment helps the border patrol align its resources against specific threats and can help describe how secure a border sector is .

it is unclear whether metrics at these two levels interact with one another and if they do , how they influence or affect one another .

understanding the security risks at the border and developing methods to measure the performance of the border patrol in allaying these risks are fundamental to congressional oversight of the border patrol , cbp , and dhs more broadly .

some members of congress have asked for a clear measure of how many unauthorized migrants cross the border and / or of the overall state of border security .

however , determining unauthorized border flows is difficult for many reasons , such as unauthorized migrants' desire to avoid detection .

still , metrics , at both the strategic and operational levels , ideally provide congress with a sense of the current state of the border that helps inform public debate and possible legislation .

for example , in past discussions around comprehensive immigration reform , some have said that legislation must include measures to increase border security , while others have urged that the border first be secured before other immigration reforms take place .

this report reviews the use of metrics at the department ( i.e. , dhs ) and agency level ( i.e. , cbp ) .

the report begins by describing the performance metrics at the strategic level that dhs is developing ( the level of unauthorized entry of migrants ) and has used ( the recidivist rate and the effectiveness rate ) .

next , the report summarizes dhs's , and the former immigration and naturalization service's ( ins's ) , use of metrics since the early 2000s .

the report also addresses the border patrol's metrics at the operational level .

it concludes with a discussion of select issues congress may consider when evaluating measures of border security .

the appendix includes information on additional data and methodologies that have been reviewed or recommended by scholars and think tanks .

dhs's , and the former ins's , efforts in developing different performance metrics at the strategic level to depict the state of the border have resulted in an array of measures that focus either on border security as a whole or on a component of it ( figure 1 ) .

over time , performance metrics have come and gone , offering little continuity and opportunity for historical assessment .

in recent years , dhs has been developing a new measure to estimate unauthorized entry of migrants into the united states .

while dhs has shown intent to continually improve its measurement of border security , this new metric is subject to influence by external factors that are outside of the control of dhs and may not directly measure border security .

dhs currently reports the recidivism rate and the rate of interdiction effectiveness .

these measures , though subject to limitations , are meant to estimate the border patrol's effectiveness in apprehending migrants and deterring migrants from re - entering the united states .

dhs's continual re - evaluation of its performance metrics has created a history of past metrics that have either attempted to comprehensively measure border security , such as optimal deterrence and operational control , or have reported only single metrics , such as apprehensions .

at the operational level , the border patrol estimates risk at the border through the use of risk assessments .

these assessments are not used as metrics themselves .

however , the border patrol's methodology for risk assessments monitors certain metrics , along with other information , in order to estimate the level of risk at the sector level .

dhs defines risk as "the potential for an unwanted outcome resulting from an incident , event , or occurrence , as determined by its likelihood and the associated consequences. .

the process of risk assessment identifies and evaluates potential risks or hazards and analyzes what could happen if the hazard went unchecked .

the border patrol conducts risk assessments at an operational level to determine the level of risk present in specific border sectors .

they are meant to inform and not dictate decisionmaking with respect to resource allocation and response .

furthermore , risk assessments are not designed to measure overall performance , though dhs uses certain risk measurements that may be able to speak to performance .

cbp's 2012-2016 border patrol strategic plan ( bpsp ) focuses on "identifying high risk areas and targeting ... response[s] to meet" threats in those areas .

this plan employs a risk - based strategy , which departs from the previous , resource - based 2004 national border patrol strategy .

according to border patrol officials , they employ the "state of the border risk methodology," which the agency claims is "a scientifically valid , adaptable , and quantifiable means of assessing the relative risks of the corridors and sectors of the southwest border. .

this approach has three components: "intelligence," "situational awareness," and "risk methodology. .

intelligence refers to information gathered and analyses performed by u.s. intelligence agencies that offer insight into terrorist or criminal efforts to exploit the u.s. border and undermine security measures .

the border patrol works with other agencies to obtain and share different intelligence .

the information collected through these collaborations reportedly gives the border patrol the opportunity to predict threats and act proactively .

situational awareness refers to understanding conditions at specific locations on the border .

the border patrol increases its situational awareness through two methods .

first , the traditional method is used in areas of high threat and activity along the u.s. border , where agents employ different tracking strategies and coordinated patrols .

second , the technical method is used in areas of low activity , where the border patrol uses geospatial intelligence .

if activity is detected by geospatial intelligence technology , sectors are notified by dhs and they investigate the activity .

as of august 24 , 2015 , 1,279.84 border miles ( 877.10 on the southwest border and 402.74 on the northern border ) employed geospatial intelligence and 95.4% of those miles confirmed no activity present .

the risk methodology is comprised of 12 indicator metrics that were created by isolating key concepts involved in apprehending undocumented migrants and seizing contraband .

for example , some indicators are the average apprehensions per recidivist , daily average apprehensions , and the percentage of first time apprehensions .

in addition , other metrics the border patrol uses are the recidivist rate and the effectiveness rate , the same metrics that dhs uses as performance metrics .

however , the border patrol reviews these metrics at the sector level to make operational decisions , while dhs examines them for the entire border to make strategic decisions .

for each sector , the border patrol standardizes each indicator in order to create a common unit of measure .

the average measure for each indicator is noted and if there is a significant deviation from that norm in the wrong direction , meaning it is noticeably different from that sector's average , it is determined to be risky .

depending on how different the measure is from its average , the border patrol determines whether the risk is classified as low , medium , or high .

therefore , in this methodology , risk is determined by detecting variations or changes from the norm for each sector .

though intelligence , situational awareness , and the risk methodology are all important to determining risk , when intelligence contradicts the risk methodology's findings , intelligence holds more weight .

this is because the risk methodology's indicators examine past information while intelligence focuses on the future .

in reviewing current metrics and those under development , congress may consider whether these metrics adequately measure border security .

for example , is dhs's new metric in development , unauthorized entry of migrants into the united states , satisfactory or will additional metrics be needed to sufficiently measure border security ? .

furthermore , is a comprehensive border security metric , like operational control , still desirable or necessary or can border security be measured by other metrics that look at different components of security ? .

a clear measure of border security is an important tool to help congress conduct oversight and evaluate if cbp is reaching its intended goals .

congress may want to consider what type of review and oversight should be required with respect to measurement of performance .

for the purposes of maintaining accountability within dhs and the border patrol , congress may also want to review what it means to be "effective," and more specifically what the targets or meaningful thresholds for different metrics should be .

for example , what is an acceptable level of risk at the border ? .

an evaluation of metrics , at the strategic and operational levels , may also help congress analyze how to most efficiently use resources at the border .

for example , should enforcement expenditures be maintained , increased , or decreased ? .

furthermore , congress could consider whether the allocation of funding between different enforcement programs should remain the same or be adjusted .

congress may also be interested in the implementation of metrics at operational and strategic levels and how they interact with one another .

for instance , what changes are happening at the departmental level and how do they affect the day - to - day work of border patrol agents ? .

in theory , metrics should be used not only to hold dhs accountable but also to inform decisionmaking and the development of strategies for improvement .

therefore , implementation of metrics and how they are used may be of interest to congress .

congress could consider whether other data and methodologies should be used to measure border security .

for instance , the unintended consequences and secondary effects of border security demonstrate some of the tradeoffs present in maintaining or changing the level of security present at the border .

this calls into question whether certain secondary effects are negative and acceptable and whether they impact what is considered to be effective border security .

furthermore , additional or improved data and methodologies could be used to adjust measurements to incorporate shifting migrant demographics , such as increases in unaccompanied child migrants , asylum claims , and migrants from countries other than mexico .

some migrants coming from countries not adjacent to the united states also face border security and immigration enforcement in transit countries , such as mexico .

therefore , congress may also consider whether dhs's metrics account for the actions of transit countries and whether dhs is capturing the correct data .

for example , a decrease in apprehensions at the southwest border may not be only a result of successful deterrence by the border patrol , it may also be the result of increased apprehensions of unauthorized migrants in mexico , who are therefore prevented from reaching the u.s. border .

several pieces of legislation have been introduced in the 114 th congress that include reporting and measurement requirements .

for example , some legislation would direct dhs to submit a northern border threat analysis .

other legislation would require the secretary of homeland security to gain and maintain operational control and situational awareness of the northern and southern borders of the united states , while also strengthening dhs's measurement and evaluation of its activities and progress .

research by scholars and think tanks has recommended the collection of additional data and the use of varied methodologies in order to obtain meaningful performance - based metrics to measure border security .

some have suggested collecting data other than enforcement data in order to view a greater breadth of factors impacting border security .

additionally , expanding on the types of methodologies with which enforcement and other data are collected and analyzed can allow for broader perspectives and new findings .

new data and methodologies also allow for inclusion of metrics that may be able to provide a more complete or holistic view of border security .

data in addition to traditional enforcement statistics , survey data based on interviews with migrants and potential migrants are additional sources of information on unauthorized migration .

surveys can collect different information about their subjects than is found in enforcement data .

this is because they can be conducted within the united states as well as in migrant countries of origin , and they may capture more information about successful unauthorized inflows and the deterrent effects of enforcement .

in 2011 , dhs commissioned a comprehensive study by the national research council ( nrc ) on the use of surveys and related methodologies to estimate the number of unauthorized u.s. - mexico border crossings .

the nrc recommended that dhs use survey data along with enforcement data to measure unauthorized flows and the effectiveness of border enforcement .

rand has recommended the use of respondent - driven sampling for migrant surveys .

this method would involve a nonrandom sample of individuals from the population of interest who invite others to participate , and they would invite more individuals to participate .

researchers can account for social networks and recruitment patterns in order to obtain estimates of population characteristics .

to account for potential inaccurate responses from migrants , rand also suggested the use of "group answers" that group illicit and licit activities together , therefore allowing migrants to answer questions without revealing any unlawful activities .

this suggestion responds to migrants' possible hesitation to participate in a survey or provide accurate information for fear of subsequent law enforcement action .

surveys also pose certain limitations , such as issues about whether samples are representative of the overall migrant population , which is related to who is surveyed and where .

similarly , the composition of the migrant populations can also affect the ability of a survey to fully capture migration metrics .

for instance , recent decreases in the proportion of unauthorized mexican migrants entering the united states may call for the development of survey methodology that accounts for different source countries .

since migrant flows cannot be measured directly , some have suggested the use of models that create estimates of unauthorized entry using proxy data .

with respect to migrant flows , researchers have suggested human smuggler fees as a possible proxy for border control effectiveness .

in theory , more effective border enforcement would make it more difficult for a smuggler to pass the border ; this additional cost to them could be passed on to migrants through higher fees .

however , smuggling fees are also sensitive to other factors , such as the risks and costs associated with providing "coyote" services , the cost of attempting to cross the border without a coyote , migration alternatives , the size and structure of the coyote service industry , migrants' ability to afford services , and the specific services the coyote is contracted to provide .

a model using proxy data would need to account for other influencing factors in order to create a more reliable flow estimate .

methodologies different methodologies can employ the use of enforcement data and other data in order to analyze the effectiveness of border security .

for example , population surveys can be used to estimate flows of migrants to and from countries .

similar to the residual method used to estimate the undocumented population in the united states , mexico's censo de población y vivienda could be used to identify emigration risk factors by monitoring annual changes in population demographics that are not explained away by births or deaths .

additionally , comparisons across each country's population surveys could produce broad estimates of unauthorized migrant flows to and from each country .

however , population surveys do have limitations , such as their relatively high costs , infrequent administration , and the possibility of undercounting those without stable housing .

regression models could be used to estimate the size of the population that is likely to migrate and the proportion that will attempt to enter the united states .

models can account for and link changes in the risk population to economic , demographic , and social factors that may influence the decision to migrate .

in order to obtain statistically significant results in a regression model , a sizable sample would be needed .

furthermore , the model would need to be sensitive to specific time periods and certain migrant cohorts .

stratified sampling of border crossers would involve the border patrol randomly placing resources across sectors , taking into account the likelihood of resources being placed in a certain region and the number of apprehensions made there .

this methodology could be used to estimate total apprehensions that would have been made if resources were placed in all sectors .

incidentally , this method could also assist in improving border patrol performance by increasing the chance of detecting new transportation routes and strategies by allowing for random placement .

another method for estimating detection in a sampled area would involve "red teaming," where migrants or agents are recruited to attempt crossing the border in order to establish the probability of interdiction .

