a number of reasons underlie a growing congressional interest in the complex national security policy area that has come to be labeled "building partnership capacity," or "bpc. .

first , since 2006 bpc has increased in prominence within u.s. strategy , arguably becoming a central pillar of u.s. national security and foreign policy in recent years .

following the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 , successive u.s. and department of defense leaders concluded that the traditional set of security assistance and security cooperation tools did not meet the needs of the changed strategic landscape .

the term "building partnership capacity" was coined in the 2006 quadrennial defense review .

since then , bpc has become a catchall phrase for a wide array of programs , all underpinned by the assumption that strengthening foreign security institutions in weak and fragile states will have tangible positive benefits for u.s. national security .

activities in which dod engages toward those ends include ( but are not limited to ) : training , mentoring , advising , equipping , exercising , educating and planning with foreign security forces , primarily in fragile and weak states .

bpc is also used to describe a core element of recent u.s. military campaigns — namely , training and equipping foreign security forces — in iraq ( 2003-2011 ) , afghanistan ( 2001-present ) and iraq / syria ( 2014-present ) .

despite the increasing emphasis on , and centrality of , bpc in national security strategy and military operations , the assumption that building foreign security forces will have tangible u.s. national security benefits remains a relatively untested proposition .

this leads to the second reason for growing congressional interest: neither the policy nor academic communities have explored in great detail whether or not building partner capacity works to achieve u.s. strategic objectives .

recent events , particularly the battle between the afghan government and the taliban over konduz , as well as the collapse of u.s. - trained and equipped forces in iraq and syria in the face of the islamic state , have called into question whether these bpc programs can achieve their desired effects .

do bpc programs and activities actually advance u.s. national security interests ? .

if so , when ? .

if not , why not ? .

this leads to the third reason for increased congressional interest in bpc and related programs: fiscal oversight .

the relative intellectual and programmatic ambiguity of these efforts make it difficult to understand what , specifically , the dod is doing to build partner capacity in fragile states .

answering the question , "what is bpc ? .

is surprisingly difficult , as definitions of bpc vary across the u.s. government .

this uncertainty , in turn , makes it difficult to understand what , specifically , dod is spending on bpc and related programs .

while congress has authorized over $100 billion toward higher profile bpc missions in iraq , afghanistan and syria since 2001 , dod continues to execute bpc missions in countries around the globe .

in some instances , components of dod have begun augmenting its force structure in order to better conduct current and future bpc missions .

as dod budgets generally reflect inputs rather than outputs or outcomes , these bpc expenditures are difficult to identify and account for ; this , in turn , creates challenges in determining whether it constitutes a cost - effective policy option .

in short , despite the centrality of bpc in u.s. national security strategy and military operations , it remains unclear whether building the capacity of foreign security forces is an effective way to accomplish u.s. strategic objectives .

it also remains unclear exactly how much dod allocates toward bpc and related programs .

these issues both individually and collectively present considerable oversight challenges for congress , especially as it weighs the relative strengths and weaknesses of training and equipping programs in iraq and syria today as well as the need for future programs .

the complexity of bpc and related programs makes analyzing these programs' effectiveness a challenging endeavor .

this report is therefore intended to accomplish two interrelated purposes .

it first seeks to build a common understanding of what , exactly , constitutes bpc by illuminating the various ways in which different usg components define it .

in so doing , it charts the evolution of bpc in national strategy documents since the term was first coined in 2006 .

with that intellectual baseline established , it then explores whether bpc has proven an effective means by which the united states has accomplished its strategic objectives to which such programs have directed since world war ii .

it concludes with questions and issues for congress to consider .

it is important to note that this is not an exhaustive study of all u.s. - led bpc efforts , which is beyond the scope of this research .

this report differs from many other crs products , as it is intended to assist congress with its oversight responsibilities by helping it think critically about bpc and related programs .

accordingly , it raises more questions than it answers .

among the most important: are bpc shortcomings due to execution issues ? .

or are they due to bpc being an inappropriate way to accomplish u.s. strategic objectives ? .

while rand and crs scholarship illuminates some criteria for judging whether a bpc effort is likely to be effective ( found on page four ) , ultimately , there are no clear - cut answers at present ; further analysis is needed .

crs research offers the following potential key takeaways for congress: "building partner capacity" ( bpc ) is difficult to define .

since the term's introduction in 2006 , it has been used to describe dod programs , a strategic rationale for building the security forces of weak and failing states , and broader dod cooperative activities with a variety of actors , including the state department , u.s. state and local governments , security institutions in foreign countries , private companies , and nongovernmental organizations .

this report focuses on bpc's use as a strategic rationale for building security forces of weak or failing states .

determining exactly how much dod currently spends on bpc - related activities across its enterprise is difficult .

this oversight challenge appears to have increased in recent years due to dod's increased emphasis on , and prioritization of , cooperation on security matters with other countries .

cooperative security activities , including those that build capacity in weak and failing states , are diffuse across the dod enterprise , and therefore difficult to trace to a particular budget activity or line item .

the conceptual and programmatic complexity of bpc activities has compounded the analytic challenge of determining whether bpc programs are effective .

therefore , this report takes a "back to basics" analytic approach to understanding bpc effectiveness by identifying what kinds of strategic goals the united states sought to accomplish since world war ii when deciding to build a partner's capacity .

these goals included victory in war or war termination ; managing regional security challenges ; indirectly supporting a party to a conflict ; conflict mitigation ; building institutional and interpersonal linkages ; enhancing coalition participation ; and alliance building .

this report examines between two and four case studies for each strategic - level rationale , for a total of 20 cases .

the overall results are depicted in figure 1 below: figure 1 suggests that in the case studies crs researched , bpc efforts have been the least effective — relative to the strategic goal the united states sought to achieve — when used as a war exit strategy .

bpc efforts have been most effective when used to build interpersonal and institutional linkages with other states and to build alliances .

with respect to alliance building , several nations have , in a sense , "graduated" from being considered relatively weak and fragile states ( particularly after the cessation of major wars ) to strong u.s. allies ; south korea , poland , and japan are such examples .

the breadth and scope of the different activities and programs that fall under dod's catchall term "building partner capacity" ( bpc ) has made analyzing these programs — and their overall efficacy — difficult .

this difficulty arises in part because the term "building partner capacity," based on recent dod usage , has been used to capture dod's wide variety of engagements with an extensive range of non - dod actors .

as a recent report from the center for a new american security ( cnas ) notes , "the term building partner capacity ( bpc ) has become a catchall for a wide array of programs , only some of which actually pertain to enhancing the capabilities and capacity of a partner's military and civilian institutions. .

indeed , as a rand study noted , bpc is more a "term of art" than a specific program or capability .

moreover , like many other terms of art , bpc means different things to different people .

regardless of how the term bpc is used , it is primarily associated with a fundamental assumption: that enhancing the security capabilities of partners in less capable , weak , and / or failing states will ultimately advance u.s. national security interests .

despite the increasing importance and priority placed upon bpc by senior figures in the u.s. government , the assumptions that bpc is actually effective — and that the unintended consequences of bpc efforts are manageable — appear to have remained relatively untested .

to the extent that bpc has been evaluated by government and nongovernment analysts , studies have tended to focus either on whether programs have been successfully executed ( was equipment package x delivered to country y ) , or on the difficulties of executing bpc programs due to the hodgepodge architecture of the security cooperation / security assistance enterprise .

arguments for or against the application of bpc strategies and programs tend to be anecdotal ( it worked / did not work in country a ; therefore , it could work / could not work in country b ) .

almost none of them systematically explore whether bpc programs achieved their intended strategic - level effects .

understanding whether , and when , bpc programs actually deliver intended strategic effects ( as listed above ) is an inherently tricky analytic endeavor .

this is due to a variety of reasons .

in the first instance , as a 2013 rand study argued , data limitations , lack of assessments , and the long time horizons for partnership efforts make assessments of effectiveness difficult .

in some instances , these dynamics are exacerbated by the fact that those institutions tasked with monitoring a given bpc program's effectiveness are often those charged with executing the program .

furthermore , rand observes that in some instances , program managers lack sufficient longevity — or institutional memory — to understand the efficacy ( or lack thereof ) of programs .

the study also observes that the relationship between improving the effectiveness of security forces and reducing the necessity for u.s. combat forces to intervene is , "is not a straightforward endeavor. .

146 another analytic challenge pertains to what , exactly , constitutes a bpc effort .

while congress and the state department tend to think of bpc as a relatively narrow foreign assistance tool , the dod is de facto conceptualizing bpc as a strategy to address a broad range of challenges .

indeed , dod is including engagement with foreign forces across the full spectrum of its activities — doctrine , organization , training , materiel , logistics , personnel & facilities ( "dotmlpf" ) — which go beyond the more tightly scoped foreign assistance programs and authorities .

a further complication to understanding bpc effectiveness is determining what , precisely , the strategic objectives are for a given program .

determining effectiveness requires understanding what the bpc effort was intended to do in the first place .

bpc programs are , almost by definition , longer - term activities spanning multiple years , if not decades .

during these times , events on the ground , as well as changes of leadership in washington , often lead to strategic - level shifts of emphasis or priorities .

while at the strategic level these are often shifts of degrees , on the ground this can have real resource implications — and therefore real impact on the overall effectiveness of the mission .

complicating matters further , rationales are often conflated with each other when justifying a particular bpc program or mission .

for example , in iraq , the argument for building iraqi security institutions was about alliance building ( creating a stable iraq that is friendly to the united states ) as well as war termination ( allowing u.s. and coalition forces to withdraw ) .

which goal mattered more ? .

what were the resource implications of prioritizing one over the other ? .

without a solid strategic - level understanding of why these bpc programs were initiated , it becomes extremely difficult — if not impossible — to truly judge whether they were effective .

still , all this does not necessarily argue that an analysis of bpc's effectiveness — relative to strategic - level aims for a given program — should not ( or cannot ) be undertaken .

given how many billions of dollars have been spent on these programs , a study of bpc's overall efficacy is necessary , even if it only serves as a starting point for other , more in - depth analytic work in this area .

crs therefore sought to understand whether , at a strategic ( versus programmatic ) level , bpc has been an effective way to achieve strategic goals ? .

if so , when ? .

crs reviewed the historical record and developed a list of objectives that the united states sought to accomplish through building partner capacity activities .

this list included victory in war or war termination , managing regional security challenges , indirectly supporting a party to a conflict , conflict mitigation , building institutional and interpersonal linkages , enhancing coalition participation , and alliance building .

crs then selected 20 case studies since world war ii , organized by strategic rationale , to determine whether a given bpc effort had its intended strategic effect ( an explanation of the methodology can be found in the text box below ) .

while it would be an analytic stretch to presume that failures or successes were a direct result of bpc efforts rather than other external or internal factors , one can make judgments based on the overall trends whether bpc meaningfully contributed ( or did not contribute ) to the accomplishment of stated u.s. strategic objectives .

the following sections of this report delve into the case studies used to support the analysis in figure 1 .

the sections are organized according to bpc rationale .

after outlining the logic behind a given rationale ( war termination , proxy warfare , etc .

 ) , each section explores whether those strategic objectives were met and concludes with an overall assessment of the efficacy of bpc toward accomplishing that rationale .

in many instances , the united states has built or expanded partner militaries with the goal of curtailing its involvement in wars .

particularly in those instances in which u.s. forces were engaged in a conflict , but with limited interests , the united states has dedicated significant resources to training and equipping host nation forces .

as the logic goes , enabling a host nation and transitioning security responsibility from the united states to the partner creates conditions whereby american forces are able to withdraw .

put differently , at times the united states has sought to create an environment in which the level of conflict , even if it continued , could be handled by local forces , thereby creating a path to extricate u.s. forces .

further , as many senior officials argued during the counterinsurgency campaigns in iraq and afghanistan , local forces and governments must ultimately be responsible for maintaining security after military coalition members depart .

thus , constructing durable security institutions has been a key component of post - 9 / 11 military campaign strategies .

in the post - world war ii period , large - scale capacity building missions designed to enable u.s. withdrawal from a particular theater of operations occurred in three countries: vietnam , iraq and afghanistan .

the logic for this strategic rationale is that building the security capability of states might prevent , or roll back , the ability of terrorist groups and other hostile forces to launch attacks against u.s. interests or those of its allies .

doing so might also prevent the outbreak of hostilities among warring factions that might otherwise lead to a humanitarian catastrophe and / or u.s. military intervention , as well as empower nations to participate in regional military operations that might benefit u.s. national security interests .

as president bush argued in 2004 , the world "must create permanent capabilities to respond to future crises," in particular , "a more effective means to stabilize regions in turmoil , and to halt religious violence and ethnic cleansing. .

the 2015 national security strategy builds on this logic , arguing that mitigating state fragility and preventing , containing , and resolving armed conflict are all in the national security interests of the united states .

thus , military - to - military engagements in this context are envisioned to be part of risk - mitigation strategies ; a mechanism through which the local , "friendly" governments can be empowered to manage internal or regional security challenges with minimal u.s. involvement , if any .

bpc in this context has therefore evolved into a set of programs and authorities designed to better allocate the security burden among concerned countries , particularly in regions in which the united states has less direct interests .

these bpc programs to manage regional security challenges tend to be more preventive in nature ; they are designed and implemented as a bulwark against instability rather than with a specific crisis or conflict in mind .

as such , these programs are designed to strengthen partners' ability to manage their own security responsibilities , whatever they may be .

over the course of its history , the united states has , with relative frequency , supported its allies and partners as they wage their own internal conflicts .

these are contingencies wherein the united states has some sort of larger , geopolitical stake in the outcome of an ongoing conflict , but cannot — or politically will not — become a direct party to the conflict .

during the cold war , this indirect support was often an extension of great power competition .

in the absence of the soviet union , however , the united states continued supporting local actors to advance other nationa l objectives , such as stemming the flow of narcotics into the united states .

in these instances , military support and aid are channeled to one belligerent over another , in the hopes that doing so will enable the u.s. - favored party to ultimately win and create an advantageous post - war situation for the united states .

this assistance can be as simple as providing weapons and money , or as complex as providing combat advisors .

bpc has been used to help prevent the outbreak of further hostilities among warring countries or factions .

as the logic goes , strengthening a relatively weak party to a conflict can help create — or reestablish — a balance of power among different factions , especially upon cessation of hostilities .

this , in turn , makes it more difficult for the parties in question to return to violent conflict .

since world war ii , the majority of u.s. military campaigns have been fought with coalition partners .

indeed , as was more recently demonstrated in iraq and to some extent afghanistan , the ability to draw upon a broader array of capable militaries to perform coalition operations may alleviate the burden levied upon u.s. forces .

furthermore , a broad and diverse array of coalition partners can help build international political legitimacy for military campaigns that do not have un security council mandates .

yet many of the nations that signal interest in participating are unable to do so without significant external investments in the forms of training , equipping , logistics and sustainment .

by compensating for shortfalls in in partners' capabilities , the united states can simultaneously improve its partners' immediate operational effectiveness as well as their overall military capability .

building the military capability of partners , thereby enabling them to participate in coalition operations , can therefore enhance the united states' ability to achieve its strategic and military objectives .

the department of defense ( dod ) routinely engages in various activities designed to strengthen partners while promoting u.s. military personnel's understanding of , and connections to , other countries .

many of these programs have been ongoing throughout the cold war into the present day .

others were initiated after the 9 / 11 attacks to promote individual and institutional collaboration on counterterrorism issues specifically .

in large part due to the military's experience in iraq and afghanistan , many dod and administration officials have further stressed the need to build linkages and partnerships for two primary reasons .

first , recent operations underscored an enduring requirement for soldiers to operate in cultural contexts unfamiliar to most u.s. military personnel and understand the local "human terrain" of the environments in which they operated .

as the theory goes , building relationships with partners around the globe helps better prepare military forces to understand local and regional dynamics in the event of a crisis that might necessitate u.s. involvement .

as former chief of the army staff raymond odierno noted: before the most recent set of conflicts , it was generally believed that cultural awareness was only required in select army units , such as special forces or civil affairs .

recent history has made clear that we need expanded levels of cultural and regional awareness in all army units .

second , the experiences of iraq and afghanistan underscored the complexities of prosecuting coalition warfare at strategic , operational , and sometimes tactical levels .

strengthening institutional and interpersonal linkages between u.s. military personnel and their counterparts in other nations can therefore bolster interoperability between the united states and its partners .

programs traditionally associated with this rationale include dod's regional centers , multinational exercises , and the international military education and training program ( imet ) , among others .

more recently , the u.s. army has initiated a plan to align its force structure with different regions around the globe ( "regionally aligned forces" ) to help accomplish these purposes .

one key rationale for u.s. military engagement with foreign counterparts pertains to shaping their security institutions for the purposes of creating stable , likeminded partners and allies .

thus , the united states engages with the security institutions of other governments to increase the number of partners with comparable political and military objectives that it may call upon to help manage various security challenges .

this military engagement may , at least in theory , "spillover" and enable cooperation on a variety of other , non - military issues .

successive u.s. administrations have argued that building partner capacity — using security cooperation , security assistance and other tools and authorities at its disposal — is a key , if not preferred strategy for spreading stability in fragile states .

as secretary of defense robert gates once stated , "the most likely and lethal threats – an american city poisoned or reduced to rubble – will likely emanate from fractured or failing states. .

he further noted that building the capability and capacity of partners to manage their own security is "in many ways the ideological and security challenge of our time. .

this is a main reason why the united states has consistently prioritized the allocation of resources toward building the security capability and capacity of weak and failing states .

bpc has , in fact , become a strategic cornerstone of the u.s. approach to dealing with a wide variety of conflicts and security challenges — from latin america to the middle east to asia .

as the logic goes , if the united states enables these countries — or other local actors — to manage their own security , the threats to the united states that might emanate from their territories — such as terrorists , narco - traffickers , or radical jihadists — might be eliminated , thus reducing the risk that the united states might have to intervene directly .

ultimately , the application of bpc strategies assumes that strengthening these local actors will help advance the united states' ability to advance its own objectives , and that these partnership strategies will help establish more u.s. partners in managing global security .

while the theory appears uncontroversial , its fundamental assumption — that engaging in bpc is a viable manner through which the united states can achieve its objectives — has remained a relatively untested proposition .

as such , congress today operates from a limited foundation when trying to evaluate the efficacy and efficiency of current bpc efforts .

in order to begin addressing this analytic gap , crs therefore developed a list of strategic rationales the united states has articulated when beginning bpc programs , and then analyzed whether programs were effective relative to those aims .

the results of this crs study , depicted in figure 1 , are elaborated below , by rationale .

the priority being placed by successive u.s. administrations on building partner capacity , combined with the apparent intellectual and programmatic ambiguity of bpc programs as currently formulated and executed , altogether suggest that significant work might be done to clarify bpc's purpose , roles , and efficacy relative to strategic objectives and execution .

as a starting point , congress may ask the following questions as it scrutinizes current and future bpc programs and activities ( broadly defined ) : better understanding the strategic context in which bpc programs are being applied is important to understanding whether bpc is likely to prove an effective means toward stated ends .

under what conditions is bpc , broadly defined , likely to achieve success ? .

how can congress , in its oversight function , assess likely success for bpc ? .

bpc and security cooperation activities are manifesting across a broad range of dod's programs and operations .

should congress likewise take a broader view of bpc and security cooperation in the policy provisions of the ndaa ? .

how can the united states build a more holistic view of bpc and security cooperation that captures the broad range of dod activities in these areas ? .

related , what is dod actually spending on bpc activities , broadly defined ? .

can congress obtain reliable information on these programs and their strategic effects ? .

is dod's current strategic - level approach to bpc consistent with the current national security strategy ( nss ) and national military strategy ( nms ) ? .

are the assumptions regarding security cooperation and partnerships in both the nss and nms appropriate , given bpc's mixed track record ? .

are the resources for bpc and related efforts sufficient to accomplish stated objectives ? .

what are the force structure implications if dod continues to reorient itself to perform bpc tasks ? .

it appears that some bpc programs have been formulated and executed without an appropriate appreciation for the longer term risks and unintended consequences they can create .

does bpc produce a meaningful return on investment ? .

are the risks and unintended consequences produced as a result of bpc efforts worth the investment ? .

how can dod and the u.s. government better account for those risks , and manage them over time ? .

related , does bpc create de facto security obligations to partners ? .

what happens if and when the united states fails to live up to the expectations of partner states ? .

how is dod defining its strategic ( rather than programmatic ) end states for bpc ? .

should congress influence these strategies through legislation or oversight ? .

how can dod tell whether it is achieving its objectives ? .

should strategic , versus programmatic , measures of effectiveness be developed ? .

if so , would those be better developed by the executive branch , or an external organization that does not have usg bureaucratic interests in the discussion ? .

given the paucity of literature on the subject , significantly more work could be done to explore and explain bpc successes and failures .

is bpc's mixed track record due to poor execution of programs ? .

or are bpc efforts being applied toward strategic ends that are inappropriate ? .

are dod security cooperation programs and authorities delivering the right kinds of assistance ? .

building partner capacity can result in better trained and equipped partners with interests that do not necessarily align with those of the united states .

what criteria does the united states use in selecting partners ? .

are partners on the ground legitimate and capable of building and sustaining durable security institutions ? .

how can the united states better account for , and manage , divergence of interests , if at all ? .

the international security environment is becoming increasingly complex .

if fiscal resources continue to shrink for dod programs and operations , how should dod prioritize bpc relative to other missions ? .

the increasing priority that successive u.s. administrations have placed on building partner capacity programs and activities prompted crs to try to understand the efficacy of these programs .

accordingly , this study sought to understand what , exactly , constitutes dod's building partner capacity programs , and whether they proved an effective means toward advancing u.s. strategic objectives .

the results varied depending upon the strategic rationale in question .

ultimately , the study raised more questions than answers and should therefore be used as a starting point for further debate and analysis on the subject .

there are no clear - cut answers at present .

considerably more intellectual spade work could be undertaken to clarify the conceptual underpinnings of bpc efforts , and whether , and when , bpc is an appropriate tool for advancing u.s. strategic goals .

