benefits and services for low - income families have received increased attention from policymakers in recent years .

this is due in part to elevated federal spending in the wake of the deep recession of 2007-2009 .

the federal government , sometimes in partnership with state governments and local entities , provides an array of economic assistance to persons and families with low income .

there are various ways to identify these "need - tested" programs and the individuals who are eligible for and served by them .

however , it is more challenging to identify how these programs interact with each other and how they cumulatively provide benefits to families and individuals .

there is no single data source that identifies all need - tested benefits for which individuals and families are eligible or those they actually receive .

one way to analyze the interaction of need - tested benefits is to look at case studies , which create hypothetical families and present a suite of benefits and services for which those families would be eligible under program rules .

for example , a congressional research service ( crs ) analysis estimated that in 2014 , a single mother of two children , working all year , full - time at the minimum wage could receive almost $9,000 in combined benefits from the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , the additional child tax credit ( actc ) , and the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) .

however , such case study analyses are limited because their hypothetical families do not reflect the wide variation in characteristics and circumstances of actual families .

they typically assume that families receive all the benefits for which they are eligible , which is not the case in reality .

further , they sometimes assume that families receive benefits for a full year , though many families are financially needy for only part of a year and receive benefits for only some months as their circumstances change .

this report takes a different approach to exploring the interaction of need - tested benefits .

it uses data collected by the u.s. census bureau , along with microsimulation modeling , to explore individuals' and families' eligibility and benefit receipt .

the report uses the same data source as , and methods similar to , a government accountability office ( gao ) report released in 2015 ( u.s. government accountability office , federal low - income programs , multiple programs target diverse populations and needs , gao 15-516 , july 2015 ) .

the gao report describes federal programs for people with low incomes , examines selected household characteristics of people in poverty , examines the poverty status and household characteristics of selected programs' recipients , and discusses the research on how selected programs may affect incentives to work .

this report complements the information in the gao report , providing further analysis of benefit receipt from specific need - tested programs .

specifically , this report provides information on eligibility and benefit receipt among individuals and households in 2012 from nine major need - tested programs for which adequate data were available , listed in the order of the amount of their fy2012 federal obligations: supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) ; earned income tax credit ( eitc ) ; supplemental security income ( ssi ) ; housing assistance provided through the section 8 housing choice voucher program , the public housing program , and the project - based rental assistance program ( collectively referred to as "housing assistance" ) ; additional child tax credit ( actc ) ; special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) ; cash assistance from the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant ; child care and development fund ( ccdf ) ; and low - income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) .

this report is organized around and addresses six questions that may help inform policy discussions about the future of selected need - tested benefits .

the six questions and key findings related to them are presented below in table 1 .

while the federal government supports a number of need - tested benefit programs , uniform data on eligibility , participation , and benefits across programs are generally available only from household surveys .

however , respondents from those surveys tend to under - report receipt of need - tested assistance .

thus , this report combines information from a census household survey with estimates from a microsimulation model , the third version of the transfer income model ( trim3 ) .

the need - tested benefit programs examined in this report are limited to nine cash or in - kind transfer programs and tax provisions for which eligibility , benefit receipt , and benefit amounts are estimated by trim3 .

this report examines benefit receipt from nine major need - tested benefit programs ; they are listed in the report's introduction and discussed in more detail in table 2 , below .

in some cases , the report considers only a portion of the benefits provided under a program ( eg , only the refundable portion of the child tax credit ( known as the actc ) , or only the cash assistance portion of tanf ) .

in other cases , several programs are aggregated and treated as one program ( eg , housing assistance ) .

the nine programs are not necessarily the largest need - tested benefit programs , either in terms of spending or individuals served .

as discussed above , the largest need - tested benefit program , medicaid , is not included in this analysis but is examined separately in appendix b .

nor do these programs represent the full breadth of assistance potentially available to low - income individuals and families .

 ( for a more comprehensive list , see crs report r43863 , federal benefits and services for people with low income: programs and spending , fy2008-fy2013 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

rather , as discussed previously , they represent a subset of need - tested benefit programs — those for which sufficient data are available in trim3 .

the selected need - tested programs examined in this report target different populations and have different eligibility criteria .

some entitle all eligible individuals to benefits ; others have limited funding and can only serve a limited number of eligible individuals and families .

this section discusses how these rules translated to the population in 2012 , quantifying how many individuals were eligible for these programs and how many actually received benefits .

a substantial minority of all individuals and families benefited from at least one of the selected need - tested programs in 2012 .

however , as discussed earlier in " programs examined in this report ," these programs have different income eligibility rules and provisions that target benefits toward certain populations , such as families with children or the aged and disabled .

thus , some types of families may be more likely to receive need - tested aid than others .

as discussed earlier , the selected programs examined in this report ( which exclude the large medicaid program ) provide benefits to more than 1 in 3 persons in the population residing in 42 million families .

how does this translate in terms of dollars received ? .

in 2012 , the annual median benefit to families who received at least one need - tested benefit was estimated to be $3,300 ( i.e. , half the families who received at least $1 in aid received an amount less than or equal to $3,300 , the other half received more than $3,300 ) .

however , the median does not necessarily reflect the circumstances of most families receiving need - tested aid .

figure 7 shows the estimated number of families receiving selected need - tested benefits by the total dollar amount of annual benefits received from all programs in 2012 .

the figure shows that many families received a relatively small benefit during the year — more than 10 million families received less than $1,000 in benefits .

this represents about 1 in 4 families that received need - tested benefits .

as noted above , half of all families received less than $3,300 during the year .

relatively few families received large benefits .

the figure shows that as the annual benefit amount per family increased , the number of families receiving benefits decreased .

the distribution of annual benefits among families in 2012 is what is known as a "skewed" distribution .

it is asymmetrical , with many families bunched at one end of the distribution — in this case at the lower dollar amounts .

however , a few families tend to receive high benefit amounts .

a characteristic of this skewed distribution is that the relatively few families that receive high annual need - tested benefit amounts account for a disproportionately large share of all spending .

for the purposes of this report , the benefit total received by the 25% of families that received the highest amounts — $9,027 or more in 2012 — is used as the high benefit amount concentrated among relatively few families .

figure 8 examines total spending for the selected need - tested programs by the amount of annual benefits received by families .

it shows that 11% of all spending on the selected need - tested benefits was for families with annual benefits of less than $3,300 ( the median ) .

this means that the 50% of all families with annual benefits less than $3,300 accounted for 11% of all spending .

on the other hand , families with annual benefits of $9,027 or more accounted for 64% of all spending .

an earlier section of this report ( " how many people are eligible for need - tested benefits , and how many actually receive them ? " ) .

discussed the extent to which individuals received benefits from any and each of the need - tested programs examined in this report .

of additional interest is the extent to which benefits were received from one program only or from more than one .

table 8 shows families that received at least one need - tested benefit in 2012 , by the number of programs from which they were estimated to receive benefits and certain benefit combinations .

the table shows that an estimated 4 in 10 families that received at least one need - tested benefit received benefits from only one program .

the remainder , or a majority of families that received at least one benefit , did so from more than one program .

in 2012 , an estimated 14% of those who received any benefit received only snap and 13% received only the eitc .

other program benefits were received alone less frequently .

among families that received benefits from two programs , the most common combination was simultaneous receipt of the two refundable tax credits , the eitc and the actc .

the most common combination of three programs was the two tax credits together with snap .

as would be expected , families that received benefits from more programs tended to receive higher total annual benefits .

figure 9 shows the estimated median total annual benefits for families by the number of programs from which they received benefits .

the median annual benefit was $800 for families that received aid from only one program , $3,595 for families that received aid from two programs , and the amounts rise for each additional program .

for families that received benefits from five or more programs , the median benefit was $17,180 for the year .

table 9 shows the estimated median benefits received by families and the estimated percentage of families receiving benefits from multiple programs in 2012 , by their pre - welfare income - to - poverty ratios .

the table shows that median benefits were higher for families with lower pre - welfare income relative to need .

the median benefit for the poorest families ( pre - welfare incomes less than 50% of the poverty threshold ) was $9,262 , and fell to $1,000 for the highest income group ( pre - welfare incomes of 300% of poverty or more ) .

additionally , families with lower incomes were more likely to receive benefits from more than one program , while a majority of families in the higher income groups ( pre - welfare incomes of 200% of poverty or higher ) received benefits from only one program .

about one - third of all persons were estimated to receive at least some benefit from the selected need - tested programs in 2012 , and the rate of benefit receipt among some groups — such as those in families with an individual with disabilities or a family with a child — was even higher .

the median annual benefit for those who received any benefit in 2012 was $3,300 , although some families received substantially larger amounts .

as discussed earlier , 25% of all families that received any aid received benefits of $9,027 or more .

 ( the $9,027 amount was the 75 th percentile — 75% of families received less than that and 25% of families received that or more. ) .

these families , while accounting for 25% of all families receiving benefits , accounted for two - thirds of the selected benefit spending .

this section examines the question of how these families differ from families that received less in benefits .

many people in the united states were eligible for need - tested benefits in 2012 .

four in ten people were estimated to be eligible for benefits from at least one of the nine need - tested programs examined in this report .

however , not all persons eligible for need - tested benefits actually received them .

among the programs examined in this report , an estimated 70% of eligible families actually received snap and 65% of eligible families received wic in 2012 .

however , the estimated rate of benefit receipt among eligible persons was 28% for tanf cash assistance , 22% for liheap , 18% for subsidized housing , and 17% for ccdf ( based on eligible children ) .

in 2012 , one in three people were estimated to have actually receive d benefits from at least one of these programs .

many of these families had characteristics not typically associated with economic disadvantage ; a substantial portion of families that received aid had pre - welfare incomes above the poverty line in 2012 .

however , many of these families received relatively small benefits .

benefit receipt differed considerably depending on family characteristics .

families with an aged member and those comprising non - aged , non - disabled childless adults represented a disproportionately small share of all families receiving assistance and total benefit dollars spent .

for the aged , this partially reflects the role social security plays in providing income and medicare plays in providing health care coverage .

the aged also have a relatively low rate of take - up of the need - tested benefits for which they are eligible .

this report focuses on nonmedical need - tested benefits: it does not reflect the protection that medicaid offers in providing expensive long - term care services to the aged should they exhaust their income and assets to obtain them .

families containing non - aged , non - disabled childless adults also received relatively small amounts of need - tested benefits .

they are ineligible for benefits from the programs that are available only to families with children ( actc , tanf , child care , and wic ) .

this group is also eligible for a relatively small eitc .

in 2012 , a single childless adult could receive a maximum eitc of $475 for the year , while a tax filer with three children was eligible for a credit of up to $5,891 .

the wide reach of need - tested benefits is attributable to two major groups of families: those that contain an individual with disabilities and those with children .

families with a non - aged , disabled member totaled 18.6 million ( 14% of all families ) , and 60% of them received benefits from at least one need - tested program in 2012 .

individuals are typically considered disabled if they have a physical or non - physical impairment that prevents work .

moreover , the presence of an individual with disabilities might also limit the ability of other family members to work .

families with a non - aged disabled member accounted for $89.5 billion , or 37% of total spending , for the nine need - tested benefit programs examined in this report .

families with children accounted for the greatest amount and share of need - tested spending ( 41% ) .

many policy debates about low - income people focus on families with children and reflect the tension between trying to alleviate high levels of financial need while not undercutting expectations that non - disabled parents work .

both goals can be expensive .

the large share of families with children that received need - tested aid is attributable to assistance provided to families with a working adult member .

these families totaled 29.8 million ( 23.2% of all families ) , and 45% of them received benefits from at least one need - tested benefit program in 2012 .

many of these families did not have characteristics that are often associated with economic disadvantage .

families with children who have working adults accounted for $91.6 billion , or 48% , of total spending for the nine need - tested benefit programs examined in this report .

families with children without an aged or disabled member who also lacked an adult worker were a relatively small group in 2012 ( fewer than 1 million families ) .

however , they were the most likely group to be in the top 25% of families in terms of benefit amounts received , with 44% of such families having benefits of $9,027 or more .

though only 25% of families receiving need - tested benefits had benefits of $9,027 or more , they accounted for 64% of total spending for the nine need - tested programs discussed in this report .

families that received large benefits tend to have characteristics that traditionally have been associated with economic disadvantage and discussed in past policy debates: being in poverty or even "deep poverty" ( pre - welfare incomes under 50% of the poverty line ) , disabilities , weak or no job attachment , low levels of educational attainment , and headed by single mothers .

data and methods data sources and limitations this report examines eligibility , participation , and benefit receipt in calendar year 2012 .

estimates in this report were derived using data from the march 2013 annual social and economic supplement ( asec ) to the current population survey ( cps ) , augmented by information from the transfer income model , version 3 ( trim3 ) , funded by the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) and maintained at the u.s. census bureau .

asec the asec is a household survey of the non - institutionalized population conducted by the census bureau in march of each year .

the non - institutionalized population excludes those persons residing in institutional group quarters such as adult correctional facilities , juvenile facilities , skilled - nursing facilities , and other institutional facilities such as mental ( psychiatric ) hospitals and in - patient hospice facilities .

the non - institutionalized population includes members of the armed forces living in civilian housing units on a military base or in a household not on a military base .

the asec asks respondents to report on household members' demographic characteristics , work experience , and earnings in the prior year .

in addition , the asec asks respondents about receipt of certain government benefits in the prior year , including six of the need - tested programs examined in this report: ssi , tanf , snap , wic , housing assistance , and liheap .

while the asec does not directly ask questions about federal taxes , the census bureau provides its own estimates of the actc and the eitc ( based on data provided by respondents about their household's economic and demographic circumstances ) for inclusion in asec estimates of after - tax income .

data on ccdf benefits , however , are neither collected nor estimated by the census bureau in conjunction with the asec .

as with any household survey , asec data are subject to sampling error , as well as error from respondents misreporting household members' circumstances .

research has found that need - tested benefits are commonly under - reported on the asec .

respondents report fewer household members receiving need - tested benefits than are recorded by federal or state administering agencies .

for example , in 2005 it was estimated that the asec captured 57% of snap recipients , 59% of tanf recipients , and 74% of ssi recipients .

in the case of housing assistance , it appears that there is under - reporting of benefits by families receiving federal housing assistance , and over - reporting of receipt of assistance by families who are not receiving federal housing assistance , perhaps because they are receiving some form of state or local assistance .

in addition , benefit amounts reported by asec respondents typically fall below the benefit amounts recorded in agency expenditure data .

trim3 trim3 is a microsimulation model for government benefit receipt that is primarily funded by the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) and maintained at the urban institute .

microsimulation models apply a set of program rules to individual or family units to simulate various elements — in this case , eligibility for certain need - tested benefit programs , likelihood of receiving one or more benefits , and the amount of any benefits received .

simulations at the individual or family level are then aggregated to allow for comparisons across families and programs .

estimates in this report were generally derived from the trim3 microsimulation model using administrative data on program rules and survey data on individuals and families from the march 2013 asec .

this report used trim3 to adjust asec survey responses for under - reporting of applicable need - tested benefits .

this was done by using family characteristics and likelihoods of benefit receipt to "assign" benefits to a portion of the families estimated to be eligible for benefits but not reported as receiving them on the asec .

in addition to using trim3 to adjust asec data for certain programs , this report also relied on trim3 estimates , rather than census bureau estimates , of federal tax benefits from the actc and the eitc .

this was done so that the assumptions and methods underlying the estimates of the refundable tax credits were aligned with those of the government spending benefit programs .

finally , this report used trim3 to estimate the receipt and amount of ccdf subsidies for families .

the asec does not collect information on ccdf benefits , but the trim3 child care estimates were derived using data on income , work , and age of children , as reported on the cps .

the trim3 microsimulation model generally brings recipient counts and total benefits ( in dollars ) in line with aggregate administrative totals for the need - tested benefit programs examined in this report .

however , trim3 is a model and all models have limitations .

for instance , trim3 makes a number of simplifying assumptions in order to estimate monthly income ( often necessary for eligibility establishment under program rules ) because the asec only asks respondents about annual income .

to do this , trim3 "allocates" annual income amounts for individuals across the months of the year based on a variety of factors ( eg , number of weeks of employment ) .

however , such allocations of income may not always be perfect , meaning that there is some margin of error in trim3 estimates of eligibility , participation , and benefits .

additionally , housing assistance estimates from trim3 rely on weighted statewide averages for fair market rents and income eligibility thresholds , rather than the local area data that are actually used for program administration purposes .

while trim3 corrects for under - reporting of benefit receipt on the asec , it generally does this on a program - by - program basis .

because of a lack of administrative data on multiple program participation , trim3 is only able to specifically target real - world overlap for a subset of program combinations when correcting for under - reporting .

table a - 1 summarizes some key estimation issues , by program , for the data used in this report .

key assumptions annual estimates of income and benefit receipt the estimates of eligibility , receipt , and benefits in this report are based on program rules .

many of the need - tested programs examined here determine eligibility and benefits on a monthly basis .

as a result , the number of people who received benefits at any point over the course of the year tends to be greater than the number of people receiving benefits in any one month .

the estimates in this report reflect receipt of one or more benefits at any point during 2012 ( i.e. , total recipients includes people who were estimated to receive one or more benefits for only part of the year ) .

as such , this report's estimated number of recipients tends to be greater than the number of recipients reported by administrative data , which often show monthly or monthly average participation .

in addition , benefit amounts in this report are estimated annual benefits received by a family over the course of the entire year .

the information on refundable tax credits from the eitc and the actc represents the amounts earned during the year , which are actually paid to families once a year when they receive their tax refunds , generally in the following year .

for example , tax credits earned in 2012 would generally be received in early 2013 when taxpayers filed their 2012 federal income tax returns .

this also comports to the way the refundable tax credits are considered in analyses of family income and poverty .

definition of "family" this report presents estimates of benefits received at the family level .

the family level is used because it best represents an economic unit — people who pool together financial resources , consume goods and services , and make economic decisions together .

for purposes of this report , the family unit includes all those in a household who are related by blood , marriage , or adoption , as well as cohabiting couples , relatives of cohabiters , and unrelated children who are cared for by the family ( eg , foster children ) .

this family construct is consistent with the family unit used for the supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) , but differs from the family unit used for the official poverty measure , which excludes cohabitating couples , relatives of cohabiters , and unrelated children .

the family unit used in this report may also differ from the unit used by programs for eligibility determination purposes ( eg , the eitc and the actc use tax filing units , which may be different than the family unit used for benefit estimates in this report ) .

however , use of a common family unit allows this report to examine receipt of benefits across all programs in a comparable manner that would not otherwise be possible .

supplemental poverty measure the spm is an alternative poverty measure developed by the u.s. census bureau and the bureau of labor statistics that is based on a broader range of income sources and costs than the official poverty measure .

the official poverty measure counts only earnings and cash benefits ( eg , social security and unemployment benefits ) .

in addition to these , the spm counts certain in - kind benefits ( eg , snap , wic , housing assistance , liheap ) and tax credits ( eg , the eitc , the actc ) and subtracts a number of necessary expenses ( eg , taxes , work - related child care , commuting costs , and medical out - of - pocket expenses ) from a family's total resources to arrive at a measure of disposable income available to meet the family's basic needs .

the spm also sets separate income / resource thresholds for homeowners with a mortgage , homeowners without a mortgage , and renters ; these thresholds are adjusted for variations in housing costs by geographic area ( metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas in a state ) .

crs used the spm for contextual purposes when considering the economic circumstances of families who are eligible for or receiving need - tested benefits .

trim3 uses each program's family unit , income eligibility , and benefit computation rules for determining its estimates for eligibility and benefit receipt of need - tested programs .

benefit levels readers should be aware of additional considerations regarding the benefit levels presented in this report .

one consideration is that all in - kind benefits were monetized for the purpose of this analysis and several assumptions were made in that process .

for example , in the case of housing assistance , the benefits provided by the section 8 housing choice voucher ( hcv ) program , the project - based section 8 rental assistance programs , and the public housing program were all calculated the same way , using an approximation of the method used for calculating the maximum benefit a family could receive under the section 8 hcv program .

this approach is tied to the market cost of housing and is commonly used by researchers and policy analysts .

however , the public housing and project - based section 8 rental assistance programs provide affordable rental units to families rather than the vouchers provided by the section 8 hcv program for use in the private market .

while the dollar value of a voucher is fairly clear , the dollar value of an affordable rental unit is less clear ; thus , this approach may over - or under - estimate the dollar value of the benefit received by a resident of public housing or project - based section 8 rental assistance housing .

estimates of the refundable tax credits in conducting the asec , the census bureau does not ask survey respondents about their federal tax liabilities or whether they benefit from tax credits .

therefore , estimates must be made in order to incorporate tax liabilities and estimates into analyses based on the asec .

trim3 applies the federal tax rules in effect during the year to the population for that year .

this involves taking the asec's information on individuals and families and family structure and creating a "tax filing" unit ( i.e. , the tax filer and their spouse and dependents , if applicable ) .

trim3 then applies the rules for counting income , deductions and exemptions , eligibility for tax credits , and tax rates to determine the unit's tax liabilities and / or tax credits .

it is well known in the research community that estimates of the total dollars and number of filers receiving refundable tax credits based on information from the asec is well below the true dollar amount and number of filers who actually claim these credits .

for 2012 , the trim3 estimate of the total dollars of the eitc is $46.4 billion .

this is compared to statistics of income ( soi ) data , based on tax returns that showed a total $64.1 billion .

note that this is not a function of using trim3 estimates ; the census bureau's own estimates of the eitc using the asec were similar to those made by trim3 .

research has been done on why eitc estimates from the asec differ from those reported on the soi , but the reasons for the different estimates have not been conclusively explained .

factors that have been raised as potentially explaining this discrepancy include eitc "compliance" issues , where taxpayers claim an eitc or higher eitc amount that they are not eligible for ; misclassification of tax units from asec family structure information ; or under - reporting of earnings on the asec that are used to estimate the eitc .

similar shortfalls and results are also observed for the actc .

medicaid this report uses data from the trim3 microsimulation model for 2012 to provide information about who is eligible for and receiving benefits through need - tested programs and the value of these benefits .

medicaid is the largest need - tested program , but it was not included in most of the analysis provided throughout the report because ( 1 ) trim3 does not provide information on enrollment and benefit values of medicaid ; ( 2 ) using the 2012 information would miss the major expansion of medicaid eligibility under the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 as amended ) ; and ( 3 ) there are issues with valuing medicaid .

this appendix provides a brief overview of the medicaid program followed by sections about trim3 and medicaid , medicaid participation rates , and the value of medicaid coverage .

medicaid overview medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term services and supports ( ltss ) .

in fy2014 , medicaid is estimated to have provided health care services to 63 million individuals at a total cost of $494 billion , with the federal government paying $299 billion ( about 61% ) of that total .

medicaid coverage includes a wide variety of preventive , primary , and acute care services as well as ltss .

not everyone enrolled in medicaid has access to the same set of services .

different eligibility classifications determine available benefits .

to be eligible for medicaid individuals must meet both categorical ( eg , aged , individuals with disabilities , children , pregnant women , parents , certain non - aged childless adults ) and financial ( i.e. , income and sometimes assets limits ) criteria .

historically , medicaid eligibility had generally been limited to certain low - income children , pregnant women , parents of dependent children , the aged , and individuals with disabilities ; however , as of january 1 , 2014 , states have the option to extend medicaid coverage to most non - aged , low - income individuals through the medicaid expansion enacted as part of the aca .

medicaid spending per full - year equivalent enrollee was $7,236 in fy2011 .

however , medicaid spending per enrollee varies significantly by population group .

the following are per - enrollee spending amounts by major population group: children = $2,854 adults = $4,368 aged = $16,236 disabled = $19,031 .

one reason the aged and disabled populations have higher per - enrollee expenditures is because these populations consume most of ltss .

the medicaid per - enrollee spending amount for enrollees with no ltss was $4,332 in fy2011 , while per - enrollee spending for enrollees with ltss was $44,719 .

among the enrollees with ltss , the medicaid per - enrollee spending ranged from $25,837 for those with no institutional or home - and community - based service waiver services to $66,006 for those with ltss consisting of only institutional services .

trim3 and medicaid for 2012 , the trim3 microsimulation model only estimates which individuals are likely eligible for medicaid coverage .

in that year , trim3 estimated that 65 million persons ( 21% of the total u.s. population ) were eligible for medicaid .

it ranked third only to snap and liheap in terms of number of people eligible in the non - institutional population .

the medicaid eligibility information in trim3 has a few limitations .

first , trim3 only includes data for non - institutionalized individuals , but some medicaid enrollees receive institutional services .

second , trim3 simulates medicaid eligibility for full medicaid coverage , but some states provide limited benefit coverage ( eg , inpatient hospital - only coverage or preventative care - only coverage ) to certain populations .

third , the eligibility information in trim3 is for 2012 , and therefore doesn't take into account the aca medicaid expansion .

for the states that have implemented the aca medicaid expansion ( 30 states and the district of columbia ) , medicaid eligibility looks significantly different in 2015 than it did in 2012 , with substantially more parents , individuals with disabilities , and nonaged adults without dependent children being eligible .

additionally , for 2012 trim3 did not include information about medicaid enrollment ( i.e. , who is receiving medicaid coverage ) and the value of medicaid coverage .

thus , it is not possible to treat medicaid in the same manner as the other need - tested programs discussed in this report .

instead , the following sections summarize other research about medicaid participation rates and the value of medicaid coverage .

participation rate the participation rate ( or take - up rate ) of medicaid refers to the percentage of people eligible for the program that choose to enroll in medicaid .

research indicates the medicaid participation rates for adults tend to be lower than the participation rates for children .

the average estimates of medicaid participation rates for adults from a number of studies from 1999 through 2010 range from 52% to 81% .

however , the participation rates vary significantly by state .

for instance , a study of the medicaid participation rate in 2009 estimated a national participation rate of 68% , with state medicaid participation rate estimates ranging from 51% in nevada to 94% in massachusetts .

research suggests that participation rates among children in medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) tend to be greater than the medicaid participation rate for adults , and the rate has grown significantly in recent years .

the medicaid and chip participation rate for children was 82% in 2008 and increased to 88% in 2012 .

as with adults , these participation rates vary by state , ranging from 80% or lower in two states to 90% and higher in 21 states and the district of columbia in 2012 .

research has also found that medicaid participation rates are higher among non - whites , individuals in families with lower incomes , and people with health - related limitations ( such as ssi recipients ) .

also , medicaid participation rates were found to be lower for older children ( ages 13 to 18 ) relative to younger children , and for nonaged , childless adults without functional limitations relative to all non - aged adults .

it is important to note that participation rates provide the number of people eligible for the program that choose to enroll .

however , not all medicaid enrollees access services .

value of medicaid as noted previously in this report , estimating the dollar value of health benefits to families and individuals is particularly difficult .

a seminal national academy of sciences report issued in 1995 examining potential changes in the measurement of family well - being for poverty analysis stated: the issue of how to treat medical care needs and resources in the poverty measure has bedeviled analysts since the mid - 1970s , when rapid growth in the medicare and medicaid programs ( and in private health insurance ) led to a concern that the official measure was overstating the extent of poverty among beneficiaries because it did not value their medical insurance benefits .

yet after two decades of experimentation , there is still no agreement on the best approach to use .

for most of the cash , food , and housing benefits discussed in this report , the amount a family receives in benefits can be estimated based on their circumstances as reported on the asec .

that is , a dollar value of what is spent on benefits for the family can be estimated based on available data .

this is not so for medicaid .

actual medicaid spending for a family is determined by the amount and type of medical services it consumes .

moreover , the medical services consumed by a family are related to the health of family members .

medicaid is also paid to the provider of services .

for these reasons , medicaid benefits do not simply add to other family income to determine the family's well - being .

that is , more dollars are spent on an individual when an individual is less healthy ; those extra dollars spent do not mean that the individual or the individual's family is "wealthier. .

however , medicaid does have economic value to families that receive benefits .

historically , the valuation methods have relied on per - enrollee medicaid spending for individuals in a given demographic group .

there are two major approaches that have been used to value medicaid: a method that uses its "average cost" to the government and another that attempts to measure its "fungible value. .

average cost method the first method uses the average cost of medicaid to the government .

this is the valuation method used most recently by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) in its analysis of the distribution of income .

it was also historically used as the "market value" of medicaid by the u.s. census bureau .

usually , the average cost is estimated based on the person's state , age ( aged or child ) , and disability status .

it is not clear that the average cost of coverage represents the value of that coverage to an individual .

if the individual would prefer that the average cost of coverage be paid in cash instead , the average cost of coverage would overstate the value health insurance has to the individual .

the 2008 oregon health insurance experiment examined enrollees' willingness to pay for coverage .

it found that enrollees would not be willing to cover the cost to the government of medicaid coverage , but they would be willing to pay $0.2 to $0.4 per dollar of government spending on their medicaid coverage .

however , it is also possible that the bundle of health care services covered by medicaid could not be purchased without coverage at the average cost of coverage .

if this is the case , the value of coverage could be understated .

additionally , medicaid coverage has spillover effects to other people , and thus its value to society may be greater than its value to individual recipients .

the 2008 oregon health insurance experiment found that medicaid coverage for low - income , uninsured adults increased health care use ( i.e. , outpatient care , preventive care , prescription drugs , hospital admissions , and emergency room visits ) ; improved self - reported health ; and reduced depression .

medicaid coverage also has benefits to health care providers , who otherwise might be required to provide uncompensated services .

fungible value of medicaid the second method historically used to value medicaid benefits attempts to measure its "fungible value. .

the fungible value is supposed to represent the amount of resources of medicaid enrollees' families that are freed up for other uses by medicaid coverage .

that is , medicaid coverage does not directly increase a household's income , but it can increase an individual's ( or family's ) ability to consume other goods and services because the individual ( and family ) does not have to use income to pay for health care services .

fungible values were based on the "average cost" of medicaid per enrollee in a person's demographic group , adjusted for food and housing costs and family incomes .

cbo has also used the fungible value of medicaid in its estimates on the distribution of household income .

the nature of medical coverage means that medicaid is not a relatively fungible benefit .

medicaid coverage for relatively low - cost services ( eg , a doctor's visit ) might free up money for the purchase of other goods and services .

however , medicaid coverage for a very expensive benefit ( eg , a surgery ) is unlikely to affect a family budget in a similar way .

such expenses would likely overwhelm a low - income family's current income and potentially their assets .

medical care expenses and economic burden and risk as discussed above , in 1995 a national academy of sciences panel recommended revising poverty measurement .

it recommended not placing a dollar value on either private health insurance or publically provided health care from programs such as medicaid when computing poverty statistics .

rather , it recommended subtracting out - of - pocket medical expenses from family resources , so that the new poverty measure would consider a family's disposable income available to purchase non - medical goods and services .

the spm implemented by the u.s. census bureau followed the recommendation of not including the value of medical insurance as a family financial resource and deducting out - of - pocket medical care expenditures .

beginning with the release of the 2014 poverty data , the census bureau discontinued providing the average cost and the fungible value of benefits from medicaid and medicare .

in the fall of 2010 , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) asked the national academy to convene a panel to examine "the state of the science in the development and implementation of a new measure of medical care risk as a companion measure to the new supplemental poverty measure. .

that panel recommended developing measures of medical care economic burden and medical care risk , separate from poverty , to capture effects on family finances and economic risk to families of having no or inadequate health insurance coverage .

in terms of actual burden , the panel recommended that the census bureau provide information that would compare a family's or individual's out - of - pocket medical expenses with its resources available for medical care .

these resources would include both current income and a portion of the family's or individual's liquid assets .

under the recommendation , the medical economic burden would be used to measure how medical out - of - pocket expenses affect a person's or family's poverty status — how much they reduce the resources available to the family to purchase non - medical goods and services relative to poverty .

measuring medical care economic risk would entail measuring the likelihood that a family would incur a specified level of medical out - of - pocket expenses .

the panel did not make a specific recommendation on the medical care economic risk , though it did recommend that the relevant federal agencies undertake research to develop that measure .

the medical care burden and risk measure has yet to be implemented .

family categories in this report this report divides families into six categories: ( 1 ) families with an aged member ( 65 or older ) ; ( 2 ) families with an individual with disabilities ; ( 3 ) families with children and no earners ; ( 4 ) families with children and earners ; ( 5 ) other families , without a member who is aged , disabled , or a child , with no earners ; and ( 6 ) other families , without a member who is aged , disabled , or a child , with earners .

as discussed previously in this report , any individual family is placed into only one category even if it may meet the criteria of another category .

families are assigned sequentially to a category based on the ordering of families listed above .

for example , if a family had any aged member , it is placed in the first category ( families with an aged member ) .

this is the case even if the family also has an individual with disabilities or a child .

the method described above creates mutually exclusive categories of families that sum to the total number of families in the population .

however , it fails to reflect the complexity of families and family structures present in the population .

table c - 1 shows families with an aged member by the presence of individuals with disabilities and children .

the table shows that of the 32.5 million families with an aged member , 14.1% of them had either an individual with disabilities or a child .

moreover , these families also had higher poverty rates based on pre - welfare income and higher rates of need - tested benefit receipt than did families with an aged member who did not have an individual with disabilities or a child .

table c - 2 shows how many families without an aged member but with an individual with disabilities include a child .

of the total 18.6 million families with a non - aged disabled member , close to one - third ( 32.3% ) also had a child .

almost 8 in 10 families with a non - aged disabled member and a child received a need - tested benefit compared with about half of families with a non - aged disabled member but no children .

