even as congress finalized legislation creating the fec in 1974 , some members of the house and senate disagreed over how the agency should be constituted , what powers it should have , and how broad its enforcement authority should be .

perhaps unsurprisingly , almost immediately , the fec's enforcement activities generated controversy .

fo r some , they were too vigorous ; for others , too lax .

partially due to enforcement controversies , congress has occasionally considered restructuring the agency .

in the 114 th congress , h.r .

2931 would replace the current six - member body with a five - member commission , including a chairperson with enhanced enforcement powers .

recent congresses have also engaged in oversight concerning the fec's enforcement practices and transparency .

the controversy surrounding the fec's enforcement of campaign finance law and regulation continues .

during 2015 , as the fec marked its 40 th anniversary , prominent media accounts and opinion pieces chronicled tense relations among commissioners and stalemates over new regulations and enforcement .

in recent years , commissioners have sparred at open meetings and in the media about whether the agency's enforcement activities are inadequate or overzealous .

the debate over enforcement is not merely about internal agency disagreements .

rather , it represents broader controversies about what the fec does and what it should do , and what federal campaign finance policy is and should be .

some also contend that enforcement establishes the boundaries of permissible campaign behavior .

this report is not about the fec's individual enforcement controversies , but , rather , about why controversies surrounding the enforcement process might matter to congress as it provides the agency with overall direction and shapes campaign finance policy generally .

members of congress have a dual stake in campaign finance policy: as regulators and as the regulated .

by enacting legislation , appropriating funds , and conducting oversight , congress establishes the rules that campaigns — including their own — must follow and provides resources for ensuring compliance .

more generally , enforcement is one of the most prominent topics in federal campaign finance policy .

policy debates often characterize enforcement as an indicator of other issues , such as the health of the fec or the extent of government regulation of political speech .

enforcement can also indicate to what extent emerging campaign practices will be permitted , as the fec considers how existing law and regulation might apply to new circumstances .

proposals to restructure the fec typically have enforcement implications .

for all these reasons , even a basic understanding of enforcement can enhance familiarity with campaign finance policy overall .

as noted elsewhere in this report , congress has regularly considered legislation and held hearings that could affect the fec's enforcement duties .

the fec is a six - member independent regulatory agency .

commissioners are appointed by the president and subject to senate confirmation .

the senate most recently confirmed commissioners in 2013 ( the 113 th congress ) , as shown in table 1 .

another crs report provides additional detail about the commission .

three major enforcement options are at the commission's disposal: ( 1 ) what the agency has termed the "general enforcement process" established in feca ; ( 2 ) the alternative dispute resolution ( adr ) program ; and ( 3 ) the administrative fine program ( afp ) .

the first category includes the most complex and sometimes controversial matters that the commission might handle , designated as "matters under review" ( murs ) .

they may entail lengthy investigations or audits , protracted negotiations between the commission and h.r .

3487 respondents , substantial civil penalties , or litigation — although the pace can vary depending on individual circumstances .

by contrast , matters handled under the afp and adr programs typically are simpler and less controversial .

adr cases can involve various issues ; the program is designed to facilitate negotiation that leads to relatively speedy resolution of fairly simple matters .

afp cases are limited to straightforward matters involving late filings .

a five - year statute of limitations applies to campaign finance enforcement matters .

enforcement is important not only for encouraging compliance with law and regulation or correcting non - compliance , but also for what it represents about the state of campaign finance policy overall .

for some , the fec's enforcement process is unnecessarily complex and insufficiently transparent .

for others , it is too lax to be effective .

whether observers prefer more vigorous , more limited , or unchanged campaign finance enforcement , there is general consensus that a clear , consistent enforcement process matters .

without transparent and consistent enforcement , political actors lack guidance about what they can and cannot do , when , and how .

if congress wants to provide more direction surrounding enforcement , it could pursue legislation to clarify those issues on which policy stalemates have occurred .

nonetheless , pursuing legislative clarity on controversial issues might not be practically attainable in all circumstances .

in addition , legislating individual policy issues would not necessarily address the fact that the commission routinely deadlocks on a variety of issues , which suggests that structural reform could be a more expedient route to curtailing split votes .

as such , some contend that more vigorous enforcement of campaign finance law requires restructuring the fec .

most prominently , critiques typically propose eliminating the even - number commissioner structure to make deadlocks less likely .

for some , in choosing the current bipartisan structure , congress intentionally made the fec "weak" with the agency being "designed to promote deadlock along party lines on issues that really mattered. .

other observers warn that an odd number of commissioners could invite politicized enforcement .

as one analysis explains , "the fec's bipartisan design ... allows its regulations to carry weight .

if not for this bipartisan design , every fec action would be tinged with politics and viewed by some as illegitimate. .

several questions could be relevant as the house and senate examine how they want the fec to enforce campaign finance law and regulation — if they choose to make any change at all .

potential questions include the following: how does congress want the fec to prioritize enforcement compared with other duties , such as disclosure ? .

what relationships does congress want the fec to have with other enforcement agencies , and for which areas of law and regulation should the fec be responsible ? .

does the commission have a unified understanding of what the agency's enforcement priorities are and should be ? .

does congress want to clarify its expectations in these areas through oversight , legislation , or both ? .

does the commission have adequate appropriations to carry out enforcement duties ? .

does the commission have adequate personnel to carry out enforcement duties ? .

does the commission have adequate statutory authority to carry out enforcement duties ? .

to what extent should the commission wait for relevant pending litigation to resolve before reaching a determination in enforcement cases ? .

does congress want to leave that determination to the commission or to specify a standard ? .

if so , what ? .

do feca's civil - enforcement requirements sufficiently reflect current needs ? .

for example: do prohibitions on sharing information about open enforcement matters limit the potential for filing frivolous complaints for publicity ; do they limit the commission from informing the public about its enforcement activities ; or neither or both ? .

do the required time frames ( eg , as shown in table 2 ) allow for sufficient consideration by the commission and are they reasonable for respondents ? .

do those time frames , commission practices , or both or neither affect what is sometimes regarded as long delay in pending enforcement matters ? .

does the requirement that the commission attempt to negotiate compliance undermine enforcement ? .

does congress want to clarify which investigation and enforcement activities fec staff can initiate versus those that require commissioner actions ? .

specifically , does congress want to revisit the authorities of the commission versus those of the ogc or other enforcement staff ? .

does congress want to reestablish the fec's authority to conduct random audits ? .

does congress want to amend feca ( or enact another statute ) to provide either greater flexibility or limitations in the enforcement process ? .

the fec can determine how to prioritize enforcement activities , fill relevant staff vacancies , and whether or not commissioners can agree on enforcement actions .

much of the enforcement process , however , is set in statute and therefore beyond the agency's control .

as long as campaign finance policy remains controversial , history suggests that so , too , will be enforcement .

