the federal government first supported a program for energy storage and electric power system technology during the 1970s , before the establishment of the department of energy ( doe ) .

in those early days , the program was focused mainly on energy storage — especially to even out the variable power production from rapidly growing use of wind and solar technologies — but also to support large coal and nuclear power plants .

the advancement of computer capacity , miniaturization , and industrial controls has expanded the ability of grid operators to monitor and control electric power flows .

the subsequent increase in networking of computerized devices for grid data collection and control advanced the ability of operators to anticipate , avoid , and otherwise mitigate potential power crises , such as blackouts .

however , in more recent years , internet - connected networks have become vulnerable to unwanted computer - driven intrusions and disruptions , revealing a new cybersecurity challenge for electric power systems .

the nation's energy infrastructure is diverse .

it includes a variety of transmission and distribution system network structures ( electricity , oil , and natural gas ) , an array of operating models ( public and private ) , and a variety of hardware and software .

the energy sector consists of thousands of electricity , oil , and natural gas assets that are dispersed geographically .

thus , interdependency within the sector and across the nation's critical energy infrastructure sectors is significant .

coordinating the security and resilience of energy assets is complicated by the virtually borderless nature of energy use and the reliance on predominantly privately - owned infrastructure .

key challenges and opportunities facing the electric power industry include a changing power generation mix , replacing aging infrastructure ( transmission , storage , distribution , and generation ) ; modernizing and securing communication networks ( eg , analog to digital ) ; accommodating new end - use technologies ( for solar and other distributed resources ) ; planning for increased interdependencies of natural gas , water , and electricity systems ; and devising business models to manage the challenges while providing reliable and affordable electricity .

these activities are constrained by the need for cost control , physical security , cybersecurity , improved system resiliency , and the flexibility to adapt to weather and market uncertainties .

further opportunities arise from growing use of shale gas production and decreasing costs for information technologies which allow improved grid control and more opportunities for customer management of power use .

oe operates seven program offices and one administrative office ( program direction ) .

each program office has its own set of goals and funding needs .

the fy2017 request sought to establish three new programs .

table 3 shows the funding breakdown for existing and proposed activities by program office .

it also shows congressional recommendations for fy2017 .

after the administration issued its fy2017 budget request , congress held a number of doe oversight and appropriations hearings .

as noted previously , further actions were taken in the house and senate on doe funding recommendations in the e&w bills , s. 2804 and h.r .

5055 .

in the senate , s. 2804 was incorporated into h.r .

2028 as an amendment in the nature of a substitute , and it was approved on the senate floor .

the senate - passed fy2017 e&w bill included $206 million for oe — the same amount as the fy2016 appropriation .

in the house , h.r .

5055 was defeated in house floor action .

that bill had included $225 million for oe , which was the amount recommended by the house appropriations committee .

in late september 2016 , a continuing resolution ( p.l .

114-223 , division c ) set fy2017 funding for oe at the fy2016 level through december 9 , 2016 .

on december 10 , 2016 , a second continuing resolution provided funding at the fy2016 level through april 28 , 2017.the various steps of the congressional process for the fy2017 e&w appropriations are outlined in table 4 .

for additional background on selected oe programs , funding , and policy aspects , see the following crs reports .

crs report r44465 , energy and water development: fy2017 appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43966 , energy and water development: fy2016 appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rs22858 , renewable energy r&d funding history: a comparison with funding for nuclear energy , fossil energy , and energy efficiency r&d , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r41886 , the smart grid and cybersecurity — regulatory policy and issues , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43604 , physical security of the u.s. power grid: high - voltage transformer substations , by [author name scrubbed] crs insight in10425 , electric grid physical security: recent legislation , by [author name scrubbed .

