there are several ways to measure traffic safety: the number of highway fatalities ; the number of serious injuries from crashes ; the economic loss to people involved in crashes ; and the social cost of emergency response and accident - induced traffic delays .

to understand these numbers in context , other measures are often applied to produce rates such as number of events per million miles traveled , per million registered drivers , and per million persons in the total population .

similar measures can reveal trends for narrower categories such as vehicle occupants and bicyclists .

the fatality rate per 100 million vehicle miles traveled ( vmt ) is the most commonly cited measure of traffic safety , due in part to the seriousness of that outcome and in part to the fact that fatalities are closely tracked and unambiguous .

nearly every crash involving a fatality is investigated and clearly identified as a vehicle - related incident .

in contrast , crashes involving injuries or property damage may be reported inconsistently by local public safety agencies or may not come to the attention of authorities ; reported data on the numbers of serious crashes and of crashes involving injuries are estimated based on sampling .

as figure 1 indicates , the fatality rate has improved significantly since the passage of the first federal highway safety legislation in 1966 .

however , the improvement has not been continuous .

the fatality rate dropped rapidly , from around 5.5 per 100 million vmt to around 3.2 , in the first decade of federal oversight .

as the fatality rate has become lower , reductions in that rate have necessarily become more modest: over the past 20 years it dropped from around 1.8 to 1.1 .

there have been four periods of abrupt declines in the fatality rate since 1970 , all of which coincided with recessions ; in each instance , the decline was followed by a period of little improvement or even an increase in the fatality rate as the economy emerged from recession .

the number of people killed in traffic - related crashes dropped from a high of around 55,000 in 1972 to around 33,000 in 2013 .

this decline took place in the context of significant increases in both the number of licensed drivers and annual vmt ( see table 1 ) .

although the fatality rate from motor vehicle crashes has fallen to a record low , other measures indicate that improvement in traffic safety has stalled .

the rate of crashes resulting in serious injuries was significantly higher in 2013 than in 2008 , and the overall crash rate has been rising ( figure 2 ) .

highway safety rates and trends vary by state .

fatality rates tend to be lower in more urbanized states .

in addition , some states have relatively strict laws concerning safety matters , such as enforcement of mandatory seat belt use and requirements that motorcyclists wear helmets , while other states have fewer safety laws or enforce such laws less vigorously .

government policies influence highway safety in important ways .

however , some of the change in accident and fatality rates over the past several decades is attributable to factors beyond the scope of federal highway safety policies .

there are four basic tools available to government to improve traffic safety: engineering , education , enforcement , and emergency response .

these tools may be used , in different ways , to achieve three traffic safety goals: reducing the number of crashes ; reducing the severity of crashes ; and improving medical care for people injured in crashes .

as indicated in table 6 , each of these tools is better suited to achieving some goals than others .

federal policy efforts fall primarily into the categories of engineering and enforcement .

driver education and emergency response to traffic incidents are handled largely by state and local governments with little federal involvement or funding .

federal involvement in education and enforcement of safe driving practices has come through funding for state activities .

as behavior of passenger car drivers is largely under the authority of states , not of the federal government , congress is not able to mandate driver behavior .

instead , it has had to rely on both carrots ( incentive grants ) and sticks ( penalties that reduce federal transportation funding ) to influence state governments to adopt and enforce traffic safety measures affecting driver behavior .

in recent years , congress has largely restricted itself to using incentives rather than penalties to influence state enforcement efforts .

although u.s. highway safety statistics have steadily improved , there is room for further improvement .

since 2010 the reductions in u.s. fatality and injury rates have stalled , and preliminary estimates indicate that traffic deaths increased by 9% in the first nine months of 2015 compared to the same period in 2014 , while vmt increased by less than 3% .

also , while the u.s. highway safety record was once the world's best , in recent years the highway safety performance of several other industrialized nations has surpassed that of the united states .

there are several policy actions congress could consider that are recommended by safety advocates as being relatively low - cost but effective interventions .

these include actions dealing with seat belt usage , motorcycle helmets , automated traffic enforcement , and implementation of new vehicle safety technologies .

a survey found that 87% of front - seat occupants wore seat belts in 2014 .

the rate was 90% in states with primary enforcement seat belt laws , and 79% in states with other laws .

other countries have achieved higher use rates: australia ( 96% ) , england ( 95% ) , and canada ( 92% ) .

nhtsa estimated that in 2013 an additional 2,800 lives would have been saved if all unrestrained passenger vehicle occupants five years of age and older had worn seat belts .

as noted above , the incentive grant program congress created in 2005 to encourage states to adopt mandatory belt use laws with primary enforcement was judged to have reached its ceiling by 2012 , with 34 states and the district of columbia having adopted such laws for front - seat passengers , and 17 states and the district of columbia having adopted such laws for all vehicle occupants ( front and rear seats ) .

options available to congress to increase the number of states with primary enforcement laws for seat belt use by all occupants include an incentive program with a much greater value of incentive , a program that would penalize states that do not adopt such laws , or a combination of the two .

ninety nations , representing 77% of the world's population , have universal mandatory helmet laws , including a standard for helmet performance .

in australia , the reported helmet use rate by motorcycle operators is 99% .

universal helmet laws have been shown to be very effective in promoting helmet usage , because a violation of the law is easily seen .

currently , 19 states and the district of columbia have universal helmet laws .

nhtsa estimates that if every motorcyclist wore a helmet meeting dot standards , hundreds of motorcyclists' lives would be saved each year .

however , congress has prohibited nhtsa from lobbying state legislatures to encourage the adoption of universal helmet laws , and it omitted adoption of universal helmet laws from the list of safety measures required for a state to receive a motorcycle safety incentive grant .

in the surface transportation authorization enacted in 2015 , congress prohibited states from using federal highway safety funding to check motorcycle helmet use and to create checkpoints that specifically target motorcyclists .

automated traffic enforcement , such as the use of cameras to capture evidence of speeding and running red lights , has several advantages in encouraging compliance with traffic laws .

such tools reduce the risk that officers enforcing traffic laws will be attacked by suspects they approach or be hit by passing cars , allow monitoring of many more intersections and miles of roadway , and may be less costly to deploy than police officers .

in numerous studies , red - light cameras have been shown to decrease the number of both red - light violations and crashes involving injuries and fatalities at signalized intersections .

a review of 28 studies measuring the effect of speed cameras found that speed cameras reduced the number of crashes in an area , generally from between 14% to 25% , and also reduced the number of crashes resulting in injuries or deaths .

a number of other countries have made extensive use of speed cameras in their highway safety programs .

for example , in france , use of automated enforcement was a key feature of a highway safety initiative announced in 2002 .

australia introduced such cameras in 1989 ; 2,300 cameras were in place by 2009 .

the percentage of light vehicles in free - flowing traffic exceeding the speed limit by more than 10 kilometers per hour ( roughly 6 mph ) dropped from 36% in 2001 to 10% in 2009 .

in the 2012 surface transportation authorization act , congress prohibited states from using any federal - aid highway funding for automated traffic enforcement ( except in school zones ) , and prohibited states from using any of their federal highway safety funding for automated traffic enforcement ; congress continued these prohibitions in the fast act .

in a further disincentive to the use of automated enforcement , congress required states in which automated enforcement systems are in operation to use some of their federal safety funding to conduct a biennial survey of those systems .

since driver error plays a major role in traffic crashes , the prospect of reducing the role of the human driver in driving decisions is considered to have great potential to reduce crashes and the resulting deaths and injuries .

industry is racing ahead with developing and implementing driver - assistance technologies , with the goal of largely , if not entirely , replacing the human driver .

nhtsa has been studying the impact of driver - assistance technologies in the context of considering what features might be added to the list of mandatory safety standards .

the last such addition was in 2007 , when electronic stability control was mandated for all passenger vehicles beginning with the 2012 model year .

it is estimated that it takes around 17 years for the u.s. automobile fleet to turn over , and this time period has been lengthening due to the increasing reliability of cars and decline in crashes , so the impact of new vehicle technologies is likely to take some time to appear .

there is also a question about how quickly new safety technologies reach higher - risk drivers , as those at highest risk are younger drivers who may be less able to afford new vehicles .

dot has announced that it would work with industry , states , and other stakeholders to accelerate the deployment of autonomous vehicles , and has proposed a 10-year , $4 billion program to test connected vehicles .

given the potential safety impact of the new collision - avoidance technologies and the lag in the spread of such technologies , an analysis of the costs and benefits of a program to encourage drivers to replace older cars with new cars equipped with these technologies may be worthwhile .

recent experience with the consumer assistance to recycle and save act of 2009 ( which created the so - called "cash for clunkers" program paying vehicle owners to scrap old cars and purchase new , more fuel - efficient ones ) can help inform the prospects of such a proposal .

