cybersecurity refers to a broad set of concepts for which there is no standard definition — it often varies by the entity employing it .

dhs , for example , has defined cybersecurity as "the activity or process , ability or capability , or state whereby information and communications systems and the information contained therein are protected from and / or defended against damage , unauthorized use or modification , or exploitation. .

the committee on national security systems has defined a "cyber attack" as an attack , via cyberspace , targeting an enterprise's use of cyberspace for the purpose of disrupting , disabling , destroying , or maliciously controlling a computing environment / infrastructure ; or destroying the integrity of the data or stealing controlled information .

strengthening federal cybersecurity has been a priority for congress and the executive branch for several years .

the focus on cybersecurity has increased since the office of personnel management ( opm ) data intrusion was revealed in june 2015 , which heightened concerns about vulnerabilities within the government's systems and networks .

all federal agencies have responsibilities for protecting their individual systems and networks under federal law .

some agencies , such as dhs and dod , possess broader cybersecurity roles compared to other agencies .

dhs has responsibility for protecting unclassified federal civilian systems and networks and assisting agencies in responding to cyber threats and attacks .

dhs is also the lead agency for coordinating with the private sector to protect critical cyber infrastructure assets .

dod is responsible for defending the nation against cyberattacks of "significant consequence," as well as conducting military operations in cyberspace .

dod is also responsible for assisting dhs in fulfilling its government - wide cybersecurity roles .

the federal cybersecurity workforce plays an integral role in maintaining and improving the government's cybersecurity .

cybersecurity professionals are responsible for designing and building secure information networks and systems , identifying and addressing vulnerabilities within those networks and systems , and collecting and analyzing data necessary to respond to cyberattacks efficiently and effectively , among other things .

federal stakeholders and researchers have stated that robust federal cybersecurity is not possible without cybersecurity professionals .

developing and maintaining a robust federal cybersecurity workforce , however , has been an ongoing challenge .

the chief human capital officers council working group found skills gaps in cybersecurity positions ( and other positions ) government - wide , which prompted the obama administration to create a cross - agency priority ( cap ) to reduce those gaps by half by the end of fy2013 .

according to a january 2015 gao report , however , efforts to close these cybersecurity gaps were at an "early stage of maturity. .

this report examines congressional oversight of two strategies undertaken by congress and the executive branch to strengthen the federal cybersecurity workforce: ( 1 ) initiatives to define and identify the federal cybersecurity workforce , and ( 2 ) hiring and pay flexibilities applicable to cybersecurity positions at dod and dhs .

this report focuses on dod and dhs because of their key roles in federal cybersecurity and because the majority of hiring and pay flexibilities for cybersecurity professionals authorized by congress apply to dod and dhs .

the executive branch has several initiatives to define and identify the federal cybersecurity workforce: ( 1 ) the national cybersecurity workforce framework , ( 2 ) cybersecurity data codes , and ( 3 ) a federal cybersecurity workforce dataset .

laws aiming to define and identify the workforce mandate the use of these initiatives .

two laws include provisions that aim to define and identify federal cybersecurity positions: 1 .

the border patrol pay agent reform act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-277 ) 2 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) the laws codify , and in some ways enhance , opm's ongoing efforts to define and code federal cybersecurity positions since 2013 .

the laws also enhance omb's efforts to assess agencies' cybersecurity workforce capabilities .

broadly , the laws require all agencies to ( 1 ) assign data codes to all cybersecurity positions according to the national cybersecurity workforce framework ; ( 2 ) conduct critical needs assessments for identified cyber positions ; and ( 3 ) submit progress reports on completing these tasks .

table 1 , below , compares efforts to define , identify , and assess federal cybersecurity positions between the laws and the opm / omb directives described above .

congress has authorized hiring and pay flexibilities for dod and dhs to enhance the recruitment and retention of cybersecurity professionals .

opm has also provided similar , but distinct , hiring flexibilities for certain dod and dhs cybersecurity positions .

the text box , below , provides a brief background on hiring and pay flexibilities .

the subsections below discuss selected hiring and pay flexibilities authorized by statute ; selected opm - issued hiring flexibilities ; key functions of selected hiring and pay flexibilities ; and an analysis of selected statutory provisions on hiring and pay flexibilities .

congress has shown an interest in ensuring that the federal cybersecurity workforce is defined and identified .

congress has also shown an interest in ensuring that hiring and pay flexibilities for cybersecurity positions at dod and dhs are properly implemented and achieve their intended purposes .

if such interest continues , congress could enhance its oversight of these efforts to increase its awareness and knowledge of their implementation .

the subsections below discuss potential issues in the absence of enhanced congressional oversight related to ( 1 ) identifying and defining the federal cybersecurity workforce , and ( 2 ) hiring and pay flexibilities that can be used to fill dod and dhs cybersecurity positions .

pursuant to its oversight authority , congress could consider several oversight policy options to enhance its knowledge and awareness of identification and recruitment efforts for the federal cybersecurity workforce .

seven options are presented in this section , though other policy options exist .

the first two policy options relate to monitoring opm and omb initiatives to define and identify federal cybersecurity positions .

the remaining five options relate to monitoring the implementation of hiring and pay flexibilities used to fill dod and dhs cybersecurity positions .

crs takes no position on the advisability of these and other potential policy options .

this section does not present broader policy options that address the capabilities of the federal cybersecurity workforce , such as the establishment of additional hiring and pay flexibilities , other personnel tools that could be used to recruit and retain cybersecurity professionals , and whether federal cybersecurity professionals are enabling agencies to fulfill their respective missions .

opm could be required to notify appropriate congressional committees on the status of the cybersecurity dataset , including when the dataset is completed and released to the public on opm's online workforce data portal .

in exercising its oversight authority , congress may require these notifications to occur annually , semi - annually , quarterly , or on any other standard timeline .

opm could also be required to brief appropriate congressional committees on the structure and functions of the dataset upon its release .

this could include ( but not be limited to ) the data it presents , how the data can be used to generate a government - wide count of the cybersecurity workforce , how it will be kept up to date , and anticipated enhancements and adjustments to be made .

as mentioned previously , p.l .

113-277 and p.l .

114-113 require gao to submit a report to congress describing the status of identifying , coding , and evaluating critical needs of cybersecurity positions at dhs and executive branch agencies .

the laws do not , however , explicitly require gao to evaluate opm's dataset .

in its oversight capacity , congress could additionally direct gao to study the operation and effectiveness of the opm cybersecurity dataset one year after it becomes operational .

the study could evaluate , whether the dataset and opm cybersecurity data codes accomplish the goals listed below .

the study could also evaluate the validity of reported skills gaps in agencies' cybersecurity positions .

 ( 1 ) identify positions for which the primary function is cybersecurity ; ( 2 ) enable opm and agencies to determine the baseline capabilities of the workforce , examine hiring trends , identify skills gaps , and more effectively recruit , hire , train , develop , and retain an effective cybersecurity workforce ; ( 3 ) allow hr professionals to better understand the workforce and what issues need to be addressed ; and ( 4 ) provide a platform for organizations outside of the federal government to similarly organize their cybersecurity professionals .

congress could amend existing statues to extend the reporting requirements articulated in the law for dhs cybersecurity positions — or the law for dod cybersecurity positions — to dod intelligence positions .

congress could also add a new reporting provision that requires dod and dhs to provide information on any challenges encountered in implementing the flexibilities under p.l .

104-201 , p.l .

114-92 , and p.l .

113-277 .

reporting requirements enhance congressional oversight of the hiring and pay flexibilities used for dod intelligence positions .

in addition , the reporting requirements might allow congress to compare the use of the dod and dhs hiring and pay flexibilities .

congress could include the metrics listed below in the annual reporting requirements for dod intelligence positions ( p.l .

104-201 ) and dod positions affiliated with the u.s. cyber command ( p.l .

114-92 ) .

the metrics could provide congress with greater clarity on the extent to which the flexibilities under the laws are being used to fill cybersecurity positions .

such clarity might better position congress to determine the utility of the flexibilities and the need ( or lack thereof ) for additional flexibilities for dod cybersecurity positions .

for dod i ntelligence positions ( p.l .

104-201 ) : 1 .

total number of covered cybersecurity positions filled using the hiring flexibilities authorized by p.l .

104-201 .

2 .

total number of covered cybersecurity positions filled using other hiring flexibilities .

3 .

percentage of filled cybersecurity positions that are affiliated with the u.s. cyber command .

for dod positions affiliated with the u.s. cyber command ( p.l .

114-49 ) : 1 .

total number of covered cybersecurity positions filled using the hiring flexibilities authorized by p.l .

114-49 .

2 .

total number of covered positions filled using other hiring flexibilities .

3 .

percentage of covered positions filled through other existing hiring flexibilities .

dod and dhs could be required to report their use of opm - issued hiring flexibilities for cybersecurity positions .

the requirements could include , ( 1 ) the number of positions filled using the flexibility ; ( 2 ) the pay plan , occupation , series , and grade of the position ; ( 3 ) the nature of action of each hire ; and ( 4 ) any challenges encountered in implementing the flexibilities .

such data might enhance congress's capacity to determine the extent to which these flexibilities are being , or have been used — and any barriers to maximizing their use .

this information could , in turn , assist congress in addressing any barriers to using statutorily authorized flexibilities and determining the utility of additional flexibilities .

dod and dhs could be required to provide training on the proper use and implementation of the hiring and pay flexibilities for cybersecurity positions to hiring managers and human resources staff listed below .

congress could require the training to include a review of the existing authorities that can be applied to cybersecurity positions .

training might allow staff to better understand when and how to use the flexibilities .

1 .

department - level human resources ( hr ) staff that manage the civilian workforce this could include staff within the office of chief human capital officer ( chco ) , as well as other hr units that might be involved in civilian workforce issues .

1 .

department and component - level staff that develop implementing guidance for hiring and pay flexibilities dhs and dod often issue implementing guidance for hiring and pay flexibilities at the department and component levels .

it might be useful for staff charged with issuing implementing guidance to receive training on the structure and functions of the flexibilities .

1 .

component - level supervisors and hiring managers that use , or would use , the flexibilities dhs and dod supervisors and hiring managers that use , or would use , the flexibilities might also benefit from training .

the inspectors general at dod and dhs could be required to report on how effective the hiring and pay flexibilities authorized through statute — and the specific features — have been in recruiting and retaining qualified cybersecurity professionals .

for example , the reports could include an analysis of whether the hiring flexibilities reduced time to hire , and whether the reduced time to hire attracted qualified cybersecurity professionals to the departments , whether monetary incentives were a primary factor in attracting and retaining cybersecurity professionals to the federal government , which types of monetary incentives were most effective in doing so ( eg , performance awards or student loan repayments ) , and potentially other related matters .

appendix a. side - by - side analysis of selected provisions from statutory authorities for dod intelligence , dhs cybersecurity , and dod positions at the u.s. cyber command appendix b .

reporting requirement .

