s ales of locally produced foods comprise a small but growing part of u.s. agricultural sales .

estimates vary , but they indicate that local food sales total between $4 billion and $12 billion annually .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) estimates that local food sales totaled $6.1 billion in 2012 , reflecting sales from nearly 164,000 farmers selling locally marketed foods .

this represents 8% of u.s. farms and an estimated 1.5% of the value of total u.s. agricultural production .

most ( 85% ) of all local food farms are smaller in size , with gross annual revenues under $75,000 .

local and regional food systems generally refer to agricultural production and marketing that occurs within a certain geographic proximity ( between farmer and consumer ) or that involves certain social or supply chain characteristics in producing food ( such as small family farms , urban gardens , or farms using sustainable agriculture practices ) .

some perceive locally sourced foods as fresher and higher in quality compared to some other readily available foods and also believe that purchasing local foods helps support local farm economies and / or farmers that use certain production practices that are perceived to be more environmentally sustainable .

however , no such standards or practices are required under federal programs that support local foods .

many of the federal programs that support local foods generally define "local" based on the geographic distance between food production and / or sales based on the number of miles the food may be transported and require that food be sold within the state where it is produced to be considered local .

the most widely used definition is from the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 , food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ) , which defined a "locally or regionally produced agricultural food product" as it pertains to eligibility under the business and industry ( b&i ) guaranteed loan program , a usda loan program .

under the definition , "locally or regionally produced agricultural food product" means "any agricultural food product that is raised , produced , and distributed in ... the locality or region in which the final product is marketed , so that the total distance that the product is transported is less than 400 miles from the origin of the product " ; or "any agricultural food product that is raised , produced , and distributed in ... the state in which the product is produced . .

this report provides background information on many of the types of operations engaged in the u.s. local and regional food system .

a wide range of farm businesses may be considered to be engaged in local foods .

these include direct - to - consumer marketing , farmers' markets , farm - to - school programs , community - supported agriculture , community gardens , school gardens , food hubs and market aggregators , kitchen incubators , and mobile slaughter units .

other types of operations include on - farm sales / stores , internet marketing , food cooperatives and buying clubs , pick - your - own or "u - pick" operations , roadside farm stands , urban farms ( and rooftop farms and gardens ) , community kitchens , small - scale food processing and decentralized root cellars , and some agritourism or other types of on - farm recreational activities .

this report also highlights some of the available resources within existing federal programs administered by usda and other agencies .

a number of existing federal programs benefiting all u.s. agricultural producers also provide support and assistance for local food systems .

these and other usda programs were authorized in the 2014 farm bill ( p.l .

113-79 , agricultural act of 2014 ) .

other programs were authorized in 2010 as part of the most recent child nutrition reauthorization ( healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 , p.l .

111-296 ) .

in addition , some administration initiatives have been created to leverage existing usda programs to support local food systems .

a more comprehensive description of existing programs supporting local and regional food systems in the united states is available in crs report r43950 , local food systems: selected farm bill and other federal programs .

finally , this report discusses some of the legislative options that have been previously proposed by congress and intended to broaden support for local and regional food systems .

some aspects of these proposals were included as part of the omnibus farm bill in 2014 and may be included in future farm bill reauthorizations .

despite gains in federal support for local food systems in recent years , some members of congress , as well as many community and farm advocacy groups , continue to argue that such food systems should play a larger role in u.s. farm policy and that the laws supporting agriculture should be revised to reflect broader , more equitable policies across a range of production systems , including local food systems .

those supporting the expansion of such policies often advocate for the creation of programs specifically targeting support for local food systems , as well as increasing funding for federal farm programs that support local foods .

however , others in congress oppose extending farm support programs to local food systems , which traditionally have not been a major constituency among other long - standing u.s. agricultural interests .

those supporting an increased role for local food systems within u.s. farm policy cite the increasing popularity of local foods and a general belief that purchasing local foods helps support local farm economies and / or farmers that use certain production practices that may be considered more environmentally sustainable .

those opposed to extending farm bill benefits to local food systems cite concerns about overall limited financial resources to support u.s. farmers as well as concerns that the local food systems might not provide for the most efficient and productive use of natural resources for producing food , among other criticisms .

the focus on locally sourced foods and efforts to convince consumers to "buy local" are not new concepts .

"state grown" or "locally grown" branding programs were introduced in the 1930s ( eg , " pride of new york ," " pick tennessee products ," or " ohio proud " ) , and such programs now exist in most u.s. states .

 ( for more information , see text box below. ) .

in the late 1990s , the usda - appointed national commission on small farms , among other recommendations , emphasized the need to strengthen the "local farm economy" through policy changes within the department's federal programs as a way to better meet the needs of small farmers and ranchers .

although consumer interest in local foods has some of its roots in the late 1960s and concerns about the environment , growth in mainstream consumer demand has increased sharply in the past decade , along with consumer willingness to pay more for such products .

despite the growing popularity of the local foods market , there is no established definition of what constitutes a "local food. .

there is also no consensus about what primary factors would need to be considered if one were to construct a definition of what constitutes a "local food. .

in most cases , local foods refer to foods produced near where they are consumed , based on a certain geographic proximity ( between farmer and consumer ) or the number of miles the food travels from where it is grown to where it is ultimately purchased or consumed by the end user .

local foods may also refer to the types of marketing channels used between farmers and consumers .

in other cases , however , local foods may invoke certain attributes desired by the consumers who purchase them , involving certain social or supply - chain characteristics in producing food , such as supporting small family farms , urban gardens , or farms using sustainable agriculture practices .

the latter case also raises questions about how the local food movement may be used to address a perceived need , such as increasing access to fresh , nutritious foods for underserved communities or contributing to rural economic development .

the lack of a universally agreed - upon definition , however , does raise questions about what a local food is and may also provide opportunities for fraud in the marketplace with the sale of foods that are marketed as "local" when they cannot be determined to be local .

studies show that consumers continue to confuse "local" and "organic" foods , even though only a small percentage of certified organic products are direct marketed , according to studies .

data and information are available on the types of businesses engaged in local food systems , including farms that sell direct - to - consumer through farmers' markets , roadside stands , on - farm stores , csas , or other types of on - farm sales such as internet or mail order sales , pick - your - own or "u - pick" operations , cottage food makers , mobile markets , and also agritourism or other types of on - farm recreational activities .

other forms of local food markets may include foods produced in community gardens or school gardens , urban farms ( and rooftop farms and gardens ) , community kitchens , or small - scale food processing and decentralized root cellars .

the following is a review of some of these types of direct - to - consumer marketing and other forms of local operations .

products sold through these outlets may include fresh foods ; processed foods ( such as honey ; syrups ; beef jerky ; and homemade jellies , jams , and pickled products ) ; and certain non - edible products such as nursery crops , cut flowers , and wool and other fiber products .

locally produced foods may also pass through an intermediary , such as a restaurant , government institution , grocery store , or other retail channel .

food sales to farm - to - school programs may be direct from the farm or through an intermediary .

food hubs and market aggregators , along with kitchen incubators and mobile slaughter units , may be employed in distribution and / or processing within these marketing channels .

some of these types of food outlets are also reviewed .

historically , food grown in urban areas may be "planted on private or public property including vacant lots , city parks , churchyards , schoolyards , and rooftops and on land owned individually , by a community group , institution , municipality , land trust , or other entity," as well as in backyards , city lots , or community gardens , or grown using hydroponic ( or soil - less ) systems .

urban agriculture may include food crops ( including medicinal and ornamental plants ) and fruit trees , and also grazing of some types of livestock ( eg , honey bees , chickens , goats ) .

in the united states , urban agriculture has evolved over time , starting with vacant lot cultivation , encompassing school gardens and the city beautification movement prior to world war i and victory gardens during the world wars ( or relief gardens during the great depression ) ; and now it covers ongoing trends in school and community gardening , city farming , and abandoned property reclamation .

many of these operations are managed by an organization or private enterprise to grow food for sale at retail stores , but smaller - sized operations also grow exclusively for sale at farmers' markets and food fairs , or for field - to - direct - sales to consumers , food processors , and cottage food makers ( home kitchens ) .

increasingly , urban agriculture has grown to include more large - scale innovative systems and capital - intensive operations , including vertical or roof - top farms , hydroponic greenhouses , and aquaponic facilities .

examples of some existing or planned larger - scale operations include brooklyn's grange farm and gotham greens ; hantz farms in detroit ; growing power in milwaukee and chicago ; farmedhere in chicago ; aerofarms in new jersey ; and bright farms facilities located in illinois , missouri , pennsylvania , and virginia .

urban agriculture is often characterized as being produced in close proximity to where it is sold and consumed .

urban farming operations are not only diverse in terms of the types of systems and practices used , but also differ in terms of their underlying motivations and objectives .

as noted by other researchers: a broad understanding of urban agriculture must take into account the various activities of households to achieve food security , and to create income .

urban food production is more than food related .

community - based and individual food production in cities meets further needs of the urban population like sustainable urban development and environmental protection .

some noted objectives of urban agriculture include community and economic development ; improved access to fresh , locally produced food ; transformation of vacant urban property ; collection and reuse of organic waste and rainwater ; and education , organization , and employment of local residents .

several major cities have educational and apprentice programs geared to urban agriculture .

a 2014 study by portland state university reports that groups engaged in urban agriculture are mostly motivated by an interest in community building , education , food quality , and sustainability .

myriad challenges exist in urban farming , such as city codes , zoning laws , land access and use restrictions , licensing , and permitting , as well as other regulations covering , for example , soil contamination , air and water pollution , site renovation , soil fertility , waste management , access to water , site security , marketing and financing , liability and risk insurance , local nuisance ordinances , pesticide use , pest management , and issues involving raising urban livestock , among other factors .

globally , an estimated 15% to 30% of the world's food supply is grown in urban areas , and an estimated 60% of all irrigated croplands globally are located within 12 miles of an urban area .

in the united states , one study estimates that locally - produced foods ( within 100 miles from where consumed ) have the potential to meet as much as 90% of the national food demand .

others are more skeptical of the contributions from urban agriculture: some highlight the fact that urban land accounts for only about 2% of available land and question whether urban farming is an efficient use of available resources and whether urban producers have "the skills and the inclination to seriously grow food. .

others question whether urban farming can be profitable given the costs of land ownership and other farming inputs and whether urban farms can substantially contribute to u.s. consumption , while recognizing that urban farms provide services other than commodities , such as "instilling a sense of agrarianism" and supporting businesses devoted to food access .

in october 2015 , secretary of agriculture tom vilsack indicated that usda was developing resources to provide assistance to urban farmers .

many existing federal programs benefiting u.s. agricultural producers may provide support and assistance for local food systems .

with few exceptions , these programs are not limited or targeted to local or regional food systems , but are generally available to provide support to all u.s. farms and ranchers .

these include farm support and grant programs administered by usda as well as programs within other federal agencies , such as the departments of commerce ; health and human services ; and the treasury .

in addition , the obama administration has implemented departmental initiatives intended to support local food systems , such as the "know your farmer , know your food" initiative , among other activities .

authorizations for many of the highlighted programs supporting local and regional food systems are contained within periodic farm bills or within child nutrition programs .

other introduced legislation in previous congresses would further expand upon these types of existing programs to create additional opportunities for local food systems .

these include proposals providing targeted support for nontraditional and beginning farmers , focused at the farm production level , as well as proposals focused on nutrition and enhanced access to food .

a number of states and cities have enacted a variety of laws and policies affecting local food systems , including requirements regarding licensing , permitting , zoning , and public health , as well as initiatives regarding urban farming , housing of animals , and also nuisance ordinances .

a number of cities and localities have convened urban agriculture workgroups that have issued a series of recommendations specific to different regions and production areas , which are available through online searches .

a compilation of these state laws , rules , and requirements is beyond the scope of this report that focuses on federal programs , which are designed to support the development of local and regional food systems .

in addition , most states have enacted laws regarding "cottage foods" generally regarded as non - potentially hazardous foods ( such as baked goods , jams , and jellies ) .

many states allow producers to make these goods in their homes , rather than in a commercial kitchen , and intend to reduce the barriers to entry for small - scale food producers .

cottage food laws vary among states , with some being more restrictive than others .

omnibus farm bills enacted in both 2008 and 2014 included a few provisions that directly support local and regional food systems , as well as reauthorized several programs that benefit all u.s. agricultural producers , including local and regional food producers .

despite these gains , many community and farm advocacy groups continue to argue that such food systems should play a larger policy role within the farm bill , and that the laws should be revised to reflect broader , more equitable policies across a range of production systems , including local food systems .

many in congress have historically defended the existing farm support programs as a means to ensure that the united states has continued access to the "most abundant , safest , and most affordable food supplies in the world. .

however , there are long - standing criticisms of the traditional farm subsidy programs administered by usda .

some criticize the fact that the core farm bill programs are focused on selected commodities — corn , wheat , cotton , rice , soybeans , dairy , and sugar — and there have been calls from both inside and outside congress to revamp u.s. farm programs .

among other program criticisms are concerns about the overall effectiveness of farm programs and the cost to taxpayers and consumers , as well as questions about whether continued farm support is even necessary , given that many support programs were established many decades ago and are considered by some to be no longer compatible with current national economic objectives , global trading rules , and federal budgetary or regulatory policies .

in addition to calls for increased equity among all u.s. food producers — regardless of farm size , type of food , or how it is produced — various programmatic changes have been proposed , some of which dovetail with efforts by supporters of local food systems .

some researchers recommend that the most appropriate role for public policy is to reduce market barriers to local food production through policies that provide support for supply chain development and marketing , and also assistance with regulatory compliance .

some in congress continue to express the need to change farm policies in ways that might further enhance support for local food systems and rural communities , arguing that u.s. farm policy should be modified to reflect broader , more equitable treatment across a range of production systems , including local food systems .

supporters often cite the increasing popularity of local foods and a general belief that purchasing local foods helps support local farm economies and / or farmers that use certain production practices that some consider more environmentally sustainable .

rising popularity is attributed to both increasing consumer demand and a desire among agricultural producers to take advantage of market opportunities within local and regional markets .

others contend that subsidizing the more traditional agriculture producers creates a competitive disadvantage to other producers who do not receive such support .

others in congress oppose extending farm bill support to explicitly support local food producers , who are already eligible for many farm bill programs .

some may be opposed to extending farm bill support to local and regional food systems , which traditionally have not been a major constituency among other long - standing u.s. agricultural interests .

those opposed to extending farm bill benefits to local food systems cite concerns about overall limited financial resources to support u.s. agricultural producers as well as concerns that the most efficient and productive use of natural resources be employed for producing food .

as shown by challenges from some in congress to usda's "know your farmer , know your food" initiative , concerns have been expressed about the perceived priorities of usda and fear that a shift in priorities may result in fewer resources for "conventional farmers who produce the vast majority of our nation's food supply. .

 ( for more information , see accompanying discussion in the section titled " administration initiatives ." ) .

other criticisms highlight the lack of an established definition of what constitutes a "local food" and also perception that usda's support of local foods is mostly targeted to affluent consumers in urban areas , rather than farmers in rural communities .

