daily fantasy sports ( dfs ) , a form of online gaming in which players assemble imaginary teams that amass points based on how well individual players perform in real - life sporting events , operates in a gray area of the law .

the dfs industry has not been regulated by the federal government , but the attorneys general of several states have claimed that dfs either violates state laws or is subject to state regulation .

congressional action directly affecting the dfs industry dates back to a 2006 law , the unlawful internet gambling enforcement act ( uigea ; p.l .

109-347 ) , which outlaws illegal gambling using the internet and bars banks , credit card firms , and other financial service providers from processing payments to companies offering "unlawful internet gambling. .

uigea defines "unlawful internet gambling" as placing or receiving a bet or wager via the internet where such bet or wager is unlawful under either federal or state law .

uigea provides an exemption to this prohibition for online participation in fantasy sports if the games have certain attributes including set prize pools , skill - based contests , and outcomes that do not depend solely on the performance of a single real - world team or player .

however , dfs contests did not exist at the time of uigea's enactment in 2006 , and there is debate about whether dfs , as presently offered to consumers , falls within the law's fantasy sports "exemption. .

it is also possible that courts could determine that dfs is subject to a 1992 law , the professional and amateur sports protection act ( paspa ; p.l .

102-559 ) , which bans sports betting in most states , and to various other federal and state gambling laws .

this uncertainty has drawn the attention of congress , with some members proposing to reexamine the legal status of the industry .

fantasy sports began as a type of informal gambling among friends , in which participants composed imaginary teams of active professional baseball players and won or lost depending on their players' statistical performance over the course of a full baseball season .

fantasy baseball developed into more formal "rotisserie leagues" in the 1980s , with elaborate rules and scoring systems .

daily fantasy sports essentially extends the fantasy concept to other sports , compresses season - long games into daily and weekly formats , and allows them to be played online among participants with no personal connection .

dfs online gaming offers players a variety of sport options ( eg , baseball , basketball , football , and hockey ) , performance metrics , and types of contests ranging from one - on - one competitions to games with large numbers of participants .

the idea is for a player to assemble an imaginary team that amasses points based on how well each individual on a team performs in real - life games , as measured by statistics such as the number of passing yards gained in football , the number of hits in baseball , or the percentage of three - point field goal attempts that are successful in basketball .

to add to the challenge , every dfs player is given a salary cap , requiring that the sum of the real - life salaries of the players on each team fall below a specified level .

depending on the game the participant chooses to enter , the rewards for winning could range from a few dollars to a large amount in a guaranteed prize pool ( gpp ) .

dfs companies assert that these rewards are earned as the result of a fantasy sports player's skill rather than being the result of luck or chance .

the companies' websites describe their offerings as "contests" and "games" and avoid such words as "gambling" and "bet. .

as discussed further below , the determination of whether players' rewards are earned as a result of skill or of chance may be significant in establishing the legal status of dfs .

according to a study published in sports business journal , "dfs affords a huge advantage to skilled players .

in the first half of the 2015 mlb season , 91% of dfs player profits were won by just 1.3% of players. .

a separate survey of dfs participants conducted by eilers research in summer 2015 found that 70% of contestants lost money .

these studies seem to suggest that the best players dominate everybody else because a certain amount of skill goes into putting together a winning daily fantasy lineup .

one of the attractions of dfs is that it can be played on a variety of communication devices at a time and place of the participant's choosing .

a typical fantasy sports player is younger , better educated , and wealthier than the usual visitor to a casino .

a typical player is a male around 30 years of age who is extremely interested in sports and has played in fantasy leagues for several years .

many dfs participants formerly played online poker , which in the united states is now legal in only three states .

according to the fantasy sports trade association ( fsta ) , the industry's national trade group , dfs players spent an average of $257 on entry fees and league - related materials in 2015 .

dfs is tiny relative to the gambling industry , whose casinos , indian gaming operations , racinos , and state lotteries generated nearly $70 billion in net revenue in 2014 .

despite the dfs industry's modest size , its rapid growth has raised questions about its potential effect on the more established gambling industry .

casinos and casino hotels employed about 400,000 people nationwide in 2014 , and they are a major source of government revenue .

lotteries and taxes on commercial casinos and other types of gambling generated $27.3 billion for state governments in 2014 , according to the rockefeller institute of government of the state university of new york .

in nevada , gaming taxes made up about 24% of the state's general fund revenue in fy2014 , and nevada counties collected additional fees and levies from casinos .

pennsylvania collects a tax of 55 cents on every dollar bet on slot machines in the state .

dfs companies historically have not been regulated as gambling in most states ; however , the question of whether they should be is currently being litigated in a number of jurisdictions , as discussed in the " legal status and regulatory environment " section of this report .

gambling is primarily a matter of state law , reinforced by federal law in situations where the presence of an interstate or foreign element might otherwise frustrate enforcement of state law .

few states have enacted laws that expressly address fantasy sports .

however , state gambling laws often define "gambling" in such a way that they could potentially apply to fantasy sports , depending on the rules and format of the particular contest at issue .

the legal status of fantasy sports under most state laws often turns on whether success in the activity depends primarily on the skill of individual contestants ( which would likely make it legal ) or mostly chance ( which would probably make it unlawful gambling ) .

in addition , some state laws that would appear to permit "traditional" fantasy sports may not be as favorable toward dfs .

more than 80 civil lawsuits have been filed across the country against fanduel and draftkings ; these cases allege improper or illegal conduct by the companies and advance three different theories of liability: ( 1 ) the use of "inside information" to gain an unfair advantage ; ( 2 ) violations of state gambling laws ; and ( 3 ) fraud relating to misleading promotional schemes .

in early february 2016 , the u.s .

judicial panel on multidistrict litigation consolidated these actions in a massachusetts federal district court , noting that "these actions involve common questions of fact" and that "centralization … will serve the convenience of the parties and witnesses and promote the just and efficient conduct of this litigation. .

until these and other lawsuits involving dfs operators are settled , prosecutions become final , or states and the federal government definitively respond legislatively or administratively , questions will remain as to exactly what state and federal laws apply to these companies , their customers , and their service providers .

the popularity of dfs and its unregulated status have generated a number of concerns related to protection of consumers who enter daily fantasy sports contests .

no bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress that would either legalize or regulate dfs nationwide .

however , some members have called for formal inquiries into the daily fantasy sports industry .

in october 2015 , representative hakeem jeffries asked the house judiciary committee to examine whether "permitting a multibillion - dollar industry to police itself serves the best interests of the american people. .

senator robert menendez and representative frank pallone have called on the federal trade commission ( ftc ) to implement safeguards and ensure a fair playing field in daily fantasy sports .

and senator richard blumenthal has called for a federal investigation into deceptive or fraudulent practices at dfs leagues by the ftc and the department of justice .

in addition , questions about the roles of skill and luck in fantasy sports prompted representative frank pallone in september 2015 to request the house energy and commerce committee to hold a hearing to consider whether fantasy sports is currently allowed by uigea .

according to press reports , representative dina titus , too , has asked the house energy and commerce committee to hold a hearing on the legalities of daily fantasy sports .

policy options that could shape the future of the dfs industry generally center on whether regulation should come from congress , individual states , or the dfs industry itself .

congress could pass legislation specifically governing dfs games , such as laws to oversee state and tribal agencies that regulate dfs contests .

congress could also amend the existing federal gambling laws to expressly prohibit or authorize dfs gaming .

arguably , if congress imposes regulations on dfs providers , it would likely affect the industry's costs , as new laws may include new costs such as significant consumer protections and licensing fees .

currently , a state - by - state approach is being used to regulate the industry .

for example , nevada now requires a dfs operator to obtain a license .

some states , such as massachusetts , may regulate the dfs industry within their borders , and others , like texas , may declare it unlawful gambling .

a few states , specifically kansas , may allow dfs companies to continue as an unregulated industry .

some states , for instance new york , might attempt to halt dfs operators until regulations are put in place .

litigation over some of these state actions is currently ongoing , and additional lawsuits are possible in the future .

the dfs industry has responded to greater national and state scrutiny with its own self - regulatory system .

in october 2015 , fsta , which claims more than 300 member companies , including draftkings , fanduel , yahoo fantasy sports , espn , and cbs sports digital , announced a fantasy sports control agency ( fsca ) .

fsca , led by seth harris , former acting u.s. secretary of labor , aims to develop cross - company standards , internal controls , auditing policies , and enforcement mechanisms to govern the industry .

both draftkings and fanduel have endorsed fsca's formation .

