a ccess to health care is , in part , determined by the supply of physicians available to provide treatment .

physician supply is a function of the number of physicians trained , how long they remain in practice , their productivity , and the hours they work .

policymakers have demonstrated a long - standing interest in access to care ( in general and for specific populations ) .

the federal government has identified certain health workforce concerns and creates programs that seek to address these concerns .

specifically , the government accountability office ( gao ) estimated that the department of health and human services ( hhs ) administers 72 health workforce programs .

among these programs are those that seek to increa se access to physician services , including programs that e ncourage people to enter primary care to address identified concerns that there are too few primary care physicians relative to the number of physician specialists .

federal programs also exist to recruit and retain physicians in rural areas because o f concerns that the populations that reside in these areas lack access to care .

specifically , the federal government designates some areas as medically underserved or as health professional shortage areas ( hpsa ) and provides benefits ( eg , higher medicare payment rates ) to providers who practice in these areas .

in addition to these programs and policies , the federal government provides support for medical residency training ( a.k.a. , graduate medical education [gme] ) .

specifically , through payments that are generally made to hospitals , the federal government pays some of the costs that hospitals and other health providers incur when training residents .

such costs include , but are not limited to residents' and supervisors' salaries , and the costs of extra medical tests that residents may order as part of their training .

the federal government makes a significant investment in gme — according to gao , gme programs account for nearly three - quarters of hhs's health workforce expenditures — and gme may be a strong policy lever to impact access because the number of medical school graduates who obtain and complete a residency determines the size of the physician workforce , and the types of residencies they complete determine its specialty composition .

finally , where physicians complete their residencies often affects where they establish their practices .

given the influence of residency training on the physician population , policies that alter federal funding for gme may affect future physician supply and could be used to address identified workforce concerns .

this report provides an overview of federal gme support ; it discusses whether a particular source of federal gme support is actively used to further workforce goals such as altering the geographic or specialty distribution of residents trained .

a number of gme critiques have raised concerns about the data that the federal government collects on these programs ; for example , whether the data available are sufficient to determine program effectiveness .

this report details programmatic data gaps where they have been identified .

it does not summarize recent gme critiques in detail ; for readers interested in such critiques , appendix a provides some sources for further reading .

some federal programs use gme to support training for non - physician health providers ; however , this report focuses only on the training of physicians .

to be licensed to practice independently in a state , physicians in the united states must complete a minimum of three years of gme , with additional years required depending on their specialty .

in academic year ( ay ) 2016-2017 , approximately 124,000 individual residents were in training , including approximately 21,000 fellows — medical school graduates who have completed their initial residency training and are continuing their training in a fellowship in a subspecialty .

 ( see text box for definitions. ) .

gme generally takes place in hospitals that sponsor residency programs in specific specialties ( eg , pediatrics or surgery ) .

hospitals choose the number and specialties of the residents they train , but must meet accrediting body standards that attempt to assure that hospitals have the facilities , staffing , and patient load necessary to ensure that residents will receive adequate training in their chosen specialty ( see text box ) .

during their residency , residents rotate to outpatient facilities or other hospitals to gain experience treating different populations in different settings .

specific residency training requirements vary by specialty and are determined by the accrediting bodies .

the federal government makes significant investments in gme funding through various programs .

in fy2012 , the last year of data available for all federal sources of gme payments , the federal government spent an estimated $15 billion on gme , which was the largest federal investment in the health care workforce .

more recent data analyzed by gao found that gme programs administered by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) spent $14.5 billion on gme in 2015 , but their work did not analyze department of defense gme spending .

as such , 2012 remains the most recent year of a total federal gme estimate .

using their 2012 estimate , gao found that 78% of government - wide health workforce funding was for gme ; with medicare payments accounting for 85% of this funding .

similarly , a gao analysis of hhs programs in fy2014 , found that hhs supported 72 health workforce programs , but that nearly three - quarters of all spending was from medicare gme payments .

the federal government supports gme through payments made by the medicare and medicaid programs , both administered by the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) located in hhs ; by training medical residents at department of veterans affairs ( va ) and department of defense ( dod ) facilities ; and by funding programs administered by hhs's health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) that support primary care training in outpatient facilities , rural gme program development , and training in children's hospitals .

the federal government's primary role in gme has been as a payer .

in this role , it has a significant influence on the physician workforce , but this role has generally been passive , because , with some exceptions , the federal government has little involvement through its support of gme in the content of training , the specialties it pays for , or training locations .

in addition , the government's role in gme has generally not been linked to other federal health workforce investments , such as investments made to train non - physician providers whose work could complement or , where appropriate , replace that of physicians and who could be trained at a lower cost .

these critiques have been raised particularly with regard to medicare's gme support because it is the largest source of federal gme support , estimates of medicare gme payments range from approximately $10.3 to $12.5 billion in fy2015 .

medicare is also frequently discussed because , unlike other sources of gme support , it explicitly limits ( i.e. , caps ) the number of residents it supports .

some argue that this limit makes increasing the number of residents and changing the locations where they train difficult .

this argument generally does not take into account gme growth that occurred despite the medicare cap .

for example , recent work by gao found that the number of residents in training grew by 22% over the 10-year period they examined ( 2005 to 2015 ) , although the geographic areas where residents trained remained largely unchanged .

another analysis estimates that the number of residents in training grew by 27% during the 20-year period since the medicare limit on gme support was enacted .

this may be the case because the medicare cap is not an absolute , and other sources — for example , other federal programs , state and local government funds , or hospital funds — can be used to expand or alter the number and types of residents in training .

in addition , new hospitals can begin training residents and receive medicare payment for doing so .

some argue that medicare's residency limit should be partially or fully removed to address physician shortages in certain geographic areas and medical specialties .

and members of congress have introduced legislation that would do so .

others argue that expanding medicare support , unless done in a way that is directive ; for example , by explicitly allocating positions to hospitals in specific geographic areas or requiring hospitals to fund residency positions in certain specialties , would not address identified workforce issues such as too few physicians in certain areas or practicing primary care .

gao also found that although there are incentives within medicare and other programs to increase training in rural areas , hospitals frequently did not take advantage of them .

the federal government supports workforce data collection and projections of future needs ; in addition , researchers and advocates also collect and disseminate such data .

such data are necessary inputs for gme policy but are not sufficient .

determining the appropriate gme policy is inherently challenging because training a new physician is a long process ; as such , attempting to change the physician workforce through changes to gme requires a long time horizon and good initial data to project the future need for physicians .

this process of projection is particularly challenging because policy changes may occur in the interim that alter the assumptions used in the projections .

recent projections conducted by the national center for health workforce analysis , at hrsa , demonstrate the challenges of making projections concurrent with policy changes .

in their 2013 projections , they projected that there would be a primary care physician shortage in 2020 , but that the magnitude could vary greatly depending on assumptions about the role of non - physician providers .

specifically , they projected that the number of primary care physicians would grow by 8% between 2010 and 2020 , but that the demand for their services would grow by 14% .

they based this on the demand for services at the time of the study and assumptions about the future aging of the population , and the expected increase in insurance coverage driven by the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

these projections do not reflect more recent policy changes and stakeholder responses to the implementation of the aca that may have affected insurance coverage and related demand for health services .

the projections assumed that all states would expand medicaid under the aca , that full medicaid expansion has not occurred , and that these projections also do not account for changes in federal policy related to the private insurance market .

for example , beginning in 2019 individuals will no longer have to maintain insurance coverage or pay a penalty ( i.e. , the aca's individual mandate ) , which experts predict will reduce insurance coverage .

these policy changes may mean that hrsa's projected 2020 shortages may not occur or may be less than were estimated in 2013 .

another source of uncertainty in physician projections is the size and role of non - physician providers .

specifically , the hrsa model that predicted the most extreme shortages projected that there would be a shortage of 20,400 primary care physicians in 2020 , while other hrsa models that include full use of nurse practitioners and physician assistants project that the shortage would be 6,400 .

estimates commissioned by the american association of medical colleges ( aamc ) — a private , nonprofit organization that represents u.s. - accredited medical schools and some teaching hospitals — vary depending on assumptions made about the ability of nurse practitioners and physician assistants to augment physician supply .

specifically , in projections to 2030 , the shortage of primary care physicians ranged between 7,300 and 43,100 .

others have suggested that increasing the role of these providers and the use of new care models may be sufficient to avert shortages .

experts also project geographic shortages both overall and of specific provider types and specialties .

as noted , some areas are currently designated as being in shortage .

gao also found that there has been little change in the areas where gme training occurs , which may affect where physicians ultimately practice .

as with general estimates of physician supply , the role of nurse practitioners and physician assistants may alter predicted geographic area shortages .

it is also possible that targeted policy changes either already enacted or if enacted at the federal or state levels could alleviate geographic shortages in the areas they target .

the uncertainty inherent in projecting supply and demand under changing policy conditions demonstrates the need to regularly update these projections to incorporate the latest data and policy conditions .

the general uncertainty about the future need for physicians makes it challenging to develop and implement gme policy .

however , it is relatively clear that good data are needed both to examine the overall health workforce and to determine how gme investments can be better aligned to achieve overall health workforce goals .

the need for improved data collection has also been recommended in several of gao's recent reports that examine gme spending .

the federal government supports the health workforce generally , and the physician workforce specifically , through a number of programs , including those that provide loan repayment or scholarships to physicians .

more than three - quarters of federal workforce support is through gme .

the programs below are organized by relative size , as determined by the amount that the program spends annually .

these programs are also briefly summarized in appendix b .

the federal government funds a number of programs that support medical residency training .

these programs are operated by different departments across the federal government , and each has its own stated program goals .

the rules governing these programs and the purposes of federal support vary .

these programs have generally not been examined in conjunction with one another and may have goals that are contrary , duplicative , or otherwise not aligned .

for example , in a 2015 report , gao specifically noted that cms's gme programs ( i.e. , medicare and medicaid ) do not target areas that hhs has identified as workforce needs , nor do they align with workforce goals included in hhs's strategic plan .

a 2018 report gao issued reconfirmed this finding .

the council on graduate medical education ( cogme ) , the federal advisory group tasked with examining gme policy , also noted a lack of alignment across programs and in its 2017 report called for "a national strategic plan for graduate medical education" to be created by a non - partisan strategic planning committee .

one of the major challenges for gme policymakers is that data to evaluate programs are lacking .

this lack of program transparency has been a consistent theme in a number of recent gme evaluations .

in the 2018 gao report noted above , gao found that hhs and va gme programs did not collect sufficient data to properly evaluate the federal government's gme investments .

this report did not evaluate dod gme .

gao recommended that hhs and the va identify information needed to evaluate their gme investments and improve the quality and consistency of data collected .

their study found among hhs and va gme programs that the data collection was generally done at the individual program level and was generally collected to determine hospital compliance with program statute and were not sufficient to determine program costs .

in addition , because the data collected were to determine compliance with different program statutes , these data were not consistent across programs .

gao did state that collecting gme data may be difficult because some aspects of the costs of gme training are difficult to quantify ( eg , faculty teaching salaries ) and that gme costs vary by site ( eg , costs would differ between a hospital and a clinic where residents rotate for training ) .

despite these challenges , gao has consistently recommended better data collection for gme programs .

the hrsa thcgme supported the development of a data collection instrument to quantify both teaching costs and revenue generated by residents .

as part of this analysis , they surveyed thc programs to attempt to identify these data elements ( including services and space that were donated to programs ) .

overall , they found that most programs were able to quantify the expenses associated with training , but that examining the revenue generated was more difficult .

despite these challenges , the data collection instrument because of its scope might be useful to better quantify the costs of residency training at other facility types and by other payers .

although efforts are underway to improve data collection , they are largely at beginning stages and are not coordinated across programs .

as mentioned , the chgme program is collecting baseline data to develop quality measures for its program .

as part of the development of standards , hrsa sought public comments .

in general , the commenters noted that there were no generally accepted standards for measuring residency program quality , and that the lack of accepted measures made it difficult to judge relative program performance or change over time .

as such , the agency is collecting baseline data , including detailed curriculum data , in fy2019 and is focusing on hospital quality initiatives that have direct resident involvement .

another effort in its early stages is being undertaken by the national academy of medicine , which sought expert input about how to develop metrics to evaluate individual residency program outcomes at a meeting held in 2017 .

although workshop participants overall agreed that gme quality measures are needed , most noted that developing and collecting these measures would be challenging .

for example , if one of the outcomes of interest is the quality of care that a training program's graduates provide , it is difficult to attribute whether a program graduate's ability to provide quality care is due to the training received during medical school , residency , or from peers while in practice .

some academic research has been undertaken in this area , which has shown that residency training can affect the quality of care its residents deliver and the cost of that care .

despite progress in this area , efforts are generally preliminary and data available are limited .

the current lack of data ( overall or for specific programs ) makes it difficult for policymakers seeking to amend gme payments , because data are not available to evaluate the relative success or weakness of the current payment systems .

this may be particularly challenging for those who wish to expand payments , because the limited data that do exist indicate that payments — in particular , medicare's ime payments — are higher than can be empirically justified .

as such , some argue that medicare payments should be reduced ; this was suggested by the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform , by cbo in their options for reducing the deficit , and in various years of the president's budget , including a proposal in the fy2019 president's budget .

others argue that payments should be expanded to reduce or avert physician shortages , though such shortages themselves have been debated .

congress may consider using federal gme support to encourage training in specific specialties and may consider doing so by amending how payments are allocated through existing federal programs , as some of these programs ( eg , medicare and medicaid ) exercise little control over the specialties they support .

researchers have found that when hospitals expand residency training , they tend to do so in specialties where the benefits derived from residents' labor exceed the cost of their training ( i.e. , it is profitable for the hospital to train additional residents ) .

current data collected on federal programs make it difficult to determine when a hospital requires an incentive ( eg , a payment from a federal program ) to operate a residency program or when it is profitable for a hospital to train residents without an incentive .

recent research found that it may be cheaper for a hospital to use resident services than to hire nonphysician providers to replace resident labor and that the outcomes provided by resident were similar or better .

congress could pursue policy options to encourage additional training in specific specialties , as it has in the past .

these options have not always been successful because incentives are generally given to the hospital and often measure the specialty when the resident begins training , which may miss residents who choose to subspecialize .

designing policies to affect the specialty composition of the future workforce may be also challenging , because residents may move to a different hospital to pursue further training , because gme incentives are given to the hospital but not to residents , and because current specialty needs , shortages , and surpluses may change .

a related challenge is that currently most federal programs pay the same amount for residents across specialties and by year of training ( with the exception of fellows ) .

some have speculated that a hospital's cost of training a resident may differ by specialty or by the year that the resident is in training .

the relative cost to a hospital for operating a residency program may also vary by a number of factors , such as the size of the residency program , the specialty of the program , the total number of residency programs that the hospital operates , and the availability and cost of alternative providers who would be needed to replace the resident's labor .

residents may also generate revenue for a hospital directly ( eg , because they provide additional labor ) or may do so indirectly ( eg , because the prestige of a teaching hospital may make it more attractive for some patients ) .

determining these "costs," should they exist , is challenging .

in some cases , federal gme program payments may undercompensate a hospital while in other cases program payments may exceed the hospital's costs .

gao attempted to examine the cost of training in a 2018 report and found that measuring these costs was difficult and that some costs were difficult to identify .

they also noted that the current data collected were not sufficient to identify these costs or to compare them across gme programs .

in general , the data collected are not sufficient to determine if or when these scenarios occur nor are data available to determine the factors that may affect hospital training costs .

better data on these "costs" may be useful to better target federal gme support .

congress may also consider policy options that seek to influence the geographical distribution of residents .

such strategies have been pursued in the past ; for example , the aca's redistribution of medicare - funded residency slots gave preference to hospitals in states with health professional shortage areas and low resident - to - population ratios .

successfully implementing policy options to achieve geographic distribution goals have a number of the same challenges that policy options that seek to target the specialty composition of the physician population do .

for example , proposed policy changes generally target hospitals and not the residents themselves , which may be not be effective when the desired outcomes are determined by where the residents ultimately choose to practice .

in addition , geographic distribution policies may face challenges because some areas that have traditionally trained residents may lose their current levels of support .

for example , prior critiques have raised concerns that where current residents are trained is not reflective of where the current population is located .

for example , gao notes that "medicare gme funding is disbursed based on historical patterns .

therefore , the medicare - supported residency slots , supported by this medicare gme funding , are most highly concentrated in northeastern states. .

gao confirmed this finding in a 2017 report , which examined residency training from 2005 through 2015 and found that the locations remained largely unchanged despite uneven population growth across regions during this time period .

given that training sites have been largely static , successful policy options would either need to add total residents ( i.e. , expand overall support ) or would need to implement a drawdown in support , which may be unpopular and may also be a lengthy process because some residents are currently supported in training programs that last a number of years .

although prior critiques have focused on medicare's gme support because it is the largest source of gme support , program challenges are not limited to medicare , as other federal sources of gme support have limited data available and some programs have little flexibility in how payments are used .

as these programs all seek to train physicians and are , at times , training the same physicians , policymakers may be interested in examining these programs in concert to minimize duplication and maximize program alignment .

appendix a .

additional resources below are resources for readers interested in specific critiques and policy options suggested to reform graduate medical education ( gme ) .

resources are organized alphabetically by the group that has issued the report .

council on graduate medical education ( cogme ) federal executive branch advisory council that provides ongoing assessment of physician workforce trends and training .

for all reports , see http: / / www.hrsa.gov / advisorycommittees / bhpradvisory / cogme / index.html .

relevant reports council on graduate medical education , towards the development of a national strategic plan for graduate medical education , twenty third report , rockville , md , april 2017 , https: / / www.hrsa.gov / sites / default / files / hrsa / advisory - committees / graduate - medical - edu / reports / april2017.pdf .

council on graduate medical education , the role of graduate medical education in the new health care paradigm , twenty second report , rockville , md , november 2014 , http: / / www.hrsa.gov / advisorycommittees / bhpradvisory / cogme / reports / 22report.pdf .

council on graduate medical education , improving value in graduate medical education twenty - first report , august 2013 , http: / / www.hrsa.gov / advisorycommittees / bhpradvisory / cogme / reports / 22report.pdf .

council on graduate medical education , enhancing primary care , twentieth report , december 2010 , http: / / www.hrsa.gov / advisorycommittees / bhpradvisory / cogme / reports / twentiethreport.pdf .

council on graduate medical education , enhancing flexibility in graduate medical education nineteenth report , september 2007 , http: / / www.hrsa.gov / advisorycommittees / bhpradvisory / cogme / reports / nineteenthrpt.pdf .

council on graduate medical education , financing graduate medical education in a changing health care environment , fifteenth report , http: / / www.hrsa.gov / advisorycommittees / bhpradvisory / cogme / reports / fifteenthreport.pdf .

government accountability office ( gao ) federal legislative branch agency that evaluates federal programs including those that finance health care and support the physician workforce .

for all reports , see www.gao.gov .

relevant reports u.s. government accountability office , physician workforce: hhs needs better information to comprehensively evaluate graduate medical education funding , gao - 18-240 , 2018 , https: / / www.gao.gov / assets / 700 / 690581.pdf .

u.s. government accountability office , physician workforce: expansion of the children's hospitals graduate medical education payment program , gao - 18-66r , 2017 , https: / / www.gao.gov / assets / 690 / 688072.pdf .

u.s. government accountability office , physician workforce: location and types of graduate training were largely unchanged , and federal efforts may not be sufficient to meet needs , gao - 17-411 , may 5 , 2017 , https: / / www.gao.gov / assets / 690 / 684946.pdf .

u.s. government accountability office , health care workforce: comprehensive planning by hhs needed to meet national needs , gao - 16-17 , december 11 , 2015 , https: / / www.gao.gov / assets / 680 / 674137.pdf .

u.s. government accountability office , health care workforce: federally funded training programs in fiscal year 2012 , gao - 13-709r , august 15 , 2013 , https: / / www.gao.gov / assets / 660 / 656960.pdf .

u.s. government accountability office , graduate medical education: trends in training and student debt , gao - 09-438r , may 4 , 2009 , http: / / www.gao.gov / new.items / d09438r.pdf .

medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) federal legislative branch advisory commission that evaluates medicare payment policy , including medicare's financing of physician training .

for all reports , see www.medpac.gov .

relevant reports medpac , "does it cost more to train residents or to replace them ? .

september 2013 , http: / / www.medpac.gov / docs / default - source / contractor - reports / sept13_residents_gme_contractor.pdf ? sfvrsn=0 .

medicare payment advisory commission , graduate medical education financing: focusing on educational priorities , report to the congress: aligning incentives in medicare , washington , dc , june 2010 , chapter 4 , at http: / / www.med http: / / www.medpac.gov / documents / reports / jun10_ch04.pdf ? sfvrsn=0 pac.gov / documents / jun10_entirereport.pdf .

medicare payment advisory commission's june 2009 report to congress: improving incentives in the medicare program , chapter 1 , at http: / / www.medpac.gov / documents / reports / jun09_ch01.pdf ? sfvrsn=0 .

national academy of medicine ( previously institute of medicine ) the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine are private , nonprofit institutions that aim to provide expert advice on pressing domestic and international challenges .

work can be funded by government and non - governmental entities .

for all reports , see http: / / www.nationalacademies.org / .

relevant reports board on health care services , health and medicine division , the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine , graduate medical education outcomes and metrics: proceedings of a workshop , payal martin , mariana zindel , and sharyl nass , rapporteurs ( washington , dc: national academies press , 2018 ) .

committee on the governance and financing of graduate medical education ; board on health care services ; institute of medicine , graduate medical education that meets the nation's health needs , ed .

jill eden , donald berwick , and gail wilensky ( washington , dc: national academies press , 2014 ) .

committee on implementing a national graduate medical education trust fund , division of health care services , institute of medicine , on implementing a national graduate medical education trust fund .

 ( washington , dc: national academies press , 1997 ) .

appendix b. gme program informatio .

