fundamental tax reform is an oft - cited policy priority among legislators , and appeals for tax reform seem to achieve broad support across political parties .

commentary abounds suggesting the current u.s. income tax code is overly complicated , unfair , a drag on the economy , and in need of reform .

disagreements , however , often surface when discussing the specifics of tax reform .

previous legislative debates have focused on changes to the current income tax code , such as changing marginal income tax rates or altering how different types of income are taxed .

although these debates reflect important policy considerations , they focus largely on changes within the current income tax .

alternative discussions around tax reform have suggested fundamentally altering the federal tax base , shifting toward taxing consumption instead of income .

within the current income tax structure , an individual's tax liability is determined as a function of total income .

with a consumption tax , however , an individual's tax liability would be determined by total expenditures on goods and services .

income not spent on goods or services , or "savings," would not be taxed .

consumption taxes can take many different forms — which differ in when the tax is collected , how the tax is calculated , and who is responsible for remitting the tax — but they all share the common tax base of consumption .

common consumption tax designs include a value added tax ( vat ) , a national sales tax ( nst ) , and a consumed - income tax .

consumption taxes are commonplace across the developed world .

among countries in the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , the united states is the only country without a broad - based national - level consumption tax .

however , many states have their own consumption taxes in the form of sales taxes .

in fact , the oecd encourages countries to shift away from income taxes and toward consumption taxes .

the european union even requires its member countries to implement a vat .

many of these countries also include personal and corporate income taxes alongside their vats .

multiple proposals have been introduced in the 114 th congress to shift revenue collection away from income and toward consumption .

h.r .

25 and its companion legislation in the senate , s. 155 , would replace the income tax with a national retail sales tax , often referred to as a "fair tax. .

h.r .

1040 would offer taxpayers the ability to opt into a consumed - income tax .

this report will provide a survey of consumption taxes and their basic structures , including the vat , the nst , and the consumed - income tax ( also known as a cash - flow tax ) .

after an overview of these tax structures , the report will discuss the effects of consumption taxes on economic efficiency , the distribution of the tax burden , and tax administration .

in order to provide goods and services , a government must raise revenue .

generally there are three tax bases from which governments can raise this revenue directly from individuals: income , wages , and consumption .

the united states implements taxes on all three of these bases .

the first tax base , income , includes all income from both labor and capital ( eg , wages and interest on investments ) .

in the united states , income is taxed through a federal income tax , which applies differential tax rates on income from labor and capital .

the second tax base , wages , includes all income that results from labor .

the payroll tax , which in part funds the social security program , is a type of wage tax .

the third tax base , consumption , includes all money spent on goods and services .

a number of narrow consumption taxes exist at the federal level , such as the gasoline excise tax .

broader consumption taxes are popular at the state level in the form of sales taxes .

state sales taxes are a commonplace consumption tax in the united states .

there are differences , however , across states regarding the base to which state sales taxes are applied .

for example , many state sales taxes exempt certain necessities from their sales tax base , such as certain medicines under virginia's state sales tax .

a broad and comprehensive consumption tax could be applied to all money spent on goods and services for final consumption .

examples of broader consumption taxes can be found in europe , where many countries implement national - level consumption taxes referred to as value added taxes ( vats ) .

these taxes generally do not have as many exemptions as consumption taxes in the united states , and therefore have a broader tax base .

a broader tax base , other things equal , allows more revenue to be collected with lower tax rates .

a consumption and income tax with broad bases can be similar depending on an individual's saving behavior .

an individual who saves no money at all would experience no difference between an income and a consumption tax .

without savings , consumption is equal to income .

a consumption tax distinguishes itself from an income tax when taxpayers save a portion of their income .

for example , under a consumption tax , a taxpayer who makes $100,000 and saves $10,000 a year would only pay taxes on the $90,000 that was spent on goods and services .

however , under an income tax the same taxpayer would pay taxes on the full $100,000 , whether it was saved or spent .

proponents of a consumption tax argue that by allowing savings to be carried forward tax - free , taxpayers will choose to save more of their income .

economic theory suggests that with a higher level of savings , the productivity of the economy could increase and improve living standards in the long run .

the potential economic effects of switching from an income tax system to a consumption tax system are discussed further below ( see the " alternative tax bases: economic considerations " section ) .

taxes allow governments to provide desired goods and services for their citizens ; however , taxes also tend to distort individual economic decisionmaking .

in a perfectly competitive market , it is expected that individuals and businesses will decide to spend their money and time in the most valuable manner possible , resulting in the most efficient economy possible .

taxes distort these decisions by interfering with prices .

beginning the policy discussion with the understanding that taxes generally impede economic efficiency , the goal is then to design a tax structure that minimizes distortions , allowing the market to operate as efficiently as possible .

it is important to note that a "perfectly competitive market" is a purely theoretical concept in economics , which requires several very strict assumptions to achieve economic efficiency .

for a perfectly competitive market to function according to economic theory , the market must consist of many buyers and sellers such that no individual can exert market influence independently , firms can freely enter or exit the market ( i.e. , there are no barriers to entering a market ) , the good being sold by producers is homogenous , and buyers and sellers have access to all information related to their economic decisions .

few markets , if any , achieve all of these characteristics .

there are also situations where a tax , or subsidy , can improve economic efficiency , by correcting for a market failure .

market failures can occur for a number of reasons , but result in an inefficient allocation of resources , either producing too little or too much of a good than the optimal quantity .

for example , the current income tax code contains a number of tax benefits to support education .

education generates positive externalities , as there are benefits to society that individuals do not consider when making education consumption choices .

thus , absent intervention , markets would tend to result in an allocation of resources for education that is below socially optimal levels .

taxes are thought to introduce distortions into individual work decisions and saving decisions , and impact the performance of the economy overall .

replacing the federal income tax with a consumption tax has been offered as a means to reduce distortions caused by taxation within the economy .

the following sections will discuss the potential impact and relative merits of consumption taxes compared to income taxes with respect to impacts on work choices , savings , and the economy .

in addition to considerations of economic efficiency , policymakers often consider how the tax burden is distributed when crafting tax policy .

the following discussion will compare some of the potential distributional implications of transitioning from an income tax to a consumption tax .

it is important to note that the following sections examine the impact of a revenue - neutral switch from a stylized income tax to a stylized consumption tax , and not the current income tax as implemented in the united states .

the discussion is complicated because the distributional implications of a tax structure can be changed by altering specific parts of the tax .

for example , under an income tax the first $10,000 earned could be exempted , thereby increasing the progressivity of the tax .

similarly , under a consumption tax certain staple goods , such as groceries , could be exempted , which would make the tax more progressive .

to simplify the discussion , this section will consider a pure income and a pure consumption tax structure , both with a flat 20% tax rate and similarly sized tax bases .

proponents of a consumption tax often tout the potential for increased simplicity .

although a consumption - based tax could be designed to be very simple , a consumption - based tax is not inherently simpler than an income - based tax .

an income - based tax could also be designed to be simpler and more manageable than the current income tax code .

the complexity of the current tax code is not a result of using income as the tax base , but rather the political process and the gradual additions and revisions to the tax code .

while complexity is not necessarily inherent to either of these tax bases , consumption or income , limited evidence shows that some consumption - based taxes tend to have lower administrative costs .

for example , european countries with vats have average administrative costs of 3 to 5 cents per dollar collected in tax revenue , compared with 13 cents per dollar in the united states .

another study found that vat administration costs in the united kingdom were estimated to be 0.55% of revenue collected , compared with 1.27% in the united states for the federal income tax .

as discussed earlier , most european countries have introduced vats to supplement their income taxes .

if the united states were to follow this example , administrative costs associated would likely increase , as a new or expanded agency would be required to administer the new consumption tax .

with the implementation of a vat or nst , certain decisions around monetary policy could have significant impacts on either wages or the consumer price level .

under a vat or nst , the relative price of consumer goods and services would necessarily increase with respect to production costs and wages as the new tax is applied to goods and services .

because the price increase is relative to production costs and wages , assuming production costs cannot be lowered , the relative increase in prices can be achieved either by price increases or wage decreases .

whether prices or wages are impacted depends on "the institutions of wage - and price - setting and on monetary policy. .

policy analysts generally believe that a one - time increase in consumer prices would be accommodated , in part because workers are reluctant to accept lower wages and many workers could leave their jobs if wages were lowered .

additionally , if inflation expectations remain well - anchored , a one - time price adjustment might not lead to any subsequent changes in inflation , in which case monetary policy would not need to be modified .

state tax codes and the federal tax code interact in a number of ways , which could complicate the implementation of a broad consumption tax in the united states .

as discussed earlier , a number of states have consumption taxes in the form of retail sales taxes .

if the federal government were to implement a broad - based consumption tax as well , states could object that the federal government is encroaching on their tax base .

additional implementation hurdles arise due to the inconsistent tax bases across states .

many states have exempted certain items and entities from their sales tax .

with the implementation of a consumption tax , such as the nst , businesses would have to keep track of two separate lists of taxable items based on the federal tax code and their home state tax code .

businesses would be tasked with managing a tax structure in which either one , both , or neither tax is applied to certain items at the point of sale .

this sort of added complexity reduces the administrative efficiency gains that could be achieved under a consumption tax .

however , under the current income tax structure similar complexity exists due to alternative income tax deductions available at the state and federal level .

both income - and consumption - based taxes are countercyclical to the business cycle .

under a progressive income tax , as the economy expands and individuals' incomes grow , individuals' tax burdens also grow , which some believe has a stabilizing effect on the economy .

similarly , under a consumption tax , as the economy expands , individual demand for goods grows , which will increase individuals' tax burdens and decrease demand .

it is a matter of debate whether countercyclical tax policy helps promote stability of the business cycle or potentially leads to further destabilization of the business cycle .

