widespread drought is a recurring phenomenon for much of the country , and is especially acute for the we st , where drought conditions such as low water supplies and soil moisture are prevalent .

several western states , including california , oregon , nevada , washington , and portions of montana and idaho are experiencing extreme — and in some cases exceptional — drought conditions ( see figure 1 ) .

congressional interest in addressing water resource management during drought has been heightened due to the effects drought and water constraints have had on agriculture , communities , industry , recreation , natural resources ( eg , rangelands and forests ) , and the environment in general .

although the federal government invested heavily in the development of water supplies in the 20 th century – primarily through construction of irrigation projects in the arid west – the federal government generally defers to state and local governments in surface and groundwater allocation .

federal efforts to prepare for and respond to drought and water supply impacts have thus been inherently limited in recent decades .

to date , federal legislative proposals to address current drought conditions have focused on managing federal water projects , supporting new or expanded drought - related projects and programs ( including those at the state and local levels ) , and mitigating the effects of drought and water management on agricultural production , municipal and industrial water supplies , recreational resources , and the environment .

several bills introduced in the 114 th congress would address these issues .

these bills include s. 176 , s. 1837 , s. 1894 , h.r .

2898 , h.r .

2983 , and h.r .

3045 , among others .

on july 17 , 2015 , h.r .

2898 , the western water and american food security act , passed the house .

for months , certain house and senate members have been negotiating new language to resolve differences in the bills and address concerns by federal and state governments .

a draft house bill was reportedly circulated during discussions on the fy2016 omnibus ; however , no bill was amended nor introduced .

there was also discussion of a new senate bill addressing outstanding issues and state and federal concerns ; however no bill was introduced .

negotiations are reportedly still underway , and new language is expected in the second session of the 114 th congress .

this report summarizes and analyzes several key provisions in h.r .

2898 ( as passed by the house ) and s. 1894 ( as introduced ) .

it includes analysis of provisions specific to california , such as the management of threatened and endangered fish populations in relation to pumping operations of the cvp and swp , as well as provisions that are broader in scope and might have nationwide implications ( eg , water resources financing , permitting issues , project repayment policies , and support for new water storage and water reuse / recycling ) .

this report does not comprehensively analyze each bill , nor does it cover each provision in the bills .

other crs products on h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 and on drought in general are available .

crs report r44180 , drought legislation: comparison of selected provisions in h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

summarizes and compares the provisions in h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 , including many of the provisions that are outside the scope of this report .

more information about drought in california and in general is provided in the following crs reports: crs report r40979 , california drought: hydrological and regulatory water supply issues , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43407 , drought in the united states: causes and current understanding , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; and crs in focus if10196 , drought policy , response , and preparedness , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , drought policy , response , and preparedness , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed .

of the bills in the 114 th congress considered to date , h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 , the california emergency drought relief act of 2015 , have received the most congressional and public attention .

these bills were the focus of a senate energy and natural resources committee hearing on october 8 , 2015 .

both bills contain key elements of proposed legislation in the 113 th congress that was not enacted .

broadly summarizing , both bills contain provisions that focus on water infrastructure and water conveyance in california and some west - wide and national programs that address water management and drought .

some of these provisions would be triggered by drought and water conditions or declarations , and others would result in permanent changes in water management .

further , some provisions in the bills are associated with specified states ( typically the 17 western states , hawaii , and alaska ) , whereas other provisions may have national application .

many provisions of h.r .

2898 have no specified authorization of appropriations ; s. 1894 , by contrast , contains provisions that authorize either funding subject to appropriations or mandatory funding for certain activities .

many provisions in both bills are specific to the projects and programs of the department of the interior's bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) — in particular , management of the central valley project ( cvp ) in california — but others are associated with different federal agencies ( eg , u.s. army corps of engineers [the corps] , u.s. environmental protection agency [epa] ) .

some provisions would amend existing programs and activities , whereas others would authorize new federal programs and activities .

both bills focus on water projects and management during drought , and do not attempt to address the broad suite of drought impacts and policies ( eg , effects on wildfire and agricultural assistance programs ) .

h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 have generated both support and opposition from stakeholders and have raised several questions about their implementation , if passed .

for example , with respect to managing federal water projects in california , both bills would direct managers to maximize water supplies for users while adhering to applicable laws and regulations .

some contend such provisions provide water managers the directive and authority to increase water supplies ; whereas others assert that this provision could lead to long - term negative effects on species .

some controversy is rooted in how the bills address implementation of the federal endangered species act ( esa ; p.l .

93-205 ) , including water management under federal biological opinions ( biops ) designed to protect delta smelt and salmon populations ( see box on page 9 for information on biops ) .

for example , two federal biops currently limit operations of the federal cvp and the california state water project ( swp ) at certain times of the year .

these biops were developed to assess the effects on threatened and endangered species of proposed changes in the coordinated operations of the cvp and swp beginning in 2004 and again in 2008 .

both biops found that the proposed changes in operations , including increased pumping , would likely jeopardize the continued existence of delta smelt and several salmon and other species listed as threatened or endangered under the federal esa .

as a result , both biops include specific actions that limit pumping and call for reservoir releases to protect listed species .

such actions in turn have resulted in reduced water supplies for cvp and swp water users , particularly in wet or above normal water years .

to address cvp and swp management under the biops , both h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 would direct agency officials to maximize water supplies , consistent with applicable laws and regulations ; however , h.r .

2898 differs from s. 1894 in that it would alter the implementation of portions of federal biops for delta smelt and salmon .

for example , h.r .

2898 includes a new definition or standard for determining the status of listed species and would require higher levels of pumping than currently allowed , unless agency officials showed that the increased levels would be harmful to the long - term health of the species .

h.r .

2898 also would direct agency officials to pump at the highest levels allowable under existing biops for longer periods .

supporters of h.r .

2898 contend that such changes would improve the flexibility and responsiveness of the management and operations of the cvp and swp and could potentially make available additional water to users facing curtailed allocations .

opponents contend it could have detrimental effects on species in the short and long term , and may actually limit agency flexibility .

s. 1894 also directs agency officials to increase pumping at certain times by pumping at the highest range allowable under existing biops , but it does not include a new standard for determining the effects of such pumping on species .

s. 1894 also is explicit in refraining from altering existing environmental laws .

the bills contain several similar provisions such as addressing nonnative species , expediting environmental reviews , and increasing science and data collection on listed species , among others .

the bills differ in their approaches to other policy areas , such as constructing new surface water storage projects and providing support for alternative water supplies , among other things .

at the october 2015 senate energy and natural resources committee hearing , the administration expressed concerns with several provisions in h.r .

2898 and noted several concerns with s. 1894 .

however , in speaking on both bills , the administration disagreed "with the idea that new legislation will salvage more water than the operators on the ground are wringing from the system every day. .

another question that has been raised is the potential value or effectiveness of each bill providing additional water supplies if a strong el niño produces above normal precipitation this winter .

some stakeholders have noted that provisions in the bills would afford water managers added flexibility to take advantage of high - precipitation events due to a strong el niño - influenced weather pattern .

forecasters have noted that although a strong el niño system could improve water supply conditions , such an event is unlikely to end the current drought .

as california experiences its fourth year of drought and the southwest endures more than a decade of drought conditions , western water management likely will remain an issue before congress .

as a result , elements from one or both of these bills ( as well as from other bills ) likely will receive continued attention from congress .

h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 address drought - related water issues specific to california , which is among the states experiencing the worst of the current drought .

many of these provisions focus on the cvp , which is one of the largest and most complex water resources projects built and operated by reclamation , part of the department of the interior ( doi ) .

 ( see figure 2 . ) .

the project spans hundreds of miles and delivers water stored in reservoirs to farms and cities throughout california's central valley .

the cvp delivers water to contractors throughout the state , largely serving agricultural water contractors as well as some municipal and industrial ( m&i ) contractors .

a somewhat parallel state system , the california state water project ( swp ) , serves primarily m&i water users and some agricultural users .

it is operated in coordination with the cvp .

in order to move water through the cvp and swp , extensive pumping is required .

water deliveries and pumping within the cvp and swp are often controversial for a number of reasons .

legislation addressing the management of the cvp and swp is particularly controversial because the coordinated operation and management of these projects involves a complex web of federal and state law — including state water rights priorities ; water delivery contracts ; federal , state , and local agency policies ; and multiagency agreements .

achieving consensus on such legislation is often difficult because a change in any of these factors can affect several parties and interests , including potentially altering the timing or amount of water made available to such parties or the underlying ecosystem .

as a result , h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 have raised a number of questions among interested stakeholders .

for example , if water pumped from the sacramento and san joaquin rivers' delta ( delta ) is directed to be increased beyond the status quo , where will that increased water come from and what effect might it have on other water users , various species , or in - delta water quality ? .

similarly , if involuntary reductions to specified cvp and swp users are not allowed for certain specified water users ( eg , contractors , or those in certain watersheds as in h.r .

2898 ) , could such prohibition result in reduced water supplies or a change in the timing of water available to other water users who are not specified ? .

how would such directions be reconciled with requirements that the cvp be operated in conformity with state water law and under the standard that there shall be "no redirected water supply or fiscal impacts ? .

how can such impacts be avoided , and , if they cannot , who might bear responsibility or pay for unavoidable costs ? .

lastly , what would be the implications of constructing the state waterfix project based on the proposed provisions ? .

this section discusses proposed legislative changes that would address the drought in california , including changes specific to the cvp and swp , and those that would affect other projects and areas .

the topics that are discussed include: management of fish populations and water flows , including definitions in h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 , managing delta smelt under h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 , managing salmon under h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 , operational flexibility during drought , and flexibility for project operations to manage omr flows during high - water events ; water transfers ; water rights protections and existing obligations ; and new storage project studies in california .

this section discusses broader or crosscutting issues for congress that the bills pose .

some of these issues have been featured prominently in the debate over the two bills .

h.r .

2898 and s. 1894 contain provisions that could alter the implementation of the esa and , in some cases , potentially set a precedent for how federal agencies address endangered and threatened species listed under the esa .

this section summarizes some of these provisions and discusses their potential implications for the esa .

the broader implication for esa under both bills is that agencies would be managing water supplies to the maximum extent possible ( according to varying standards set in each bill ) for users .

it could be interpreted that water needs for delta smelt and salmon will just be met according to parameters set in the bills .

this approach to addressing the resource needs of species listed under esa could set a precedent for how other listed species are managed with respect to limited resources .

this perspective is tempered by proponents of the bills who state that these provisions would support the implementation of esa and that neither bill would amend esa .

both bills contain provisions that could limit the discretion of a federal agency to manage water resources to conserve and recover listed species under the esa .

for example , the bills would authorize the approval of projects and activities that aim to maximize water supplies while remaining consistent with existing laws and regulations .

this provision might be interpreted to limit agencies' discretion when operating the cvp by directing them to maximize water supplies .

this provision could make anticipating and responding to the water needs of species , especially in anticipation of long - term effects on the species , a challenge for federal agencies managing water .

for example , maximizing water supplies in the present could have future consequences for species that might not be detected immediately or cannot be addressed before the effects on the population are realized .

furthermore , maximizing water supplies for users might not allow for a buffer to guard against unforeseen environmental circumstances that could affect listed species .

this possibility could be countered , in part , by real - time monitoring of species populations , which would be authorized in both bills .

both bills would authorize an increase in data collection and monitoring of delta smelt and salmon , which would likely improve the scientific understanding of how water operations affect these species .

h.r .

2898 would authorize several activities to increase the real - time monitoring of listed species and measure the effects of water operations on the species' populations .

in several cases , the data from these activities could be used to alter water operations to increase either water for users or water for species .

proponents of these provisions contend that they will increase scientific support and transparency for water operations .

although critical of several provisions in h.r .

2898 regarding modifications to the implementation of the biops , doi stated that provisions would improve data gathering , monitoring , and scientific analyses that would benefit real - time monitoring and provide a framework for discussion .

this could support adaptive management efforts to manage fish in the delta , and reflect efforts to incorporate adaptive management in other ecosystems where endangered species are located ( eg , the lower colorado river ) .

provisions under h.r .

2898 that would alter some aspects of the delta smelt biop and change the implementation of the salmon biop have caused some to contend that h.r .

2898 , if passed , would set a new precedent for how esa is implemented , put listed species in peril , and politicize the implementation of esa .

others note that h.r .

2898 would create conflicting directives because some sections would be implemented in a manner consistent with esa and other sections would direct implementation of operations beyond those allowed under current esa biops ( eg , specifying pumping rates and other activities not currently allowed ) , potentially causing harm to listed species .

these contentions could have nationwide implications for how species are treated under biops .

for example , some might refer to h.r .

2898 , if passed , as a precedent for proposing exceptions to biops created under esa guidelines on a species - by - species basis .

proponents of h.r .

2898 contend that provisions addressing delta smelt and salmon would be implemented within the framework of the existing biops .

further , they assert that h.r .

2898 would not amend esa .

other examples of provisions in h.r .

2898 that would alter the implementation of the biops include creating a new standard for measuring the effects of projects and activities on listed species , not adhering to seasonally based triggers mandating variable flow rates for salmon under the rpas of the salmon biop , and authorizing a new method to calculate incidental take for delta smelt .

supporters of the bill contend that changes proposed under h.r .

2898 are needed to update the biops with new data , science , and increased monitoring to maximize water supplies for users .

critics argue that these changes would override existing biops and increase stress on fish populations that have been steadily declining in the last few years .

they also claim that these provisions could have broad implications for other listed species .

the overall approach to addressing the needs of delta smelt and salmon under h.r .

2898 would contrast with the approach taken by the delta smelt and salmon biops .

under the current biops , the consultation process determines if a project will affect the species or its critical habitat .

if the project will do so , the secretary will suggest reasonable and prudent alternatives that would not jeopardize the continued existence of the species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of its habitat .

h.r .

2898 would set a baseline level for flows to maximize water supplies to cvp and swp water contractors and then work from that baseline to determine if the flows are harming listed species .

this method would require changing flow parameters under the biops and creating a new approach to measuring the effects of flows on species .

this approach could be interpreted as shifting the responsibility for determining the effects of water operations on species to water managers on a continual basis , rather than relying on analyses done in preparation of the biops , which could be based on outdated science .

this shift would allow for more operational flexibility for water supply purposes and would increase the data collected on species that could be considered for setting operations .

proponents of this approach state that these proposed changes are within the framework of the existing biops .

critics of this approach state that the baseline level of flows proposed under h.r .

2898 is higher than that mandated under the biops and could have unknown short - and long - term environmental consequences for species .

further , they contend that this approach could create situations in which the effect of water flows on species might not be realized until after the species has been harmed .

doi also has stated that the approach proposed under h.r .

2898 would include specific operations that appear to be inconsistent with esa and result in conditions that would be detrimental to species .

the objective of both bills appears to be to increase water deliveries and reliability for water contractors , in particular water users south of the delta .

neither bill contains assurances for delivering a certain amount of water or quantifies an amount of additional water to be generated by activities authorized in the bill .

based on this uncertainty , some may question how much more water might be delivered to users by each bill , if enacted .

both bills contain broad language that would direct agencies to maximize water supplies .

it is uncertain how much water could be delivered to users from specified projects authorized under each bill and other existing projects .

both bills would provide federal agencies with broad discretion to conduct operations that would maximize water use while still adhering to state and federal laws and regulations .

it is unclear how agencies would provide the "maximum quantity of water supplies possible" to cvp and other contractors and , relatedly , how they would make such a determination consistent with laws and regulations .

implementation of the maximizing water supplies provision could be difficult and possibly contentious .

for example , agencies and water users may not agree that particular actions would provide maximum water quantities .

notably , under the status quo , some observers already believe that the agencies are maximizing water supplies to the detriment of species , whereas others contend that the agencies are not doing enough to maximize water supplies within the parameters of existing laws and regulations .

some may question if the actions that would result from these bills and the broad direction to maximize water supplies for users might have unintended or long - term consequences for species and ecosystem factors in the bay - delta .

some contend that if managers were required to maximize water supplies in implementing projects , their discretionary flexibility to make decisions would be narrower .

therefore , maximizing water supplies would aim to benefit water users under drought conditions ; however the long - term effects of these actions on other factors , such as species viability , recreation , and water quality would be unclear .

a major issue underlying many of the recent proposals to alleviate the effects of drought involves the role of the federal government .

questions related to the federal role may focus on the prominence and substance of the federal role when it comes to drought and related water resources challenges .

to date , outside of federal agricultural assistance programs , much of the work on drought preparedness and response has occurred at the state and local level ; thus , major alterations to this division of responsibility could entail a significant policy change .

some have proposed that such a change is warranted .

they argue that the federal government should focus on strengthening its drought - related activities in specific areas , such as by encouraging alternative water supplies by investing in new title xvi water reuse and recycling projects or by increasing capital investments in existing or new federal water infrastructure .

others see the federal role as supporting and refining ongoing state investments , such as through planning and technical assistance for major state projects .

still others argue that the federal government's role should be reduced or eliminated .

this approach appears to prevail in several of the provisions in h.r .

2898 , which would increase the nonfederal role in permitting and potentially would transfer some projects to the state .

finally , some argue that various "traditional" federal roles should be fundamentally altered .

for example , section 312 of s. 1894 would authorize support to a wide range of projects but would set a nonfederal cost share of 75% for nonfederal projects and 50% for federal projects .

such a requirement would be in notable contrast to past policies , in which the federal government has funded 100% of the construction costs for federally authorized water projects but has required that project beneficiaries repay their shares of the federal investment for these projects over 50-year periods ( sometimes without interest ) .

coordination among federal and state governments ( as well as other interests ) also may be of interest to congress .

for example , coordinated operations between the federal and state governments are extremely important in determining water deliveries in california's cvp , as well as in other drought - stricken areas .

issues associated with addressing federal , state , and local coordination , including the extent to which the federal government can or should defer to state and local laws and decisions , may receive consideration in drought - related legislation .

the federal government also has the ability to directly or indirectly affect drought - related decisionmaking by authorizing governance structures and institutional feedback mechanisms under which some or all stakeholders have input to these matters .

issues related to funding , including the magnitude and type of federal funding to be provided for drought - related and water provisions and whether this funding must be offset or repaid , also may be a consideration for congress .

the two bills provide examples of the variety of potential approaches to funding .

h.r .

2898 would authorize only limited new discretionary appropriations , and those would be derived from half of the additional repayment revenues that would accrue to the treasury under other provisions authorized in the bill ( and thus would offset in the short term ) .

this funding would need to be repaid by project beneficiaries in accordance with laws governing reclamation projects .

for its part , s. 1894 would authorize significant new discretionary and mandatory funding in various programmatic areas ; some of these funds would not have to be repaid .

additionally , a portion of the discretionary funding that would be authorized under that legislation would provide partial federal credit support for some projects , which would have to be repaid but would allow for the leveraging of significant federal funds at relatively low interest rates .

another funding question may be the extent to which nonfederal entities can contribute or accelerate funding for federal studies and projects by funding these efforts themselves .

in many cases , acceptance of funds for these purposes would require additional congressional authority .

as congress considers legislative proposals associated with drought and related water infrastructure management and supply in drought - affected areas , discussion may arise regarding the geographic scope of federal actions and assistance .

although some of the recent legislative proposals have focused on those states and federal projects that are currently experiencing or have recently experienced severe drought conditions , other provisions apply throughout the west and a few are national in scope .

a broad policy question is whether the issue that congress is addressing is the current western drought , drought in arid regions , drought in any part of the united states , or gaps in water supply and demand .

much of the recent legislation has focused on attempting to augment the supply of water during drought .

as congress considers legislative options and proposals for addressing water issues associated with drought , numerous other factors and forces may influence the future consequences of drought .

many of these are related to demographic , development , and water demand trends and actions of state , local , and private entities .

that is , the impacts of the next drought will be shaped by the surface water and groundwater supplies that are available and how they are managed before and during the drought ; how agricultural , municipal , and industrial consumers use water ; the incentives and ability to increase water efficiency and conservation ; and the types of assistance available to prepare for and mitigate the economic , social , and environmental consequences of drought .

therefore , discussions of the extent to which federal assistance and programs are promoting drought preparedness and mitigation may expand the legislative debate beyond the augmentation of water supply and operations of federal water infrastructure .

