the united states recognized an independent nepal in 1947 and established diplomatic ties in 1948 .

relations between the two nations are described by the state department as friendly .

u.s. policy objectives toward nepal center on helping it build a peaceful , prosperous and democratic society .

the united states works with nepal to promote political and economic development , decrease the country's dependence on humanitarian assistance , and increase its ability to make positive contributions to regional security and the broader global community .

religion has long been an important factor for nepal's inhabitants , where 81% of the population is hindu and 9% is buddhist .

nepali is the official language , though there are over 100 regional and indigenous languages spoken in nepal .

the main geographic division in the country is between the low - lying and agriculturally productive terai region and the more mountainous parts of the country .

never colonized , nepal was almost totally isolated until the early 1950s .

a transition from strict rule by the king to constitutional monarchy began in 1959 , when then - king mahendra issued a new constitution and held the country's first democratic elections .

in 1960 , however , the king declared the parliamentary system a failure , dismissed the fledgling government , suspended the constitution , and established a party - less system of rule under the monarchy .

although officially banned , political parties continued to operate and to agitate for a return to constitutional democracy .

in february 1990 , student groups and the major political parties launched the movement for the restoration of democracy .

the centrist nepali congress ( nc ) party joined with the leftist parties to hold peaceful demonstrations in nepal's urban centers .

two months later , after more than 50 people were killed when police fired on a crowd of demonstrators , then - king birendra turned power over to an interim government .

this government drafted a constitution in november 1990 , establishing nepal as a parliamentary democracy with a constitutional monarch as head of state .

the king at that time retained limited powers , including the right to declare a state of emergency with the approval of a two - thirds majority of parliament .

in 1996 , the leaders of the underground communist party of nepal maoist ( cpn - m ) launched a "people's war" in the mid - western region of nepal , with the aim of replacing the constitutional monarchy with a one - party communist regime .

the uprising appears to have been fueled by widespread perceptions of government corruption and failure to improve the quality of life of citizens , including providing access to cultivable land .

the maoists ran a parallel government , established their own tax system , burned land records , and redistributed seized property and food to the poor in 45 districts .

the insurgency was waged in part through torture , killings , and bombings targeting police , the military , and public officials .

a number of bank robberies , combined with "revolutionary tax" revenue , made the nepali maoists one of the wealthiest rebel groups in asia .

the kathmandu government faced additional turmoil in june 2001 , when crown prince dipendra shot and killed his parents , king birendra and queen aishwarya ; seven other members of the royal family ; and himself , reportedly after a disagreement over whom he should marry .

this incident did much to undermine the legitimacy of the monarchy .

king gyanendra , the former king's brother , was crowned on june 4 , 2001 , and he appointed a commission to investigate the assassinations .

by mid - june , the country began returning to normal following rioting and widespread refusal to believe official accounts of the massacre .

in july 2001 , then - prime minister girija prasad koirala stepped down amid fears of continuing instability and his government's failure to deal with the growing maoist insurgency .

he was replaced by nc leader sher bahadur deuba , who then became the head of nepal's 11 th government in as many years .

nepal's economy faces the twin challenge of rebuilding after the april 2015 earthquake while also dealing with the economic impact of the political unrest in the terai that is limiting cross - border trade with india .

the situation in the terai could further undermine economic growth in 2015 .

real gdp growth is expected to slow from 5.4% in 2014 to 3.4% in 2015 .

many have attributed this to the earthquake of april 2015 .

the fuel shortage brought on by strife in the terai is the most pressing aspect of the breakdown in cross - border trade with india .

new arrangements with china appear set to alleviate some of nepal's dependence on india as a source of fuel imports .

some observers have speculated that the trade blockade could lead to a negative economic growth rate for nepal .

nepal has not had a negative economic growth rate since 1982 .

rebuilding damaged and destroyed housing and infrastructure caused by the earthquake will likely take years .

observers believe that future economic growth will be modestly stimulated by government spending on reconstruction .

according to the asian development bank , the total cost of recovery from the earthquake is estimated at $7.1 billion , equal to approximately one - third of nepal's gdp .

development partners have pledged $4 billion in grants and loans over five years .

nepal's economy is heavily dependent on agriculture .

agriculture employs 75% of the country's work force .

agriculture , forestry , and fisheries account for 31.7% of gdp by sector of origin while services account for 53.2% and industry 15.1% .

the united states is one of nepal's key trade partners .

india ( 59.7% ) , the united states ( 8.6% ) , china ( 4.6% ) , and germany ( 3.5% ) are the key destinations for nepal's exports while india ( 57% ) and china ( 29.5% ) are the main sources of nepal's imports .

the united states and nepal have signed a trade and investment framework agreement to enhance bilateral trade and investment .

"u.s. exports to nepal include agricultural products , aircraft parts , optic and medical instruments and machinery. .

there are a number of human rights concerns about nepal .

ongoing political turmoil has delayed the establishment of the national human rights commission and the truth and reconciliation and disappearance commissions .

discrimination based on caste and ethnicity remains , as do problems with poor prisons , and the courts reportedly remained vulnerable to political pressure , bribery , and intimidation .

there were also restrictions on the freedom of assembly and harassment of the media .

corruption reportedly remains widespread , and the freedoms of refugees are limited .

it is also reported that "the government made little progress in combating forced and bonded labor , which persisted despite laws banning the practice. .

nepal can be divided ecologically into the lowland terai , the intermediate hill , and mountainous himalaya regions .

nepal's "diversity of eco - climatalogical conditions ... is mainly due to its enormous altitudinal gradient , its location at the interface of the tibetan plateau and the plains of northern india , and its highly dissected mountain terrain. .

nepal is heavily reliant on its natural resources .

nepal is a landlocked geopolitical buffer state , like nearby bhutan , that is situated between two asian giants .

india and china fought a border war in 1962 in the himalayan mountains near nepal , which led to ongoing territorial disputes between those two nations .

tensions along the india - china border have mounted from time to time with concomitant troop buildups .

nepal's reliance on these two huge neighbors leads it to seek amicable relations with both , though trade , religious , and cultural ties with india have historically been closer .

