recent data breaches at major u.s. retailers have placed a spotlight on concerns about the security of personal information stored in electronic form by corporations and other private entities .

a data breach occurs when data containing sensitive personal information is lost , stolen , or accessed in an unauthorized manner , thereby causing a potential compromise of the confidentiality of the data .

existing federal law imposes security and breach notification requirements on specific industries or types of data .

for example , certain health information is subject to requirements under the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) and the health information technology for economic and clinical health act ( hitech act ) , while certain financial institutions are subject to requirements under the gramm - leach - bliley act ( glb ) .

additionally , 47 states , the district of columbia ( d.c. ) , and three territories have enacted laws requiring breach notification , while at least 12 states have enacted data security laws .

several data security and breach notification bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress , which broadly would impose security and notification requirements on businesses regardless of industry sector , with limited exceptions .

many of the current proposals would leave existing federal requirements in place and exempt institutions and / or data covered by those federal laws from a new regulatory scheme .

however , some bills would also propose to supersede existing state laws and prevent states from acting in this area , thereby creating a uniform federal standard throughout the country .

during consideration of proposed bills , two prominent legal issues have arisen .

first , to what extent would federal legislation preempt state and local actions ( including statutes , regulations , and / or the ability to bring legal claims ) regarding data security and breach notification ? .

second , what effect would such legislation have on the existing authority of the federal trade commission ( ftc ) and the federal communications commission ( fcc ) to bring enforcement actions related to data security and breach notification ? .

this report will discuss these two issues , starting with an examination of the supreme court's precedent regarding federal preemption .

it will then analyze how these preemption principles might be applied by a reviewing court seeking to determine the preemptive effect of different federal proposals .

next , it will examine the existing jurisdiction and enforcement authority of the ftc and the fcc with regard to data security and breach notification as applied to telecommunications providers and how these agencies' responsibilities might be altered by proposed legislation .

several bills relating to data security and breach notification have been introduced in the 114 th congress .

the bills take different approaches to imposing data security requirements on covered entities , if at all .

for example , some bills establish specific criteria required for a covered entity's data security program , including elements such as design , risk assessment and management , and employee training .

other bills empower the ftc to write rules regarding data security , and require the ftc to address certain topics in those rules .

still others simply state that covered entities must employ reasonable security measures and practices , without identifying what those measures and practices must be .

in general , a violation of the data security requirements or standards would be considered to be an unfair or deceptive act or practice , enforceable by the ftc .

regarding notification , generally , a covered entity is required to provide notice when personal information contained in electronic data that it owns or possesses is either ( 1 ) accessed or acquired or ( 2 ) accessed and acquired , without authorization .

each bill defines what entities are covered and what constitutes personal information .

notification must usually be provided to residents and / or citizens of the united states as well as to the ftc and , in some cases , credit reporting agencies .

each bill establishes a deadline for notification , either within a certain number of days ( such as 30 or 45 days ) or as "expediently as possible and without unreasonable delay" after discovering the breach .

delayed notification is required if notice would jeopardize certain kinds of law enforcement investigations or national security .

each bill defines the required form of notification , which may include written notice by mail or notice by email , when certain conditions are met .

in certain circumstances , substitute notification through a posting on a website or publication may be an acceptable replacement for individual notification .

the content of the notification includes such elements as the kind of personal information that has been breached , a phone number to contact for further information , and , potentially , information about the availability of free credit reporting services .

however , in most cases , if the covered entity determines that the breach poses no reasonable risk of identity theft , fraud , or other unlawful conduct , then notification is not required .

notification requirements may also be waived if the entity is already required to provide notice under an existing federal law , such as hipaa or glb .

violations of the notice requirements would typically be classified as unfair or deceptive acts or practices , which would be enforced by the ftc under existing regulations .

some bills would specifically empower the ftc to write regulations to implement the notification requirements , while others would not .

along with enforcement by the ftc , some of the proposals allow state attorneys general to enforce violations of the rules that affect people in their state through the filing of civil actions .

some bills contain additional provisions that go beyond security and breach notification and address topics such as data privacy .

additionally , as discussed further below , some bills specifically address the treatment of telecommunications common carriers , while others are silent on the subject .

the details of each bill differ and close inspection of each provision and definition is required to determine its specific effect .

forty - seven states , d.c. , guam , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands have enacted legislation requiring businesses to notify affected persons when a data breach occurs .

for example , california law requires that businesses that own or license computerized data that include personal information provide notice of a data breach to residents of california in the "most expedient time possible and without unreasonable delay. .

a breach occurs when such unencrypted data is "acquired by an unauthorized person. .

the required notice may be delayed if a law enforcement agency determines that the notice "will impede a criminal investigation. .

the notice must be written in plain language and provide specific information: the name and contact information of the reporting entity ; the type of personal information involved in the breach ; the approximate date of the breach , if known ; a general description of the "breach incident" ; and , in certain circumstances , information about credit reporting agencies and identity theft prevention .

in addition to notifying individuals whose information is acquired , if the breach affects more than 500 california residents , the entity must also notify the state attorney general .

at least 12 states also have laws specifically addressing data security .

for example , massachusetts has promulgated regulations requiring persons who own or license personal information about a massachusetts resident to "develop , implement , and maintain a comprehensive information security program.... " such a program must be in writing and contain administrative , technical , and physical safeguards that are appropriate based on the size and type of business , available resources , and the amount of stored data .

every program shall complete specific tasks , such as "identifying and assessing reasonably foreseeable internal and external risks to the security , confidentiality , and / or integrity" of data ; developing employee security policies on storage , access , and transportation of records ; and regularly monitoring the program to ensure that it is "operating in a manner reasonably calculated to prevent unauthorized access" to data .

businesses must also conduct an annual review of security measures .

finally , states may have general consumer protection laws that could potentially be used to remedy the harm caused by a data breach .

for example , illinois law makes unlawful "unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices ... in the conduct of any trade or commerce. .

this law includes prohibitions on "deception fraud , false pretense , false promise , misrepresentation or the concealment , suppression , or omission of any material fact , with intent that others rely upon the concealment.... " individuals whose personal information is compromised in a data breach may attempt to use such a consumer protection law to allege that the breached entity's failure to disclose its inadequate security measures amounts to an unfair or deceptive practice in violation of state law .

a major question related to consideration of federal legislation addressing data security and breach notification is whether , and to what extent , the federal law should preempt these existing state laws , thereby displacing state - by - state requirements in favor of a uniform , federal standard for entities covered under the general requirements established in the proposed legislation discussed above .

federal preemption is rooted in the supremacy clause of the u.s. constitution , which states that "[t]he constitution , and the laws of the united states which shall be made in pursuance thereof ; and all treaties made , or which shall be made , under the authority of the united states , shall be the supreme law of the land. .

under the supremacy clause , congress can override any state and local law that falls within congress's legislative authority .

therefore , the legal issue is not whether congress has the ability to preempt state and local laws but rather determining the particular circumstances under which federal law , either explicitly or implicitly , preempts state and local laws .

in answering the question of when preemption occurs , the supreme court has at times emphasized "two cornerstones of [] pre - emption jurisprudence. .

first , "the purpose of congress is the ultimate touchstone in every pre - emption case. .

second , "[i]n all pre - emption cases , and particularly in those in which congress has 'legislated ... in a field which the states have traditionally occupied,' we 'start with the assumption that the historic police powers of the states were not to be superseded by the federal act unless that was the clear and manifest purpose of congress.' .

there are two kinds of federal preemption: express preemption and implied preemption .

another question that has arisen in the debate on federal data security and breach legislation is which federal agency should be responsible for enforcing the new requirements .

the various proposals would primarily task the federal trade commission ( ftc ) with enforcing the new requirements , but take differing approaches as to whether the federal communications commission ( fcc ) should be permitted to retain its existing enforcement authority regarding data security and breach notification for telecommunication providers .

the ftc has broad authority under section 5 of the federal trade commission act ( ftca ) to prohibit "unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce.... " under the statute , an act or practice may be unfair if it "causes or is likely to cause substantial injury to consumers which is not reasonably avoidable by consumers themselves and not outweighed by countervailing benefits to consumers or to competition. .

while the ftc's authority over unfair or deceptive practices is broad , it is not unlimited .

for example , the ftc cannot use this authority to enforce against all "persons , partnerships , or corporations.... " rather , several entities are exempted from the scope of this authority , including banks and savings and loan institutions described in 15 u.s.c .

§ 57a ( f ) ( 3 ) ; federal credit unions described in 15 u.s.c .

§ 57a ( f ) ( 4 ) ; common carriers subject to the communications act of 1934 , as amended ; common carriers subject to subtitle iv of title 49 ; air carriers and foreign air carriers subject to part a of subtitle vii of title 49 ; andpersons , partnerships , or corporations subject to the packers and stockyards act .

therefore , for example , the ftc could not bring an enforcement action alleging an unfair or deceptive act or practice , engaged in as part of its common carrier activities , against a telephone company that is classified as a common carrier by the fcc under the communications act .

the ftc has employed its unfair or deceptive act or practice authority to bring enforcement actions and to seek settlements with companies that experience data breaches .

these actions generally focus on the allegedly deceptive nature of the claims companies make about the security provided for consumers' data and / or the company's failure to reasonably safeguard consumer data that leads to a breach .

for more information on the ftc's use of this authority in the data security and breach context , see crs report r43723 , the federal trade commission's regulation of data security under its unfair or deceptive acts or practices ( udap ) authority , by [author name scrubbed] .

while telecommunications common carriers are not subject to the ftc's unfair or deceptive acts or practices authority , they are required to follow fcc rules relating to data security and breach notification .

section 222 of the communications act establishes a duty for common carriers "to protect the confidentiality of proprietary information of... customers.... " furthermore , under section 201 of the communications act , common carriers must ensure that all "charges , practices , classifications , and regulations" relating to telecommunications service are just and reasonable , which the fcc has interpreted as applying to carriers' practices of protecting customers' personally identifiable information .

additionally , sections 631 and 338 ( i ) of the communications act establish more limited security rights for subscribers of cable and satellite television providers , as discussed below .

section 201 ( b ) and 222 requirements apply to entities that are classified as common carriers under title ii of the communications act , which includes traditional telecommunications common carriers ( such as telephone companies ) .

following the fcc's 2015 open internet order , in which the commission reclassified broadband internet access service providers ( bias or internet service providers ) as title ii common carriers , these sections also apply to those entities , provided that the fcc's reclassification decision survives legal challenge .

for more information on the 2015 open internet order , see crs report r43971 , net neutrality: selected legal issues raised by the fcc's 2015 open internet order , by [author name scrubbed] .

common carriers are subject to obligations derived from section 222 of the communications act , which requires them to guard the confidentiality of customer proprietary network information ( cpni ) and ensure that it is not disclosed to third parties without customer approval or as required by law .

cpni is defined as ( a ) information that relates to the quantity , technical configuration , type , destination , location , and amount of use of a telecommunications service subscribed to by any customer of a telecommunications carrier , and that is made available to the carrier by the customer solely by virtue of the carrier - customer relationship ; and ( b ) information contained in the bills pertaining to telephone exchange service or telephone toll service received by a customer of a carrier ; except that such term does not include subscriber list information .

it includes such information as call records , location information , features of a customer's service , and billing records , among other types of data .

the fcc has issued regulations explaining common carriers' duties to protect cpni .

these regulations define when a carrier is permitted to use and / or share cpni with other entities without a customer's approval and when a carrier can only use and / or share cpni subject to a customer's opt - in or opt - out approval .

carriers are also required to notify law enforcement and customers when a breach of cpni occurs .

in its open internet order , the fcc specifically declined to forbear from applying section 222 to internet service providers , stating: we find that forbearance from the application of section 222 with respect to broadband internet access service is not in the public interest... and that section 222 remains necessary for the protection of consumers.. .

the commission has emphasized that '[c]onsumers' privacy needs are no less important when consumers communicate over and use broadband internet access than when they rely on [telephone] services. .

while the statutory requirements of section 222 apply to internet service providers , the fcc did choose to forbear from applying its cpni rules to internet service providers .

the commission noted that the rules would not necessarily "be well suited to broadband internet access service" since "certain of those rules appear more focused on concerns that have been associated with voice service ... [and] do not address many of the types of sensitive information to which a provider of broadband internet access service is likely to have access. .

however , the commission stressed that internet service providers must still comply with the text of the statutory provisions in section 222 .

the fcc has also relied on its section 201 ( b ) authority to bring enforcement actions against common carriers that suffer data breaches .

section 201 ( b ) states that common carrier "charges , practices , classifications , and regulations" must be just and reasonable .

for example , in 2015 , the fcc entered into a consent decree with at&t following an investigation into the company's alleged failure to protect the confidentiality of cpni that led to a data breach .

the fcc declared that at&t's "failure to reasonably secure" cpni not only violated its duties under section 222 but "also constitute[d] an unjust and unreasonable practice in violation of the [communications] act. .

it referenced an earlier enforcement action in which the fcc determined that a "failure to protect and secure" customers' personally identifiable information , cpni , and other kinds of data , was an unjust and unreasonable practice in violation of section 201 ( b ) .

this failure was evidenced in part by the fact that the carrier did not encrypt any of its customers' data that was stored on servers accessible over the public internet .

along with section 222 , section 201 ( b ) 's reasonableness requirement appears to be another tool the fcc can use to hold carriers accountable for certain data security and breach failures .

several statutory provisions also impose data security requirements on cable and satellite television providers .

section 631 of the communications act prohibits a cable operator from using a cable system "to collect personally identifiable information concerning a subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber concerned. .

furthermore , cable operators are forbidden from disclosing a subscriber's personally identifiable information without the subscriber's consent ( with limited exceptions ) and must "take such actions as are necessary to prevent unauthorized access to such information" by a third party .

similar provisions apply to satellite television carriers .

these data security requirements for cable and satellite operators include protections for a subscriber's viewing history .

several of the bills being considered in the 114 th congress propose changes to the ftc and fcc's existing enforcement authority regarding data security and / or breach notification , while two others would leave the current system essentially unaltered .

under the bills that propose no changes to enforcement authority , common carriers under the communications act would not be subject to new data security and breach notification requirements , since they are not subject to ftc unfair or deceptive acts or practices authority .

common carriers would continue to be subject to sections 201 ( b ) and 222 , as enforced by the fcc .

alternatively , cable and satellite providers would be subject to both the bills' new requirements , because they fall within the ftc's unfair or deceptive acts or practices authority , and section 338 ( i ) or 631 , as applicable .

some of the bills that propose changes to the current agency enforcement structure would expand the ftc's jurisdiction and leave the fcc's existing statutory and regulatory authority intact .

for example , under h.r .

1704 , the ftc would enforce the new requirements "in the same manner , by the same means , and with the same jurisdiction , powers , and duties" as it has under the ftca , except that the exceptions to its section 5 authority "shall not apply. .

the bill does not alter the fcc's authority under sections 201 , 222 , 338 ( i ) , or 631 , although it does require the ftc to consult with the fcc before promulgating rules regarding an entity within the fcc's jurisdiction .

if this type of bill were enacted , common carriers and cable and satellite providers would all be subject to both the new requirements in the bill , as enforced by the ftc , and the fcc's existing requirements .

alternatively , some bills both expand the ftc's jurisdiction and eliminate some or all of the fcc's authority to regulate in this area .

for example , h.r .

1770 states that , as sections 201 , 202 , 222 , 338 , and 631 of the communications act of 1934... and any regulations promulgated thereunder , apply to covered entities with respect to securing information in electronic form from unauthorized access , including notification of unauthorized access to data in electronic form containing personal information , such sections and regulations promulgated thereunder shall have no force or effect , unless such regulations pertain solely to 9 – 1 – 1 calls .

under this bill , with the exception of regulations pertaining solely to 911 calls , the fcc retains no authority to enforce its requirements under sections 201 , 222 , 338 , and 631 .

therefore , if this type of bill were enacted , common carriers and cable and satellite providers would be subject to the new requirements , as enforced by the ftc , but would no longer have to comply with the fcc requirements .

other bills only eliminate the fcc's ability to enforce some of the relevant communications act provisions regarding data security and breach notification , but not all .

removing the fcc's authority in this area may reduce the types of data that are subject to security and breach notification requirements , as compared with a proposal that imposes new requirements while maintaining the fcc's authority .

for example , data within the existing definition of cpni may not meet the definition of "covered information" in the federal proposal , and , therefore , may not be subject to the new federal standards nor the security and breach notification requirements in the cpni rules , if those rules have "no force or effect" going forward .

proponents of bills that reduce or eliminate the fcc's authority in this subject area have emphasized the benefits of imposing a uniform , predictable standard across all covered entities .

opponents of this approach argue that restricting fcc authority weakens consumer protection by eliminating clear , predictable rules with which companies are accustomed to complying .

some also argue that the type of data to be protected under new federal requirements would be more limited than the data protected under the communications act provisions and , therefore , eliminating the fcc's ability to enforce those provisions will reduce consumers' data protection .

these issues are likely to continue to be discussed as the bills are considered in the 114 th congress .

