t he term big data continues to be a buzzword in many industries .

while frequently discussed , no commonly accepted definition of the term big data exists .

in many cases , the terminology used to discuss the topic is not always consistent and can vary by industry and user .

based on the broad scope of the subject , this report will rely on a broad and general definition of big data compiled from resources within the agricultural community .

the analysis also uses a terminology based on some of the more commonly used terms by government , research , and industry within the context of agriculture .

while technology is a key and underlying component of big data use in the industry , its ongoing growth and evolution make it difficult to discuss in great detail .

for the purposes of this report , technology — including hardware , software , and telemetry — and analytics are discussed in broad terms , using examples where relevant .

these should not be considered exhaustive and do not imply endorsement of a named product or company .

this report is also limited to the agricultural industry .

within the industry , farming and ranching operations use big data in different ways .

where possible both are discussed ; however , an increasing focus is placed on the use of big data in the production of crops .

this imbalance is not intentional , but rather reflects the availability of resources for this discussion .

for the purposes of this report , the term big data will be discussed in two contexts: public and private .

public - level big data represent records that are collected , maintained , and analyzed through publicly funded sources , specifically by federal agencies ( eg , farm program participant records , soil survey , and weather data ) .

private big data represent records generated at the production level and originate with the farmer or rancher ( eg , yield , soil analysis , irrigation levels , livestock movement , and grazing rates ) .

both private and public big data play a key role in the use of technology and analytics that drive a producer's evidence - based decisions .

both also present challenges , such as privacy and security , for producers and policymakers .

as previously stated , a commonly accepted definition of the term big data does not exist .

at first glance , it appears that the term is used to describe a large collection of records .

this categorization , however , is generally considered to be an understatement .

for something to fall into the category of big data it need not be big .

rather , the term big data is often used to describe a modern trend in which the combination of technology and advanced analytics creates a new way of processing information that is more useful and timely .

in other words , big data is just as much about new methods for processing data as about the data themselves .

big data is viewed as dynamic and when analyzed can provide a useful tool in a decisionmaking process .

in the context of agricultural production , big data generally refers to the use of technology and advanced analytics for processing data in a useful and timely way .

big data may significantly affect many aspects of the agricultural industry , although the full extent and nature of its eventual impacts remain uncertain .

many observers predict that the growth of big data will bring positive benefits through enhanced production , resource efficiency , and improved adaptation to climate change .

while lauded for its potentially revolutionary applications , big data is not without issues .

it is still unclear how big data will progress within agriculture due to challenges associated with both technical and policy issues .

the use of technology in agriculture has continued to grow since the early part of the 20 th century , when the industry shifted from the horse - drawn plow to mechanized tractors .

the advent of plant genetics , chemical inputs , and , more recently , guidance systems has transformed the industry into one that is increasingly technology - intense and data - rich .

the ability to generate , capture , and store data in the agricultural industry has continued to grow with the use of mobile technology and data management software .

additionally , external data sets are now readily available to the industry , allowing for a more complete picture of the world in which production agriculture occurs .

the technological advances that make up the modern computing environment have contributed to debate about big data .

while data collecting is not new , especially in the context of public data collection , only since the advent of more efficient , mobile technologies and the digitization of data have large records been able to be evaluated and analyzed in a timely and more useful way .

one key hallmark of big data is that it requires the use of analytical tools to extract value from it .

without analysis , large quantities of data can be expensive , time consuming , and distracting .

from a policy perspective , issues related to big data involve nearly every stage of its existence , including its collection ( how it is captured ) , management ( how it is stored and managed ) , and use ( how it is analyzed and used ) .

these three stages exist in both public and private data , and are discussed in greater detail in the private big data section below .

both private and public big data play a key role in the use of technology and analytics that drive a producer's evidence - based decisions .

while discussed separately in this report , they are typically combined to create a more complete picture of an operation and therefore better decisionmaking tools .

for example , companies that offer private big data products ( discussed in the " data uses " section below ) will combine agronomic , environmental , and operational data from multiple sources ( i.e. , public and private ) in order to better describe current conditions and predict future results .

this combination is one of the key reasons big data for agriculture is viewed as such a valuable tool .

on october 22 , 2015 , the house agriculture committee conducted a hearing on private big data in the agriculture industry .

panelists discussed benefits and concerns related to private big data .

data ownership and privacy were chief among concerns , but most panelists agreed that little to no government intervention was desired .

no bills have been introduced in the last two congresses relating specifically to big data in agriculture .

several bills in the 114 th congress could address issues that are potentially relevant to big data applications in agriculture , such as information sharing in cybersecurity , privacy , and notification of data breaches .

public agricultural data sets are traditionally created through the use of surveys , samples , and statistical analysis .

advances in technology and analytics through big data have expanded this traditional role but also highlight another , previously less - used source — administrative data .

while some public data records created by traditional means ( eg , surveys ) are statutorily required to meet the mission of an agency , administrative data records are generally byproducts of program administration .

whether the information is voluntarily or mandatorily collected also varies .

using big data to inform federal actions is of increasing interest to policymakers .

specifically , it is the use of administrative data that raises the possibility of analyzing existing data records in order to make more efficient and better - informed decisions about federal farm programs and activities .

it could also provide additional insight into behavioral and societal aspects of u.s. agriculture that might currently be underexplored .

similar to public big data , private big data refers to the combination of technology and analytics used to process data .

the key differences are who generates the underlying data , where that data is generated , and the purposes for which it is generated .

in this report , private big data is limited to private data sets generated on the farm or ranch , by the producer , for enhancing the operation .

there are a number of key players in the agricultural industry that make private big data possible through the use of technology ( eg , software and hardware ) and advanced analytics ( eg , descriptive , predictive , and prescriptive ) .

of the different stages of private big data — collection , management , and use — most people are familiar with the end result , or use of , the big data itself .

this is frequently because it is the easiest to understand .

it is where the producer most interacts with data — after it has been collected , analyzed , and turned into a usable form .

for example , big data is used to create prescriptive plans that include recommendations on seed and fertilizer application rates , soil analysis , and localized weather reports .

other stages in the big data cycle , such as the collection and management of data , can be more complex , and frequently hold the biggest challenges for the agricultural industry .

both public and private big data can exist independently of one another ; consequently , they are discussed separately in this report .

this was done by design to illustrate an increasingly complicated topic .

it does not , however , represent how observers think about big data in the context of agriculture .

most see big data in agriculture at the end use point , where farmers use precision tools to potentially create positive results like increased yields , reduced inputs , or greater sustainability .

while this is certainly the more intriguing part of the discussion , it is but one aspect and does not necessarily represent a complete picture .

big data is a complicated topic , not only from a technological and analytical standpoint , but also from a legal , ethical , and regulatory standpoint .

the number of key players continues to grow , as does the list of benefits and challenges .

as congress follows the issue a number of questions may arise , including a principal one — what is the federal role ? .

