o n october 10 , 2017 , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) proposed to repeal the clean power plan ( cpp ) , an obama administration rule that would limit carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions from existing fossil - fuel - fired power plants .

the action came in response to executive order 13783 , in which president trump directed federal agencies to review existing regulations and policies that potentially burden the development or use of domestically produced energy resources .

among the e.o .

's specific directives was that epa review the cpp , which was one of the obama administration's most important actions directed at reducing greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

epa promulgated the cpp on august 3 , 2015 .

the rule set standards for co 2 emissions from existing fossil - fuel - fired power plants under section 111 ( d ) of the clean air act ( caa ) .

information regarding the rule , including epa's regulatory impact analysis and numerous epa fact sheets , can be found at https: / / web.archive.org / web / 20161104002205 / http: / / www2.epa.gov / cleanpowerplan / clean - power - plan - existing - power - plants .

interest in the rule has been intense , reflecting what is generally recognized to be the importance of its potential effects .

the economy and the health , safety , and well - being of the nation depend on a reliable and affordable power supply , which many contend would be adversely affected by controls on ghg emissions from power plants .

at the same time , an overwhelming scientific consensus has formed that there are risks , potentially catastrophic , of greenhouse gas - induced climate change .

to determine how the cpp addresses these issues , congressional committees asked epa officials numerous questions about the rule , and individual members wrote epa seeking additional information about the rule's potential impacts .

following the rule's proposal , epa received more than 4.3 million public comments , the most ever for an epa rule .

epa responded to questions and comments by making numerous changes to the rule between proposal and promulgation .

congressional and public interest has continued since the final rule was promulgated .

besides epa's proposal to repeal the rule , the rule is the subject of ongoing litigation: a number of states and other entities have challenged it , while other states and entities have intervened in support of it .

on february 9 , 2016 , the supreme court granted applications to stay the rule for the duration of the litigation .

the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia heard oral arguments in the case in september 2016 , but agreed to an epa request to continue to hold the case in abeyance while the agency proceeds with the repeal process .

in order to provide basic information about the rule as promulgated , and about the ongoing litigation and proposed repeal of the rule , this report presents a series of questions and answers .

a: crs analysts , listed below , cover areas related to the proposed rule .

