in fy2014 , the department of defense ( dod ) obligated more than $280 billion for federal contracts , more than all other federal agencies combined .

dod's obligations were equal to 8% of federal spending .

many analysts and government officials have argued that by more effectively using data to support acquisition decisionmaking , dod could save billions of dollars , allocate resources more efficiently and effectively , and improve the effectiveness of military operations .

some have argued that better use of data may be one of the keys to reforming defense acquisitions .

in a letter to the house and senate armed services committees , the national defense industrial association listed data as the first critical step toward improving defense acquisitions .

in recent years congress has pursued a variety of approaches to improving dod's efficiency , such as requiring the department to be auditable , including provisions on acquisition reform in national defense authorization acts , and holding numerous hearings on agency operations and acquisition reform .

to the extent that improved data analysis could enable more effective decisionmaking , congress may choose to enhance oversight in this area and explore ways to enable dod to conduct more effective data analysis .

this report examines ( 1 ) the extent to which dod effectively uses data to inform decisionmaking , ( 2 ) some of the critical elements needed for dod to use data more effectively , ( 3 ) recent efforts to improve dod's use of data , and ( 4 ) potential questions for congress .

this report focuses primarily ( but not exclusively ) on defense acquisitions as a case study examining how effectively dod uses data to support its decisionmaking .

related crs reports include crs report r43566 , defense acquisition reform: background , analysis , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report r43074 , department of defense's use of contractors to support military operations: background , analysis , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

in light of advances in information technology that have made it possible to track and analyze large amounts of data , many analysts now believe that data analysis has become a critical element in making well - informed policy decisions and managing government programs .

when decisionmakers have access to sufficient data from which to draw reasonable conclusions , they are in a better position to measure or assess the effectiveness of government programs , inform policy decisions , and provide transparency into government operations .

in some circumstances , a lack of data can lead analysts and decisionmakers to draw incorrect or misleading conclusions .

the result may be policies that squander resources , waste taxpayer dollars , and / or undermine the effectiveness of government programs or military operations .

as two analysts wrote , "data - driven decisions are better decisions — it's as simple as that. .

consider: a 2015 gao report found that officials responsible for acquisitions and developing requirements lacked access to data and the analytical tools necessary to conduct effective reviews .

a 2015 inspector general report found that dod did not properly review or track data on spare parts , contributing to excess inventories exceeding $1 billion .

a 2014 inspector general report found that the army's audit readiness was at risk "because of unreliable data in the appropriations status report. .

a 2013 gao report found that due to a lack of data to support better decisions , dod did not effectively manage its supply chain in afghanistan .

this mismanagement had the effect of "hampering the distribution of supplies and equipment to the warfighter" and affecting operations in afghanistan .

according to a 2011 report , after almost 10 years of war , dod possessed neither a consolidated theater - wide database capable of tracking the amount of money spent on reconstruction nor a database tracking the amount of money spent on contracting in afghanistan .

despite the importance of data , general consensus exists among government officials and analysts that dod does not sufficiently incorporate data into decisionmaking .

many major policy decisions — from economic development programs in afghanistan to choosing the weapon systems of the future — are made without the benefit of substantive data .

these policies are sometimes based on assumptions , and some have argued that program reviews do not always sufficiently incorporate relevant data against which to measure success .

as retired air force general norman schwartz noted in a discussion on what he learned about the private sector after leaving the military , people make decisions in the private sector largely based on data – some of it is instinct , but data driven decisions is a big thing and i have learned that and certainly that applies in a government setting .

in recent years , congress has sought to highlight the importance of data in improving government operations .

in 2014 , congress enacted and the president signed into law the data ( digital accountability and transparency ) act , which was intended , among other things , to enable taxpayers and policy makers to track federal spending more effectively ; ( 2 ) establish government - wide data standards for financial data and provide consistent , reliable , and searchable government - wide spending data that is displayed accurately for taxpayers and policy makers ... [and] improve the quality of data submitted to usaspending.gov by holding federal agencies accountable for the completeness and accuracy of the data submitted .

in a recent hearing on management of dod , senate armed services committee chairman john mccain stated it's hard to address management problems when you lack basic data that are essential to understanding and diagnosing those problems .

and , yet , that is the case with the department of defense .

here is how former secretary of defense robert gates described the dilemma .

he said , quote , "my staff and i have learned that it was nearly impossible to get accurate information and answers to questions , such as , 'how much money did you spend ? .

and , 'how many people do you have ? ' .

the result is not just greater inefficiency and wasted resources .

it also harms the effectiveness of the department of defense , and , thus , our national security .

the result of these shortfalls in information , as secretary gates has explained , is that department leaders and their overseers in congress cannot measure the results of our national security policies , or make judgments about priorities for our military , or accurately assess the tradeoffs involved in different courses of action .

the extent to which dod is successful in promoting the use of data to inform decisionmaking will depend , in part , on congressional action .

congress could choose to allocate resources to support building the systems and workforce necessary to gather and analyze data .

congress could also pass legislation to influence the decisionmaking process within dod , as it did when it passed the weapons system acquisition reform act of 2009 .

answering the following questions could help congress determine further actions to take in its efforts to improve defense acquisitions .

a prerequisite for conducting effective data analysis is having the appropriate information systems and the qualified personnel needed to conduct effective and sophisticated analysis .

congress may want to consider whether or not to commit resources to build analytical capability , such as investing in it systems , or increasing the capacity of the offices within dod , including the cost analysis and program evaluation or the service acquisition executives within each service , or other relevant offices .

in considering how to allocate resources , congress may wish to examine: to what extent does dod have a clear strategy for understanding what data it needs , and how to deploy the right technology architecture and capabilities ? .

what steps are required to execute the strategy and put in place the systems necessary for gathering and analyzing data ? .

to what extent does dod have the in - house capability and qualified personnel to conduct robust data analysis ? .

to what extent does dod have a strategy for hiring qualified personnel to conduct data analysis ? .

to what extent can such capability be effectively contracted out ? .

many analysts argue that a prerequisite for effectively using data throughout an organization is having a culture that not only values using data to drive decisions , but also integrates data gathering and analysis into the very fabric of an organization , making it part of standard routines and operating procedures .

congress could consider legislation as a path to promote the use of data to inform decisions .

in considering legislation , congress may wish to examine: to what extent does dod have the right culture to foster the use of data in decisionmaking ? .

to what extent do the incentives within dod promote , or inhibit , the use of data ? .

what steps can be taken to incorporate data gathering and analysis into the routine processes of dod ? .

to what extent does dod have a clear strategy for how to use data analytics to improve acquisitions and business operations ? .

a recent rand report that looked at access to acquisition data concluded our findings show that access to data and information is inefficient at best .

many government personnel supporting the acquisition process often do not get their first choice of data , and what they do get may not be delivered in a timely fashion .

as beneficial as data - sharing can be , there may be instances where information security concerns suggest that data - sharing is not appropriate .

congress might ask: how can dod balance the competing interests of sharing data to improve efficiency with protecting information ? .

