fy2019 is the fourth year in a row that congress has enacted a special provision to allow for the issuance of h - 2b visas beyond the annual statutory cap of 66,000 in response to high levels of demand for the visa .

for fy2016 , congress exempted certain h - 2b workers from the statutory cap .

for the three past fiscal years , congress has authorized the department of homeland security ( dhs ) to make additional h - 2b visas available subject to certain conditions .

for fy2017 and fy2018 , dhs used this authority to make an additional 15,000 h - 2b visas available each year .

for fy2019 , dhs is making an additional 30,000 h - 2b visas available .

the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) of 1952 , as amended , enumerates categories of aliens , known as nonimmigrants , who are admitted to the united states for a temporary period of time and a specific purpose .

nonimmigrant visa categories are identified by letters and numbers , based on the sections of the ina that established them .

among the major nonimmigrant visa categories is the "h" category for temporary workers .

included in this category is the h - 2b visa for temporary nonagricultural workers .

the h - 2b program allows for the temporary admission of foreign workers to the united states to perform nonagricultural labor or services of a temporary nature if unemployed u.s. workers are not available .

h - 2b workers perform a wide variety of jobs .

top h - 2b occupations in recent years have included landscape laborer , groundskeeper , forest worker , housekeeper , and amusement park worker .

by regulation , participation in the h - 2b program is limited to designated countries , and dhs publishes a list of eligible countries each year .

bringing workers into the united states under the h - 2b program is a multiagency process involving the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) , dhs , and the department of state ( dos ) .

the program itself is administered by dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) and dol's employment and training administration ( eta ) .

dol's wage and hour division ( whd ) also has certain concurrent enforcement responsibilities .

the h - 2b program currently operates under regulations issued by dhs in 2008 on h - 2b requirements , dhs and dol jointly in 2015 on h - 2b employment , and dhs and dol jointly in 2015 on h - 2b wages .

for work to qualify as temporary under the h - 2b visa , the employer's need for the duties to be performed by the worker must "end in the near , definable future" and must be a one - time occurrence , a seasonal need , a peak load need , or an intermittent need .

the employer's need for workers generally must be for a period of one year or less , but in the case of a one - time occurrence , can be for up to three years .

in order to bring h - 2b workers into the united states , an employer must first receive labor certification from dol .

an interim final rule on h - 2b employment that was issued jointly by dhs and dol in april 2015 establishes a new registration requirement as a preliminary step in the labor certification process ; once it is implemented , prospective h - 2b employers would demonstrate their temporary need to dol through this registration process before submitting a labor certification application .

 ( as of the date of this report , however , dol continues to make determinations about temporary need during the processing of labor certification applications. ) .

at the same time that the employer submits the labor certification application to dol , the employer must submit a job order to the state workforce agency ( swa ) serving the area of intended employment .

the job order is used to recruit u.s. workers .

the employer also must conduct its own recruitment .

in order to grant labor certification to an employer , dol must determine that ( 1 ) there are not sufficient u.s. workers who are qualified and available to perform the work , and ( 2 ) the employment of foreign workers will not adversely affect the wages and working conditions of u.s. workers who are similarly employed .

to prevent an adverse effect on u.s. workers , h - 2b employers must offer and provide required wages and benefits to h - 2b workers and workers in "corresponding employment. .

h - 2b employers must pay their workers the highest of the prevailing wage rate or the federal , state , or local minimum wage .

they must provide a "three - fourths guarantee" ; that is , they must guarantee to offer workers employment for at least three - fourths of the contract period .

h - 2b employers also must pay worker visa fees and certain worker transportation costs .

h - 2b employers are not required to provide health insurance coverage .

after receiving labor certification , a prospective h - 2b employer can submit an application , known as a petition , to dhs to bring in foreign workers .

if the foreign workers are already in the united states , the employer can request a change of status to h - 2b status on the petition .

in the typical case , however , the workers are abroad .

if the petition is approved , they can visit a u.s. embassy or consulate to apply for h - 2b nonimmigrant visas from dos .

if the visa applications are approved , the workers are issued visas that they can use to apply for admission to the united states at a port of entry .

h - 2b workers can be accompanied by eligible spouses and children , who are issued h - 4 visas .

an alien's total period of stay as an h - 2b worker may not exceed three consecutive years .

an h - 2b alien who has spent three years in the united states may not seek an extension of stay or be readmitted to the united states as an h - 2b worker until he or she has been outside the country for at least three months .

the ina grants enforcement authority with respect to the h - 2b program to dhs , but allows for the delegation of that authority to dol .

dhs has delegated that authority to dol , and now dol's whd has responsibility for enforcing compliance with the conditions of an h‐2b petition and temporary labor certification .

the h - 2b program is subject to an annual statutory numerical limit .

under the ina , as amended by the immigration act of 1990 , the total number of aliens who may be issued h - 2b visas or otherwise provided with h - 2b nonimmigrant status in any fiscal year may not exceed 66,000 .

also , since fy2006 there has been a cap of 33,000 on the number of aliens subject to h - 2b numerical limits who may enter the united states on an h - 2b visa or be granted h - 2b status during the first six months of a fiscal year .

this ina amendment , enacted as part of the real id act of 2005 , effectively divided the annual h - 2b cap of 66,000 into two semiannual caps of 33,000 , respectively covering work in the first and second halves of the fiscal year .

certain categories of h - 2b workers are exempt from the cap , including the following: current h - 2b workers seeking an extension of stay , change of employer , or change in the terms of employment ; h - 2b workers previously counted toward the cap in the same fiscal year ; fish roe processors , fish roe technicians , and / or supervisors of fish roe processing ; and h - 2b workers performing labor in the u.s. territories of the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands ( cnmi ) and / or guam until december 31 , 2029 .

as noted , spouses and children who are accompanying h - 2b workers are issued h - 4 visas and , as such , are not counted against the h - 2b cap .

with employer demand for h - 2b visas exceeding supply , h - 2b admissions and the statutory cap are once again receiving attention from policymakers .

while previous congresses considered broad immigration reform bills that included proposals for new temporary worker programs to address any perceived shortfalls in the supply of foreign workers , any legislative efforts to address the numerical limitations on nonagricultural guest workers in the near term seem likely to be focused on the existing h - 2b program .

