throughout the early and mid - 1970s , congress laid the foundation of modern campaign finance policy .

before and after the watergate scandal , congress debated whether or how to regulate contributions , expenditures , and disclosure of campaign finance activities .

in particular , the 1974 feca amendments established much of the regulatory framework that remains today .

the supreme court considered those matters in its landmark buckley v. valeo decision ( 1976 ) .

to this day , these topics continue to structure the policy debate .

perhaps because monumental questions surrounding how and whether to regulate political contributions and spending occupied congress and the courts , a significant component of the 1974 feca amendments — creating a new federal agency to administer feca — received comparatively limited attention .

that agency , the federal election commission ( fec ) , would come to symbolize the fierce debate that occupies campaign finance policy overall .

the fec is responsible for civil enforcement of federal campaign finance law .

the commission also administers public financing of presidential campaigns ( applicable to participating candidates ) and conducts outreach and educational activities .

members of the public , the media , campaign practitioners , and policymakers rely on campaign finance data disclosed on the fec website — the agency's most public activity .

some allege that congress designed the fec to fail , most notably through a bipartisan , six - member structure that requires agreement from at least four commissioners for substantive action .

furthermore , some contend that recent years have marked a particularly problematic period in which , amid policy stalemates , some areas of campaign finance law have gone without adequate interpretation or enforcement .

others respond , equally vigorously , that congress purposely insulated the fec from excessive partisanship in the wake of watergate and in one of the most sensitive areas of constitutionally protected political speech .

they also caution that the commission cannot or should not do via regulation what congress has declined to do by statute .

whether by design or coincidence , fundamental tensions about campaign finance law and regulation have been evident at the fec throughout its history .

nonetheless , attention to working relationships among commissioners is increasingly part of the narrative about how the commission functions .

some commissioners have openly criticized their colleagues and the agency .

as the fec marked its 40 th anniversary in 2015 , according to one media account , "officials past and present argued about whether to rent a theater , whether to publish a report , whether to serve bagels or doughnuts , and whether , in fact , the agency even had an anniversary worth noting. .

these and similar reports highlighting alleged dysfunction at the fec are common .

some may be relevant for congressional needs as the house and senate examine the fec and form their own opinions on the agency .

discussions of the fec's organization , duties , and major areas of policy debate — the focus of this report — are less common , but are at least as relevant for congress .

the report provides background information about key areas of controversy and context that might be relevant for congress as the house and senate approach their oversight duties , appropriate funds , consider nominations , and explore options for restructuring the fec or maintaining the status quo .

as discussed throughout this report , issues ranging from minor administrative matters to fundamental changes in campaign finance law might be relevant as congress considers the fec .

because there appears to be little congressional consensus about how or whether to address the fec and its functions , this report provides a resource for congress to examine which policy questions and options are of particular interest , if any .

the report is not a legal analysis of commission activity , nor does it provide detailed discussion of relationships with potentially related agencies such as the department of justice or internal revenue service .

another crs report discusses the fec's role in enforcing campaign finance law and regulation .

 table 1 below summarizes recent legislation substantially devoted to the fec .

congress most recently held an oversight hearing focusing on the fec in 2011 , as discussed later in this report .

the appendix at the end of this report lists major legislation devoted to the fec and oversight hearings dating to 1995 .

the fec is a six - member independent regulatory agency whose members serve six - year terms .

they may continue in "holdover" status after those terms end .

commissioners are appointed by the president and subject to senate confirmation .

as discussed below , the current appointment method differs from the process congress originally enacted but that was later invalidated .

the senate most recently confirmed commissioners in 2013 , as shown in table 2 .

congress most recently reauthorized the fec in 1980 ( fy1981 ) .

throughout its history , the fec has been controversial .

topics such as disagreements among commissioners and dueling perspectives on what the agency should do , and how , receive the most prominent and consistent attention in congress , within the fec , and in the media .

other topics , such as staffing and information technology , are less prominent but can substantially affect the agency's daily business .

this section briefly summarizes selected but recurring areas of debate that might be relevant for congress .

the federal election commission is one of the most roundly criticized agencies in washington .

some contend that the commission has done too little and others say that it has done too much .

these criticisms are familiar , but examining the agency's mission and the context in which it operates is less common .

because policy consensus has not yet emerged , this report has emphasized recurring topics that might rise to congress's attention .

if congress decides to reexamine the fec , more in - depth analysis of individual policy questions or matters of agency design likely would be required .

as congress examines the nation's campaign finance enforcement agency , it might first desire to consider whether the fec established 40 years ago meets current needs .

broadly speaking , what should the fec do and how should it do those things ? .

if congress chooses to alter the fec at all , do the house and senate primarily want a different agency or do they want a different set of laws for the agency to enforce ? .

the latter option suggests a broad reexamination of federal campaign finance policy as it has existed for decades .

for those who view the status quo as antiquated , reconsidering major topics such as contribution limits , disclosure requirements , and independent spending might be preferable to narrower technical changes .

on the other hand , fundamental changes to campaign finance policy are likely to be controversial and protracted .

altering the fec also likely would be contentious , but the approach would be more modest than overhauling campaign finance policy .

the following questions raise more specific points for consideration .

does congress want to change the status quo at all ? .

if so , in which areas and how ? .

does congress want the fec to be primarily an enforcement agency , primarily a disclosure agency , or something else ? .

if congress wants the fec to focus on one task over others , should another agency take on other duties ? .

is it sufficient for some tasks to be de - prioritized , etc. ? .

to what extent should the commission have discretion to prioritize some aspects of its mission over others ? .

does congress want to provide more or new direction ? .

does congress want to retain the fec's six - member , bipartisan structure ? .

if congress chose instead an odd number of commissioners , how , if at all , might that affect perceptions of the agency's legitimacy or partisanship ? .

does the fec have sufficient appropriations to carry out its current mission and future ones ? .

does congress want to examine relations among commissioners ? .

if so , does it want to try to affect those relations through oversight , by influencing nominations , etc. ? .

does congress want to consider the fec's legislative recommendations ? .

if so , which ones ? .

does congress want to consider findings from outside critiques of the agency , such as those conducted by the fec's inspector general or advocacy groups ? .

as congress considers the questions presented above and the issues noted throughout this report , it might also be important to ask which decisions are within the commission's purview and which things only congress can change .

the fec can control much of its agenda .

commissioners can determine those areas where they can compromise and where they must disagree .

they can set the overall tone for the agency and its staff .

they can decide how to allocate resources and where to prioritize enforcement .

other factors are beyond the fec's control .

the agency cannot establish its own statutory mandate .

it cannot unilaterally reconcile complex and sometimes ambiguous campaign finance law .

most importantly , the fec cannot change the first amendment provisions that so closely protect the very conduct that congress has charged the commission with regulating .

