the goldwater - nichols act of 1986 led to major changes in officer training and career development through the establishment of a joint management system .

this system includes four basic components: joint professional military education ( jpme ) in joint schools , a joint duty assignment list ( jdal ) , joint specialty officer ( jso ) designation , and joint criteria for promotions .

this report focuses mainly on jpme requirements in the context of the intent of the goldwater - nichols reforms .

although it refers to joint officer assignments and promotions , it does not address the joint officer management system as a whole .

the first sections provide background on joint education and the changes put in place by gna .

the following sections discuss the implementation and evolution of jpme over the past 30 years .

the final section lays out some of the stakeholders' concerns and issues with the current state of jpme that congress may consider as they conduct their gna review .

the education of military officers in joint operations predates any legislation requiring both joint education and experience .

the army industrial college had been established in 1924 to educate officers in mobilization , supply , and industrial support , but no similar school was devoted to the study of joint operations .

during world war ii , following the u.s. military's exposure to working with allies in joint operations , military leaders saw a critical need for officers to be trained and educated in joint and combined operations .

to fill this void , the joint chiefs of staff established the army - navy staff college in 1943 to provide a four - month course for selected senior officers assigned to unified command and staff duties .

a memo by general henry h. "hap" arnold , then - commanding general of the army air forces , described the purpose of this war college as: ( 1 ) to train selected officers of the army and navy for command and staff duties with unified ( army - navy ) commands .

 ( 2 ) to develop methods and ideas for the most effective unified employment of all arms and services and to translate lessons learned in the field into appropriate doctrines .

conclusions reached should be spread through the services both by service publications and by the influence of the graduates of the college in planning and conducting operations .

the original army - navy staff college evolved into the national war college in 1946 and the army industrial college was later renamed the industrial college of the armed forces ( icaf ) .

the armed forces staff college ( afsc ) was also formed in 1946 to provide joint operational instruction to mid - grade officers ( o - 4 to o - 6 ) .

by 1946 , and primarily at the initiative of the senior military leadership , there were three military institutions devoted to various aspects of joint education — the national war college , the icaf , and the afsc .

the services retained their service - centric professional military education schools .

 ( a current listing of service and joint colleges and universities certified to provide jpme with geographic locations can be found in figure a - 1 . ) .

nevertheless , for much of the cold war era , despite the availability of joint courses at these colleges , there was a general lack of enthusiasm among military officers for joint education and joint assignments .

in 1981 , only 13% of officers assigned to the office of the joint chiefs of staff had attended the joint course at afsc and only 25% of o - 6s ( colonels or navy captains ) had graduated from the national war college or icaf .

some argued that joint commitments were detrimental to an officer's career , as they took them away from service - specific education and assignments that were seen as more valuable for promotion .

by the early 1980s , a number of unsuccessful joint military operations , including the aborted rescue of american hostages in iran , had generated questions by many in congress about dod's capability to execute joint operations .

on june 16 , 1980 , during a nomination hearing before the senate armed services committee , general david c. jones addressed what he saw as the main impediments to building a joint culture within dod .

one issue area that he raised was the need to "have greater incentives for the best people to go into joint jobs. .

jones's comments sparked a broader reform effort that eventually became the 1986 goldwater - nichols department of defense reorganization act ( gna ) .

the gna reorganized the department of defense and established the first formal requirements for the services to train and operate in a joint environment .

title iv of the gna established a number of requirements , guidelines , and goals as part of a joint officer management framework .

the goals of the gna in terms of personnel management were threefold: improving the ( 1 ) quality , ( 2 ) experience , and ( 3 ) education of joint officers ( see table 1 ) .

under this framework established by gna , completion of specific requirements for jpme , along with joint experience gained through assignments from the joint duty assignment list ( jdal ) , could result in joint qualification and designation as a joint specialty officer ( jso ) .

the connection between joint criteria and promotion potential was intended to incentivize officers to qualify as jsos .

the designation of an officer as a jso signified proficiency in "joint matters. .

goldwater - nichols focused on the effective management of military officers who were "particularly trained in , and oriented toward , joint matters. .

while jpme curriculum was not specifically defined , the legislation did define "joint matters" as "matters relating to the integrated employment of land , sea , and air forces. .

jpme requirements are noted in two sections of the original legislation: section 661 ( management policies for joint specialty officers ) required successful completion of a jpme program prior to an officer being nominated for joint qualification or being assigned to a joint duty position , with minor exceptions .

section 663 ( education ) contained additional requirements specifically related to jpme .

it required ( 1 ) attendance at a capstone course for all new generals and flag officers , ( 2 ) periodic review of the curriculum for the national defense university and other jpme schools by the secretary of defense with advice and assistance from the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ( cjcs ) , and ( 3 ) review of service schools' curricula to strengthen the focus on joint matters and to ensure that graduates were adequately prepared for joint duty assignments .

since its inception , the joint education and qualification system has undergone a number of statutory changes .

updated rules designate the institutions eligible to provide jpme and allow some portions of jpme to be done via "distance learning. .

other changes have strengthened the incentive system for attendance by offering accredited master's degrees and offering more flexibility in follow - on assignments to manage individual career paths and service - specific requirements .

in the past five years congress has made minor changes to jpme .

section 552 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2012 authorized dod to carry out a five - year pilot program for jpme ii instruction on a nonresident basis at not more than two combatant commands .

in response , dod established a jpme course at the joint special operations university ( jsou ) at macdill air force base , florida , which is home to both the u.s. special operations command ( ussocom ) and the u.s. central command ( uscentcom ) .

jsou was established as a satellite program of the jfsc .

section 552 of the fy2012 ndaa also authorized credit for completion of jpme i at the national defense intelligence college ( now known as the national intelligence university ) .

the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 amended 10 u.s.c .

§2154 to authorize senior level service courses of at least 10 months to meet the requirements of jpme ii if designated and certified by the secretary of defense .

previous law required jpme to be taught in residence at the joint forces staff college or senior level service schools .

this legislation appears to provide more flexibility to dod in how jpme ii coursework is completed .

while there have been few substantial changes to jpme in recent years , some within dod and congress have raised concerns about the state of joint education .

secretary of defense ashton carter announced in december 2015 that the department of defense ( dod ) would be launching a review of the department's structure and efficiency in the context of the gna reforms .

a dod memorandum dated january 4 , 2016 , outlined the key questions that would be addressed in this review .

with respect to the joint officer management system , dod plans to consider , do current law and policy governing joint duty qualifications provide the right human capital development to meet our joint warfighting requirements ? .

are there adjustments that can be made to balance the often competing demands of joint professional development and other specialized expertise or other career development considerations ? .

a spokesman for dod indicated that this review might result in internal policy changes and / or legislative proposals .

other questions that have been raised by those in the defense community include questions about faculty and staff at institutions certified to provide jpme: are faculty knowledgeable and do they have the appropriate qualifications ? .

is there an appropriate mix of civilian and military faculty ? .

is faculty compensation appropriate ? .

are the students - to - faculty and administrator - to - faculty ratios appropriate ? .

questions about the adequacy of jpme curricula in providing necessary knowledge and skills: does the curriculum adequately deliver desired leader attributes ? .

should the curriculum be expanded ? .

does the curriculum provide the right mix of tactical v. technical skills needed to serve in joint billets ? .

questions about how jpme is delivered: what is the appropriate mix of students ( eg , military - civilian , branch of service , officer - enlisted , foreign military / civilians ) ? .

can jpme be adequately provided in a non - resident setting ? .

is there adequate coordination between jpme - granting institutions ? .

could jpme credit be earned at additional degree - granting institutions ( eg , additional service schools or civilian institutions ) ? .

questions about the role of jpme in terms of career management and officer development: what should the appropriate balance be between service - centric pme and jpme ? .

should completion of jpme continue to be tied to officer promotion ? .

what should the jpme requirements be for reserve component ( rc ) members ? .

what should the balance be between joint experience and joint education in terms of joint officer qualification ? .

do existing assignment policies allow for return - on - investment for jpme ? .

congress may consider these and other questions with regard to jpme and the joint officer management system as part of the gna review and in future legislative initiatives .

acronym .

