the federal government holds about 56 million acres of land in trust for indian tribes and individuals , an area approximately the size of utah .

cars and trucks are the primary means of transportation on these lands , although airplanes , public transportation vans and buses , snowmobiles , all - terrain vehicles , boats , and other conveyances are important in some areas .

the federal government supports highway transportation on indian lands predominantly with grants and technical assistance .

most of this support is provided through the tribal transportation program ( ttp ) that is jointly administered by the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) in the department of transportation ( dot ) and the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) .

this report discusses the ttp and other highway programs relevant to the tribes , such as the national highway traffic safety administration's ( nhtsa's ) state highway safety program .

the report also looks at the role of bia's road maintenance program .

the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act ( p.l .

114-94 ) , enacted in 2015 , reauthorized the ttp and nhtsa's safety programs from fy2016 through fy2020 .

these programs are discussed in the context of the special relationship between the federal government and indian tribes , and the existing physical condition and safety performance of highways on indian lands .

this report discusses several policy issues that are likely to be of ongoing concern , including the federal funding of highways on indian lands , particularly for highway safety , and environmental review and rights - of - way .

there are currently 566 federally recognized indian tribes and 326 land areas administered by the federal government as indian reservations .

these reservations range in size from the 16 million acres of the navajo nation reservation located in arizona , new mexico , and utah to the pit river tribe's one - acre cemetery in california .

there are also other types of indian lands , including state - authorized indian reservations .

indian reservations are typically rural , sparsely populated , and remote from services , such as medical centers , schools and colleges , and large retail stores .

according to the 2010 census , about 4.8 million people live in american indian areas and alaska native villages .

of these people , 1.1 million identify as american indian or alaska native .

federally recognized indian tribes are sovereign nations , but "subject to the overriding authority of the united states. .

this means "indian tribes enjoy all the rights of sovereignty that have not been divested by congress or that are not inconsistent with the tribes' dependent status . .

federally recognized tribes are eligible for federal services and benefits .

since the 1970s , federal policy toward indian tribes has favored self - determination and , more recently , self - governance .

the indian self - determination and educational assistance act of 1975 ( isdeaa ; p.l .

93-638 ) gave tribes the power to contract with the federal government to directly administer federal funds in some policy areas including health and education .

amendments to isdeaa authorized self - governance in which tribes receive federal funds as a block grant through a compact with the federal government .

these compacts allow tribes to establish their own funding priorities .

tribal self - determination and self - governance in transportation have been slow to develop relative to other policy and program areas .

because of its historical role in managing indian lands , bia administered the tribal transportation program ( formerly known as the indian reservation roads program ) from its beginning in 1928 , and funding for the program was provided through the doi appropriations bill from the general fund of the u.s. treasury .

in 1979 , bia and fhwa signed an interdepartmental agreement for stewardship of tribal roads .

with enactment of the surface transportation assistance act of 1982 ( p.l .

97-424 ) , funding for the ttp was switched from the general fund to the highway trust fund .

tribal priorities for road and bridge funding were given more weight in the intermodal surface transportation act of 1991 ( istea ; p.l .

102-240 ) .

but a turning point in tribal self - governance came in the transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ; p.l .

105-178 ) , enacted in 1998 , which authorized indian tribes to administer federal road funding under contracts or compacts with bia as permitted by isdeaa ( 23 u.s.c .

202 ( b ) ( 7 ) ) .

another major change in the administration of the ttp came about as a result of the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient , transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l .

109-59 ) , enacted in 2005 .

safetea gave tribes the power to enter into contracts with either bia or fhwa to provide oversight .

in 2013 , at least 110 tribes had agreements with fhwa .

the fast act , enacted in 2015 , provides authority for tribes to enter into compacts with fhwa .

in conjunction with either bia or fhwa , many indian tribes administer federal funds for road maintenance , road construction , and road safety through their own tribal departments of transportation .

responsibility for public road infrastructure on and to indian reservations lies with governmental entities at all levels , tribal , federal , state , and local .

this is reflected in the national tribal transportation facility inventory ( nttfi ) , a database of existing and proposed roads that provide access to and within indian lands .

the nttfi is maintained by law by bia in cooperation with fhwa ( 23 u.s.c .

§202 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ) .

of the 157,000 miles of road listed in the nttfi , 31,400 miles are bia - system roads , 26,000 miles are tribal - system roads , and 100,000 miles are state and local government roads .

about 145,500 miles of roads in the nttfi currently exist and 11,500 miles are planned or proposed .

comprehensive information on the characteristics and condition of roads on and providing access to indian lands is unavailable , but data on bia - system roads suggest that most are rudimentary and in poor condition .

although it is not unusual for rural roads to be unpaved , about 70% of bia - system road mileage is unpaved .

by comparison , about 53% of rural roads in arizona are unpaved and 82% of rural roads in north dakota are unpaved .

bia reports that in 2014 , 17% of bia - system road miles and 68% of bridges on this system were in "acceptable" condition .

unpaved roads are considered unacceptable by definition .

fhwa's national bridge inventory indicates that at the end of 2014 about 14% of bia - owned bridges were classified as structurally deficient and 6% were classified as functionally obsolete ( see table a - 1 for the breakout by state ) .

nationally , about 10% of bridges were classified as structurally deficient and 14% were functionally obsolete at the end of 2014 .

a bridge is considered to be structurally deficient "if significant load - carrying elements are found to be in poor or worse condition due to deterioration and / or damage , or if the adequacy of the waterway opening provided by the bridge is determined to be extremely insufficient to the point of causing intolerable traffic interruptions. .

functional obsolescence arises if a bridge does not meet current design standards or traffic demands .

reasons for functional obsolescence include a bridge handles more traffic than it was built to carry ; its lanes or shoulders are narrower than those that would be built today ; the overhead clearance is inadequate ; and the roadway curve in the approach to the bridge is too extreme .

the different deficiency rates of bia - owned bridges and of highway bridges nationally are likely explained by these definitions .

bridges on lightly traveled routes , a category that probably includes most roads on tribal lands , tend generally to be in poorer structural condition than bridges on heavily traveled routes and are therefore more likely to be structurally deficient .

functional obsolescence is usually related to growing traffic demands , which may be more likely among bridges in urban areas than among those rural tribal lands .

it is widely believed that motor vehicle crashes on indian lands are substantially underreported in the nhtsa fatal accident reporting system ( fars ) database because tribes' reporting is voluntary , officials may not be trained in crash reporting , tribal record keeping may be inadequate , and computer systems may not be compatible with state systems .

for this reason , and other reasons , such as the lack of vehicle miles traveled data , it is difficult to know how safe highways on indian lands are .

in a study of crashes on tribal lands in south dakota in 2005 , researchers documented 737 crashes from tribal and bia law enforcement agencies , but only 53 of these were reported in enough detail to be included in the south dakota accident reporting system ( sdars ) , which is the source of south dakota data for nhtsa's fars database .

the study in south dakota found that less serious crashes were the most underreported .

fatalities , while not reflective of all motor vehicle crashes , are more likely to be reported in crash databases .

according to nhtsa , 316 motor vehicle crash fatalities on reservations were reported in 2013 , the most recent year for which data are available .

a little more than half of the victims ( 180 ) were native americans .

the only national study of fatalities in motor vehicle crashes on indian lands , conducted by the national highway traffic safety administration in 2004 , found that the number of fatalities on indian reservations increased by 47% , from 222 in 1975 to 327 in 2002 , while fatalities in the nation as a whole declined by 3% .

more recent data show that although fatalities on reservations have declined since 2006 , they still remain higher than in the mid - 1970s .

by comparison , rural motor vehicle fatalities , only available from 1977 , declined by 38% between 1977 and 2013 ( figure 1 ) .

studies have identified a host of personal , vehicle , and environmental factors that may contribute to the safety trends on indian lands highways compared with those on highways nationally and in rural areas .

bia's indian highway safety program ( ihsp ) states that "while nationwide data continues to be an issue , it is evident from the self - reported data from the tribes , that alcohol impaired driving , speed and non - use of seat belts play a significant role in fatal and injury crashes on the reservations. .

other factors that have been identified include road characteristics , accident response times by emergency services , low rates of child - seat use , and pedestrian safety .

a study of pedestrian safety on indian lands by fhwa , for example , found problems due to alcohol use by drivers and pedestrians , and lack of pedestrian facilities , such as traffic control devices and other treatments .

a survey of seat belt use funded by ihsp in 2013 found that seat belt use on reservations averaged about 70% , although rates differed across reservations from 36% to 91% .

the national average of seat belt use in 2013 was 87% .

an earlier study of seat belt use on reservations in 2004 and 2005 found overall seat belt use was 55% , ranging from 9% to 85% .

this suggests that while seat belt use has increased on indian reservations it remains lower than in the united states generally .

according to nhtsa , one of the main factors that explains the wide variation in seat belt use is seat belt law on reservations .

seat belt use is highest on reservations with primary seat belt laws , lower where secondary laws exist , and lowest where there are no seat belt laws .

primary seat belt laws allow a law enforcement officer to stop a vehicle and issue a citation to a driver or passenger for not wearing a belt without any other violation of the law .

secondary laws allow a citation for not wearing a seat belt only when another traffic offense has been committed .

highway safety on indian reservations is complicated by the interjurisdictional nature of law enforcement .

traffic laws on reservation roads are the decision of tribal government , and may vary from those that apply on surrounding nonreservation roads .

enforcement of traffic laws on reservations can involve tribal police , bia police , state highway patrol , and sheriff's deputies .

the authority each has to stop , detain , and cite motorists for traffic violations can depend on the tribal status of the driver , the seriousness of the violation , and agreements between the tribe and nontribal law enforcement agencies .

for example , on some reservations a speeding nontribal motorist can be stopped and detained by a tribal police officer but that officer may not be able to issue a citation without the help of a state or local police officer .

similarly , on some reservations nontribal police officers can stop and detain tribal members for violating traffic laws but cannot issue citations unless authorized to do so by the tribe .

because of the generally poor condition of highways on indian lands and the problem with highway safety , there have been proposals for large increases in funding for programs that directly fund the construction and maintenance of highways on indian lands .

because of the modest nominal increases in funding for the ttp in the fast act , funding is likely to remain an issue of concern .

during the debate over reauthorizing map - 21 , for example , a coalition of tribal groups proposed increasing funding for ttp and associated programs from the fy2015 level of $450 million to $960 million in the first year of a multi - year authorization .

this would have included $800 million for the ttp , $75 million for the bridge program , $30 million for the tribal high priority projects program , and $50 million for a new national tribal asset management program , mirroring a program for states .

the coalition proposal also called for a portion of tiger grant funds be set aside for tribes and that the law allow creation of a tribal infrastructure bank .

to gain more funding certainty , the proposal sought to authorize all program funding from the highway trust fund .

most of these recommendations were not incorporated into the legislation .

funding for safety program is also likely to remain an issue for indian tribes .

the tribal coalition proposal argued for increased funding by directing funds from highway safety programs to tribes , such as a 2% set - aside from fhwa's highway safety improvement program ( hsip ) .

it also proposed raising the set - aside of section 402 grant funding from 2% to 3.5% .

neither proposal was included in the fast act .

if these set - asides had been applied to the fy2015 authorization , tribes would have received approximately $8 million extra in direct funding for safety - related projects .

the fast act requires two studies by the secretary of transportation pertaining to highway safety on tribal lands: one on the quality of transportation safety data collected on tribal lands and the other on identifying and evaluating "options for improving safety on public roads on indian reservations" ( §1117 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) .

although tribes have the option of entering into agreements with either fhwa or bia to oversee transportation projects , bia retains responsibility for bia - owned lands or lands held in trust .

this has become an issue in the environmental review of projects pursuant to the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) .

fhwa and bia have different requirements for projects that involve similar right - of - way circumstances , and a tribe needs approval from bia on bia - owned or trust land even if the tribe has an agreement with fhwa .

in certain situations , bia will require a more resource - intensive environmental assessment when fhwa will process the request as a less resource - intensive categorical exclusion .

as the department of transportation inspector general notes the following: bia requires environmental assessments for existing roads if the tribe needs to establish or amend a right - of - way , whereas flh [federal lands highway] grants categorical exclusion in these cases .

consequently , bia determinations on the required level of environmental review could reverse flh's decisions regarding nepa requirements .

according to flh and tribal officials , bia's requirements for environmental assessments — in cases where flh does not require them — results in unnecessary effort , time , and cost for the tribes .

a legislative option would be to require bia to apply dot regulations when implementing nepa .

relatedly , there have been proposals to allow tribes the option of assuming nepa responsibilities like the states currently have .

it is believed that this might speed the approval of transportation projects .

however , a tribe making this election would have to waive sovereign immunity to allow itself to be sued in federal court to carry out the responsibilities of a federal official .

part of the problem with rights - of - way in indian country is the complexity of land ownership and rights .

additionally , documentation of existing rights - of - way is often poor .

to aid transportation projects , there have been proposals for the clarification of bia's authority to provide documentation on existing rights - of - way and to provide bia and the tribes the authority to acquire rights - of - way when necessary .

there have also been calls for the authorization of $10 million per year from the highway trust fund for bia to develop a comprehensive computerized national database of rights - of - way .

