t hree agencies in the department of the interior ( doi ) share responsibility for managing the nation's ocean energy resources , which cover approximately 1.7 billion acres on the u.s. outer continental shelf ( ocs ) .

the bureau of ocean energy management ( boem ) administers offshore energy leasing ; the bureau of safety and environmental enforcement ( bsee ) oversees offshore operational safety and environmental responsibility ; and the office of natural resources revenue ( onrr ) manages public revenues from federally regulated offshore and onshore energy projects .

boem , bsee , and onrr receive appropriations in the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

aggregate and program - level appropriations shape the resources available to the agencies for conventional and renewable energy leasing , inspections , spill preparedness , environmental enforcement , planning , research , and revenue collection and disbursement , among others .

this report discusses fy2017 appropriations for the three agencies , including the obama administration's funding request for each agency and subsequent congressional action .

the 114 th congress did not enact full - year interior appropriations for fy2017 .

continuing funds were provided through april 28 , 2017 , by two continuing resolutions ( crs ; p.l .

114-223 and p.l .

114-254 ) .

the crs generally provide funding at the fy2016 level , minus an across - the - board reduction of less than 1% .

the 115 th congress is faced with addressing the ocean energy agencies' appropriations for the remainder of fy2017 .

boem manages u.s. offshore oil and gas leasing , renewable energy development , and marine mineral leasing , with a mission to balance national interests in energy supply and environmental protection .

boem's responsibilities include developing a five - year offshore oil and gas leasing program , managing oil and gas lease sales and marine mineral agreements , reviewing exploration and development plans , facilitating renewable energy development on the ocs , conducting resource evaluations and economic analysis , and performing environmental reviews , among others .

boem's operations are funded both by discretionary appropriations under the agency's ocean energy management account and by the authority to expend offsetting collections derived from a portion of ocs rental receipts and cost recovery fees .

the initial discretionary appropriation for each fiscal year is reduced by the amount of eligible receipts and fees that are collected , so that the final amount appropriated to boem is the net of those collections .

for fy2017 , the obama administration requested total appropriations of $175.1 million for boem , of which $94.9 million would be derived from offsetting collections , for a net appropriation of $80.2 million ( table 1 ) .

boem's total available funding under the request would be $4.3 million higher ( +2.5% ) than the fy2016 total .

this reflects an increase of $6.0 million ( +8.0% ) in boem's net requested appropriation from congress , along with boem's estimate of fewer offsetting collections than in fy2016 ( 1.7% less in offsetting collections ) .

on july 14 , 2016 , the house passed its interior appropriations bill , h.r .

5538 , with total appropriations of $169.3 million for boem , offset by the rental receipt and fee collections described above , for a net appropriation of $74.4 million .

the house's total appropriation was $1.6 million less than the fy2016 enacted total and $5.8 million less than the obama administration's request .

comparing the net appropriations after offsets , the house's amount was $0.1 million more than the fy2016 enacted net appropriation and $5.8 million less than the request .

on june 16 , 2016 , the senate appropriations committee reported its interior appropriations bill , s. 3068 .

the senate committee bill contained total appropriations of $169.6 million for boem , offset by the rental receipt and fee collections described above , for a net appropriation of $74.6 million .

the total appropriation was $1.3 million less than the fy2016 enacted total and $5.6 million less than the obama administration's request .

comparing the net appropriations after offsets , the senate committee amount was $0.4 million more than the fy2016 enacted net appropriation and $5.6 million less than the request .

the 114 th congress did not enact full - year interior appropriations for fy2017 , and continuing funds were provided through april 28 , 2017 , under the crs ( p.l .

114-223 and p.l .

114-254 ) .

the crs generally provide funding at the fy2016 level , minus an across - the - board reduction of less than 1% .

bsee provides oversight of oil and gas exploration , development , and production on the ocs .

its mission is to promote safety , protect the environment , and conserve resources offshore through regulatory oversight and enforcement .

bsee's functions include issuing permits for oil and gas operations , inspecting facilities , developing regulations and standards , conducting research and collecting data on offshore safety , assessing technology , and overseeing industry oil spill prevention and readiness activities , among other responsibilities .

similar to boem , bsee's operations are funded both by discretionary appropriations under the agency's offshore safety and environmental enforcement and oil spill research accounts and by a portion of ocs rental receipts , cost recovery fees , and inspection fees , which are treated as offsetting collections in the bsee budget .

for fy2017 , the obama administration requested total appropriations of $204.9 million for bsee , of which $108.5 million would be derived from offsetting collections of ocs rental receipts , cost recovery fees , and inspection fees , for a net appropriation of $96.3 million ( see table 2 ) .

the total request was nearly level with the fy2016 enacted total , but because of an estimated drop in offsetting collections , the requested net appropriation was $7.9 million higher ( +8.9% ) than the fy2016 enacted net amount of $88.5 million .

the house interior appropriations bill , h.r .

5538 , contained total appropriations of $204.9 million for bsee , offset by rental receipt and fee collections of $96.5 million .

the bill also included a rescission of $20.0 million in unobligated balances , which functions as an offset to the total , yielding a net appropriation of $88.3 million .

the house's total appropriation for bsee was $0.2 million more than the fy2016 enacted total and the same as the obama administration's fy2016 request .

although the house's total bsee appropriation was the same as the request , because of different estimations of offsets , its net appropriation was $8.0 million less th an the agency's request and $0.1 million less than the fy2016 enacted net appropriation .

the senate appropriations committee's interior appropriations bill , s. 3068 , contained total appropriations of $204.7 million for bsee , offset by rental receipt and fee collections of $96.5 million , as well as a $25 million rescission of unobligated balances , for a net appropriation of $83.1 million .

the senate committee's total appropriation was the same as the fy2016 enacted total and $0.2 million less than the obama administration's request .

the committee's net appropriation , after offsets , was $5.3 million less than the fy2016 enacted net appropriation and $13.2 million less than the request , reflecting different estimations of offsetting collections .

the 114 th congress did not enact full - year interior appropriations for fy2017 , and continuing funds were provided through april 28 , 2017 , under the crs ( p.l .

114-223 and p.l .

114-254 ) .

the crs generally provide funding at the fy2016 level , minus an across - the - board reduction of less than 1% .

onrr was established under the doi office of the assistant secretary for policy , management , and budget to collect , account for , analyze , audit , and disburse revenues from energy and mineral leases on the ocs as well as on federal onshore and american indian lands .

with regard to its disbursement function , in fy2016 onrr disbursed $6.3 billion in revenues from mineral leases on federal and indian lands , down from $9.9 billion in fy2015 and $13.4 billion in fy2014 .

of the fy2016 total , approximately $2.8 billion came from leasing and production activity on the ocs .

the revenue amounts disbursed fluctuate annually , based primarily on the prices of oil and natural gas , and have averaged about $10 billion per year for onshore and offshore production combined over the last five years ( fy2012-fy2016 ) .

sources of onrr receipts include royalties , bonus bids , and rents for all leasable minerals including oil , natural gas , coal , and others .

onrr distributes revenues under various authorities .

revenues from onshore leases are disbursed to the states in which they were collected , the general fund of the u.s. treasury , and the reclamation fund based on various statutory formulas .

revenues from offshore leases are allocated among coastal states , the land and water conservation fund , the historic preservation fund , and the treasury .

onrr receives and processes approximately 49,000 royalty and production reports monthly .

it annually collects royalties on some 32,000 offshore and onshore producing leases and rents on some 29,000 nonproducing leases .

onrr uses an automated liquid verification system and gas verification system to ensure the accuracy of reported offshore production information .

h.r .

5538 and s. 3068 contained general provisions related to offshore energy .

section 107 of both bills directed the ocean energy agencies to collect nonrefundable inspection fees in fy2017 to be deposited into bsee's osee account and specified fee amounts .

section 108 of both bills authorized the secretary of the interior to transfer funds among and between bsee , boem , and onrr in accordance with reprogramming guidelines related to the earlier departmental reorganization .

both of these provisions are similar to those in previous years' interior appropriations laws .

section 124 of the house bill would have prohibited the use of funds in fy2017 or any other fiscal year to implement new regulations pertaining to drilling margins or static downhole mud weight in offshore wells .

the provision referred to regulatory changes contained in bsee's april 2016 final rule on offshore well control .

the obama administration included as part of its doi budget some legislative proposals that pertained to the ocean energy agencies .

one doi proposal , concerning offshore revenue - sharing payments under p.l .

109-432 , the gulf of mexico energy security act of 2006 , sought to redirect the payments from their current recipients — the states of alabama , louisiana , mississippi , and texas — to broad federal natural resource and conservation programs .

more than half of the funding would be redirected to a new coastal climate resilience program for at - risk coastal states , local governments , and communities to prepare for and adapt to climate change .

a separate proposed package of federal oil and gas legislation for both offshore and onshore activities included changes such as evaluating minimum royalty rates , adjusting the onshore royalty rate , repealing legislatively mandated royalty relief , providing for shorter primary lease terms , instituting a new fee on nonproducing leases , and making certain changes in revenue collections , among other elements .

congressional action , if any , on such proposals could take place outside of the appropriations process .

