technological advancement and the proliferation of the smartphone have reshaped the commercial landscape , providing consumers new ways to access the retail marketplace .

on - demand companies are one such innovation , and underpinning on - demand commerce is the gig economy , the collection of markets that match service providers to consumers of on - demand services on a gig ( or job ) basis .

flagship on - demand companies such as uber ( driver services ) and handy ( home cleaners and household services ) have garnered significant media attention both for their market success and recent legal challenges , particularly concerning the classification of gig workers .

broader questions about the pros and cons of the gig economy have emerged as on - demand markets grow and the gig economy expands into new sectors .

by some accounts , workers' willingness to participate in the gig economy provides evidence that gig work is a beneficial arrangement .

indeed , gig jobs may yield benefits relative to traditional employment in terms of the ease of finding employment and greater flexibility to choose jobs and hours .

the gig economy may facilitate bridge employment ( eg , temporary employment between career jobs or between full - time work and retirement ) or provide opportunities to generate income when circumstances do not accommodate traditional full - time , full - year employment .

at the same time , however , the potential lack of labor protections for gig workers and the precarious nature of gig work have been met with some concern .

the nationwide reach of gig work and its potential to impact large groups of workers , and their livelihoods , have attracted the attention of some members of congress .

these members have raised questions about the size and composition of the gig workforce , the proper classification of gig workers ( i.e. , as employees or independent contractors ) , the potential for gig work to create work opportunities for unemployed or underemployed workers , and implications of gig work for worker protections and access to traditional employment - based benefits .

in support of these policy considerations , this report provides an overview of the gig economy and identifies legal and policy questions relevant to its workforce .

the gig economy is the collection of markets that match providers to consumers on a gig ( or job ) basis in support of on - demand commerce .

in the basic model , gig workers enter into formal agreements with on - demand companies to provide services to the company's clients .

prospective clients request services through an internet - based technological platform or smartphone application that allows them to search for providers or to specify jobs .

providers ( i.e. , gig workers ) engaged by the on - demand company provide the requested services and are compensated for the jobs .

business models vary across companies that control tech platforms and their associated brands .

some companies allow providers to set prices or select the jobs that they take on ( or both ) , whereas others maintain control over price - setting and assignment decisions .

some operate in local markets ( eg , select cities ) while others serve a global client base .

although driver services ( eg , lyft , uber ) and personal and household services ( eg , taskrabbit , handy ) are perhaps best known , the gig economy operates in many sectors , including business services ( eg , freelancer , upwork ) , delivery services ( eg , instacart , postmates ) , and medical care ( eg , heal , pager ) .

with some exceptions , on - demand companies view providers as independent contractors — not employees — using their platforms to obtain referrals and transact with clients .

this designation is frequently made explicit in the formal agreement that establishes the terms of the provider - company relationship .

in addition , many on - demand companies give providers some ( or absolute ) ability to select or refuse jobs , set their hours and level of participation , and control other aspects of their work .

in some ways , then , the gig economy can be viewed as an expansion of traditional freelance work ( i.e. , self - employed workers who generate income through a series of jobs and projects ) .

however , gig jobs may differ from traditional freelance jobs in a few ways .

the established storefront and brand built by the tech - platform company reduces entry costs for providers and may bring in groups of workers with different demographic , skill , and career characteristics .

because gig workers do not need to invest in establishing a company and marketing to a consumer base , operating costs may be lower and allow workers' participation to be more transitory in the gig market ( i.e. , they have greater flexibility around the number of hours worked and scheduling ) .

in addition , a few commonly held characteristics of the provider - company relationship , when taken together , set gig work apart from the traditional freelance worker model .

on - demand com panies collect a portion of job earnings .

on - demand companies collect commissions from providers for jobs solicited through the company platform .

commissions often take the form of a flat percentage rate applied to job earnings , but some companies employ more sophisticated models .

for example , in 2014 , lyft announced that it would return a portion of its 20% commission on rides as a bonus to certain high - activity drivers .

on - demand companies control the brand .

on - demand companies rely on the jobs brokered through their platform to generate revenue , and therefore have a clear stake in attracting and retaining clients .

consequently , and to varying degrees , these companies are selective about who can operate under their brand .

some on - demand businesses condition provider participation on a background check and credentials ( eg , some require past work experience , licenses , or asset ownership ) , and some reserve the right to terminate the relationship if the work delivered does not meet company - defined standards of quality and professionalism .

on - demand companies control the provider - client relationship .

some on - demand companies discourage or bar providers from accepting work outside the platform from clients who use the company's platform .

the provider agreement for business - services company upwork , for example , includes a noncircumvention clause that prohibits providers from working with any client that identified the provider through the upwork site for 24 months .

likewise , "service professionals" working with the on - demand home - services company handy must agree that they will "not affirmatively solicit [clients] originally referred through the handy platform to book jobs through any means other than the handy platform. .

this is a potentially important difference between gig work and traditional freelance work , because it curtails the provider's ability to build a client base or operate outside the platform .

currently , the federal government does not publish statistics on the gig economy workforce .

instead , most of what is known about the number and characteristics of gig workers is drawn from related labor and tax entity statistics or comes from private - sector studies and academic research .

measuring and characterizing the gig economy workforce are challenging tasks for several reasons .

a first necessary step to measuring gig workers is establishing a precise and measurable statistical definition of the gig economy , a complicated task given the relative newness of the concept , and its broad and evolving application .

a second and closely related challenge is designing a survey that identifies individuals — through self - reported information — who meet this definition .

this challenge requires carefully formulated survey questions that account for how workers perceive their gig economy activity and a data collection strategy that aligns with the potential for seasonal or otherwise dynamic participation .

in addition to survey design issues , the relative infrequency of gig work in the overall population may create additional challenges to obtaining reliable estimates of these workers' characteristics and work patterns .

finally , modifying existing labor force survey instruments to measure these new labor force areas may require significant time and funding .

whether a worker in the gig economy may be considered an employee rather than an independent contractor is significant for purposes of various federal labor and employment laws .

in general , employees enjoy the protections and benefits provided by such laws , whereas independent contractors are not covered .

two laws , in particular , have drawn recent attention .

the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) generally requires the payment of a minimum wage and overtime compensation for hours worked in excess of a 40-hour workweek .

the national labor relations act ( nlra ) recognizes a right to engage in collective bargaining for most employees in the private sector .

individuals working in the gig economy may gain potential benefits in the form of easier entry into and exit from work and greater flexibility to choose jobs and hours .

in contrast , as discussed above , many of the typical labor protections provided by federal legislation , such as those in the flsa , center on the concepts of employee and employer .

in the case of the flsa , approximately 128.5 million , or 89% , of the nation's 144.2 million wage and salary workers are covered by its provisions .

as discussed , the flsa protections , including minimum wage and overtime provisions , are generally not extended to independent contractors .

in a traditional employment relationship , an individual is economically dependent on an employer , and thus not in control of various aspects of work life ( eg , working hours , choice of work tasks ) .

that economic dependency , however , often comes in exchange for some measure of economic security through benefits and protections .

below is a partial list of labor standards and related provisions that are likely affected by the absence of a traditional employment relationship: minimum wage .

most workers covered by the flsa are entitled to a minimum hourly wage , which is currently $7.25 per hour .

in addition , more than half of the states currently have minimum wage rates for flsa - covered workers that are above the federal rate .

in contrast , for workers not covered by the flsa , a category mainly consisting of independent contractors , there is no guaranteed minimum wage rate .

overtime compensation .

the flsa does not limit work hours ; rather , it requires additional payment for hours worked in excess of 40 per workweek .

most workers covered by the flsa must be compensated at one - and - a - half times their regular rate of pay for each hour worked over 40 hours in a workweek .

workers not covered by the flsa are not entitled to additional compensation for hours worked in excess of 40 per workweek .

unemployment compensation .

the cornerstone of the income support for unemployed workers is the federal - state unemployment compensation ( uc ) program , which is generally financed by employer taxes .

whereas the specifics of uc benefits are determined by each state , generally eligibility is based on attaining qualifying wages and employment in covered work and typically does not include independent contractors .

family and medical leave .

the family and medical leave act ( fmla ) entitles eligible employees to unpaid , job - protected leave for qualifying family and medical reasons .

because eligibility for fmla benefits is tied to an individual's work history with an employer and uses the flsa concept of employment , independent contractors are not entitled to fmla provisions .

employer payroll taxes .

in a traditional employment relationship , an employer is responsible for paying the employer's share of social security and medicare taxes ( payroll or fica taxes ) and for withholding the employee's share of these same taxes .

independent contractors , however , are responsible for paying self - employment taxes ( i.e. , the employer and employee shares of fica taxes ) .

beyond federally mandated labor standards , certain other benefits often associated with traditional employment relationships may not be available in the same form to workers in the gig economy .

in many cases , employers may offer a combination of benefit access and subsidies to employees .

the information in table 1 includes rates of access , participation , and take - up that civilian employees have to various benefits .

these data are intended to show the relatively high prevalence of certain employer - based benefits that independent contractors , by definition , do not have access to through employers .

for each benefit type below , the percentage of workers with access by work status is provided to demonstrate the higher proportion of access for full - time workers .

table 1 data indicate that for some of the major benefit categories , such as health , retirement , and life insurance , a majority of employees have access to these benefits through their employers , with correspondingly high take - up rates for these benefits .

the difference between access rates for full - time and part - time workers likewise shows an increasing likelihood of having access to benefits through traditional , full - time employment compared with other work arrangements .

to the extent that gig employment more closely resembles part - time employment , it is likely that workers in this segment of the economy might also have relatively lower access to the traditional employment - related benefits .

these sorts of benefits have traditionally been provided by employers due to cost ( eg , economies of scale ) and administrative efficiency , and are voluntary .

this list of possible employer - assisted benefits above does not mean that independent contractors have no access to such benefits .

rather , these benefits , which are more common for traditional , full - time employees , would have to be accessible through another means , such as a spouse's employer or a market mechanism ( eg , health insurance exchange ) .

as shown in previous sections of this report , the gig economy , and the labor and regulatory issues associated with it , is not well understood .

there is considerable uncertainty , for example , about the number of workers in the gig economy and whether gig work is a primary or secondary source of income for the workers involved .

in addition , some are concerned that gig workers lack access to benefits and protections associated with traditional employment relationships , such as those discussed in " employee protections " and listed in table 1 .

although it is unclear how access to benefits for independent contractors in the gig economy or in general may differ from traditional employment , it is clear that these benefits would likely have to be provided through a nonemployer mechanism , because by definition independent contractors are not employees .

if the availability of benefits and protections for independent contractors in the gig economy continues to draw congressional attention , and to the extent that gig workers seek access to benefits traditionally associated with employed workers , several relevant policy - related considerations may arise as to the best approach to resolve these issues .

these include the following considerations: which , if any , protections and benefits should be available to workers in the gig economy ? .

many of the federal labor protections listed in " employee protections " apply to employees but often exclude bona fide independent contractors .

this exclusion is often undergirded by assumptions that independent contractors have either sufficient market power or a preference for independence from any employer , such that these workers do not need or prefer the level of protection afforded to traditional employees .

if these assumptions do not hold for workers in the gig economy , consideration may be given to which benefits are essential or fundamental for these workers .

one recent proposal in this area would provide for the establishment of a third employment category for workers — called independent workers — who are not traditional employees , but who should not be considered independent contractors .

per this proposal , workers in the gig economy who are deemed independent workers would qualify for benefits associated with a more traditional employment relationship ( eg , insurance , tax withholding ) but not labor protections that are based on the number of hours worked ( eg , minimum wage and overtime ) , given the inherent difficulty of tracking hours in gig employment .

if protections and benefits are extended to more workers in the gig economy , who is responsible for enforcing protections or providing benefits ? .

a possible consideration regarding benefits and protections for workers in the gig economy is that individuals may work for multiple businesses .

to the extent this occurs and benefits are provided through and protections are enforced by an employer , consideration may be given to determining which of the multiple employers is responsible for providing access or enforcement of labor standards .

this could result in determining a primary employer for an individual or determining some shared responsibility across employers .

if benefits are accessible outside of a traditional employment relationship , how might access be structured ? .

rather than employers providing these benefits , intermediaries ( eg , nonprofits ) might facilitate the administration and purchasing of various benefits .

a recent letter from interested parties in the on - demand economy , for example , urged policymakers to consider creating models that would allow on - demand workers to pay into a common fund that provides health , retirement , unemployment , and other benefits that are not tied to a single employer .

new mechanisms , such as portable benefits or risk - pooling , may serve to provide benefits to workers in the on - demand or gig economy .

