after the bursting of the housing bubble and the ensuing financial crisis , congress passed the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l .

111-203 ) , a broad package of reforms that touched on many aspects of the financial system .

it was intended to address the problems that led to turmoil and to ensure that the financial system and the economy are better positioned to withstand future market disruptions .

while some view the dodd - frank act as essential to ensure that consumers are not abused and to promote stability in the financial system , others believe the reforms have imposed an unnecessary burden on lenders — especially small lenders — and have made it more difficult for some consumers to receive loans , particularly mortgages .

critics have highlighted the ability - to - repay ( atr ) and qualified mortgage ( qm ) rule , which implements a dodd - frank act requirement , as a subject of particular concern .

among other things , they argue that the small creditor portfolio qm , a compliance option under the rule that is intended to benefit small creditors that keep loans in portfolio , should be broadened .

they propose modifying the rule to make it easier for a lender to comply if it keeps the loan instead of selling it to another institution .

supporters of expanded portfolio lending proposals argue that because the lender is holding the loan in its portfolio , it is exposed to the risks associated with the loan ( such as the risk that the lender will not be repaid ) and therefore has the incentive to ensure that the loan is safely underwritten .

critics of the expanded portfolio lending proposals argue that the incentives of holding the loan in portfolio are insufficient to protect consumers and that the existing protections in the rule are essential to ensuring that the failures of the past are not repeated .

this report will briefly explain the atr rule and will analyze the policy debate related to portfolio lending and qualified mortgages .

title xiv of the dodd - frank act established the atr requirement .

under the atr requirement , a lender must determine based on documented and verified information that , at the time a mortgage loan is made , the borrower has the ability to repay the loan .

a lender must consider and verify certain types of information prior to originating a loan , including the applicant's income or assets , credit history , outstanding debts , and other criteria .

lenders that fail to comply could be subject to legal liability , such as the payment of certain statutory damages .

under the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) rule implementing the atr requirement , a lender can comply with the atr requirement in two ways .

first , a lender can originate a mortgage that meets the relatively less prescriptive underwriting standards of the general atr option .

under the general atr option , the loan does not need to satisfy specified criteria , but the lender must not make a mortgage "unless the creditor makes a reasonable and good faith determination at or before consummation that the consumer will have a reasonable ability to repay the loan according to its terms. .

second , a lender could originate a mortgage that satisfies the more prescriptive standards of the qm rule .

a qm is more prescriptive than the general atr option in the sense that , to receive qm status , the mortgage must satisfy specific underwriting and product - feature requirements and document compliance with the requirements .

when a lender originates a mortgage that receives qm status , it is presumed to have complied with the atr requirement , which consequently reduces the lender's potential legal liability of its residential mortgage lending activities .

a lender can comply with the atr rule by making a mortgage that is not a qm and instead satisfies the general atr option , but the lender will not receive the additional legal protections .

the definition of a qm , therefore , is important to a lender seeking to minimize its legal risk of its residential mortgage lending activities , specifically its compliance with the statutory atr requirement .

some are concerned that , at least in the short term , few mortgages will be originated that do not meet the qm standards due to the legal protections that qms afford lenders , even though there are other means of complying with the atr requirement .

underwriting and product - feature requirements of the qm categories are intended to ensure that a mortgage receiving qm status satisfies certain minimum standards , with the standards intended to offer protections to borrowers .

a loan that satisfies the less strict general atr option , in contrast , is allowed to have a balloon payment , a term in excess of 30 years , and other features that are generally prohibited in a qm so long as the lender verifies that the borrower would have the ability to repay the loan .

the dodd - frank act defined a qualified mortgage but also provided the cfpb the authority to "prescribe regulations that revise , add to , or subtract from the criteria that define a qualified mortgage" under certain circumstances .

the cfpb - issued qm regulations establish a standard qm that meets all of the underwriting and product - feature requirements outlined in the dodd - frank act .

however , the qm regulations also establish several additional categories of qm that provide lenders the same presumption of compliance legal protections with the atr requirement as a standard qm .

one of those additional categories is the small creditor portfolio qm .

the cfpb argues that the small creditor portfolio qm is "necessary to preserve access to responsible , affordable mortgage credit for some consumers. .

it believes "that portfolio loans made by small creditors are particularly likely to be made responsibly and to be affordable for the consumer. .

to receive qm status under the small creditor portfolio qm , three broad sets of criteria must be satisfied .

first , the loan must be held in the originating lender's portfolio for at least three years ( subject to several exceptions ) .

second , the loan must be held by a small creditor , which is defined as a lender who originated 2,000 or fewer mortgages in the previous year ( excluding portfolio loans ) and has less than $2 billion in assets .

third , the loan must meet certain underwriting and product - feature requirements .

compared with the standard qm , the small creditor portfolio qm has less prescriptive underwriting requirements and is intended to reduce the regulatory burden of the atr rule for small creditors .

to receive qm status under the standard qm , a borrower must have a debt - to - income ( dti ) ratio below 43% after accounting for the payments associated with the mortgage and other debt obligations .

under the small creditor portfolio qm , the lender is required to consider and verify the borrower's dti but does not have a specific numeric threshold that the borrower must be below .

a lender , therefore , has the flexibility to offer a loan with a higher dti ratio if the lender determines that the borrower is creditworthy .

because the dti threshold is considered by some to be one of the factors limiting credit availability under the qm rule , relief from that threshold allows small creditors to originate mortgages that they may not otherwise have made .

though relief is provided from the dti threshold for the small creditor portfolio qm , the other underwriting and product - feature requirements for the standard qm must still be followed .

although the small creditor portfolio qm has less prescriptive underwriting requirements than the standard qm , the small creditor portfolio qm requires a lender to hold the loan in portfolio and limits the portfolio qm option to small creditors .

the cfpb justified establishing the small creditor portfolio qm on the basis that even though the underwriting standards have been reduced ( potentially making it easier for some borrowers to qualify ) , certain factors unique to portfolio loans and to small creditors provide added incentives that ensure that a lender using the small creditor portfolio qm will accurately assess whether a borrower can repay the mortgage .

the cfpb believes both the portfolio requirement and small creditor limitation are necessary to justify the less prescriptive underwriting standards .

supporters of an expanded portfolio lending option contend that not all of the lender and underwriting requirements included in the small creditor portfolio qm are essential to ensuring that a lender will extend credit to creditworthy borrowers and argue that a less burdensome approach can be employed .

some in congress propose establishing an additional portfolio qm option that would have more relaxed eligibility criteria for the three major categories that serve as a framework for discussion — portfolio requirements , lender restrictions , and loan criteria .

this report analyzes three legislative proposals that would establish alternative portfolio qm options .

1 .

s. 1484 , the financial regulatory improvement act of 2015 , was reported by the senate banking committee on june 2 , 2015 .

2 .

s. 1491 / h.r .

2642 , the community lender regulatory relief and consumer protection act of 2015 , have been characterized as an alternative to s. 1484 because the text was initially offered unsuccessfully as an amendment to s. 1484 during the senate banking committee markup .

3 .

h.r .

1210 , the portfolio lending and mortgage access act , was passed by the house on november 18 , 2015 .

table 1 summarizes these proposals and compares them to the small creditor portfolio qm using the three - pronged framework .

the next three sections assess the three primary factors on which the legislative proposals differ compared with the status quo — portfolio requirements , lender restrictions , and loan criteria .

each section first explains how the cfpb's small creditor portfolio qm addresses that factor , and then it assesses how the legislative proposals would address the issue .

having assessed the three major parts individually — portfolio requirements , lender restrictions , and loan criteria — for the different proposals , what would the collective effect on credit availability and on regulatory burden be if an expanded portfolio qm were adopted ? .

the effect on credit availability would depend on many different factors , including which expanded portfolio qm proposal ( if any ) was implemented .

even if the broadest and least prescriptive proposal were enacted , it is unclear how significant an effect it would have on credit availability .

as a recent government accountability office ( gao ) report explains , "agencies , market participants , and observers estimated that the qm ... regulations would not have a significant effect initially because many loans made in recent years already met qm ... criteria before these regulations were promulgated. .

based on gao's analysis , an expanded qm option may not result in a significant expansion in credit availability , as many of the mortgages that would receive qm status under the new qm option would also receive qm status under the previously available options .

similarly , a december 2015 study by the federal reserve found "evidence that some market outcomes were affected by the new rules , but the estimated magnitudes of the responses are small. .

others argue that qm's prescriptive criteria are preventing some lenders from lending to creditworthy borrowers .

a portfolio qm , they argue , could increase credit availability by offering lenders more flexibility .

although gao and the federal reserve found that the qm rule has had a small effect initially on credit availability , the federal reserve argues that the qm rule "could be more binding in the future. .

an expanded portfolio qm's longer - term effects on credit availability , therefore , are unclear .

market participants expect mortgage credit conditions to loosen as more time passes from the bursting of the housing bubble , meaning that lenders may want to expand credit availability , but it is unclear whether they would do so because of the restrictions in the qm rule .

in addition , the temporary gse qm category — which , in general , has less prescriptive underwriting criteria than the standard qm category — is scheduled to expire in 2021 , which may restrain credit after its expiration for borrowers on the margins of creditworthiness .

an expanded portfolio qm option may have a greater effect on credit availability at that time .

although the effect on credit availability may be minimal , an expanded portfolio qm option that has less prescriptive underwriting standards could have a greater impact on regulatory burden .

as with many policy discussions related to regulatory burden , reducing the burden borne by the lender could reduce the protections available to consumers .

as mentioned before , lenders point to the prescriptive underwriting standards found in the cfpb's appendix q as source of their unduly burdensome compliance costs .

the less prescriptive portfolio options would not require lenders to underwrite using appendix q .

so even if a mortgage would have received qm status under an alternative qm option , the fact that the less prescriptive portfolio qm option is available would mean that a lender would not necessarily have to perform as cost - intensive of an evaluation .

the effect on credit availability may be small in this example , but the reduction in regulatory burden may be more meaningful .

the cfpb and many in congress generally agree that if a lender holds a mortgage in portfolio , then the incentives of the lender and borrower are more likely to be aligned than if the lender sold the mortgage .

there is disagreement , however , on the policy implications of whether the incentive effects alone are sufficient or whether other types of restrictions are needed to ensure prudent lending and consumer protection .

in establishing the small creditor portfolio qm , the cfpb argued that because borrower and lender incentives were more correctly aligned , the underwriting criteria for the small creditor portfolio qm could be less prescriptive than for the standard qm , but the compliance option would be limited to small creditors .

the small creditor portfolio qm needs to contain certain lender restrictions and loan criteria rather than just apply to all portfolio loans offered by all lenders , the cfpb contends , because lender and borrower incentives are not perfectly aligned .

the possibility of collateral dependent lending and other factors could result in a lender keeping mortgages in portfolio that may be profitable but not prudently underwritten .

although the lender restrictions and loan criteria are intended to ensure consumers are adequately protected , they may unnecessarily restrict credit and be unduly burdensome to lenders .

the different legislative proposals that would expand the portfolio qm option vary in their implicit responses to the cfpb .

s. 1491 is the most similar to the small creditor portfolio qm in that it would require similar loan criteria to be followed for a mortgage to qualify for the expanded qm but it would allow larger lenders to be eligible .

h.r .

1210 would have the least prescriptive loan criteria and lender requirements .

nearly any mortgage originated by any depository institution would be eligible for the expanded portfolio qm so long as it would be held in the originating lender's portfolio .

s. 1484 would also have more expansive lender eligibility than the current cfpb rule allows and less prescriptive underwriting criteria , but it would require more documentation of a borrower's financial status than h.r .

1210 would require .

the key questions that policymakers face in choosing which , if any , of the legislative proposals to support include the following: are borrower and lender incentives sufficiently aligned so that consumers will be adequately protected and loans will be prudently underwritten when the lender keeps the mortgage in portfolio ? .

is it necessary to limit the portfolio qm option to small lenders because the relationship banking model that they often employ is believed to result in a more accurate assessment of a borrower's ability to repay ? .

if so , lenders of what size ? .

should any type of mortgage held in portfolio — including balloon or interest - only mortgages — be eligible ? .

should the lender be required to follow certain prescribed underwriting procedures or to document a borrower's financial status ? .

could an expanded portfolio qm reduce lenders' regulatory burden while ensuring that consumers have sufficient protections ? .

the answers to these and other questions , which have been explored in this report , may help policymakers in evaluating the legislation .

