the phrase "glass - steagall" generally refers to the separation of commercial banking from investment banking .

in this context , commercial banking refers to the activities engaged in by depository institutions , which this report also will refer to as "banks" or "commercial banks. .

in contrast , investment banking refers to activities engaged in by securities dealers and brokerage firms , which this report also refers to as "investment banks" or "securities firms. .

congress effected a separation of commercial and investment banking through four sections of the banking act of 1933 — sections 16 , 20 , 21 , and 32 — that were designed "to prevent the undue diversion of funds into speculative operations...." these four statutory provisions are commonly referred to as the glass - steagall act .

specifically , section 21 prohibited nonbanks from accepting deposits , while sections 16 , 20 , and 32 prohibited depository institutions from affiliating with securities firms and from engaging in certain securities activities .

although there is general consensus as to what the glass - steagall act refers , there is less consensus regarding what "glass - steagall" truly means .

this lack of consensus is the result of the confluence of factors and events that occurred during the nearly 70 years from when the glass - steagall act was enacted until its partial repeal by the gramm - leach - bliley act ( glba ) in 1999 .

these factors include statutory changes to both the four glass - steagall act provisions and other laws that indirectly impacted the permissible securities activities of commercial banks ; evolving interpretations of the glass - steagall act by both federal administrative agencies and the courts ; and changes in financial markets and economic conditions .

the glass - steagall policy debate focuses on the permissible activities of financial firms in light of the risks associated with those financial activities .

commercial banking ( eg , deposit - taking and lending ) is inherently risky because depositors have the right to withdraw their funds on short notice and external events can cause widespread loan defaults , even if the loans were prudent when approved .

regulatory policies , such as deposit insurance and prudential requirements , can help limit the riskiness of commercial banking .

securities markets are inherently risky because securities prices are volatile .

however , the exposure of a securities firm to price volatility primarily depends on the degree to which the securities firm has traded for its own account ( proprietary trading ) or otherwise contractually committed to the securities , rather than merely serving as the middleman for customers ( whether buyers or issuers of securities ) .

the glass - steagall debate is not centered on prohibiting risky financial services ; rather , the debate is about whether to permit inherently risky commercial and investment banking activities to be conducted within a single firm — specifically within firms holding federally insured deposits .

the united states suffered its worst financial crisis since the great depression less than one decade after glba formally repealed part of the glass - steagall act .

some have argued that the partial repeal either was a cause of the financial crisis that resulted in the so - called great recession or that it fueled and worsened the crisis's deleterious effect .

on the other hand , some policymakers argue that glass - steagall issues were not significant causes of the crisis , and that the glass - steagall act would have made responding to the crisis more difficult if it had remained in place .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) was congress's primary legislative prescription to prevent a similar financial crisis in the future .

the dodd - frank act neither reinstated the sections of the glass - steagall act that were repealed by glba nor substantially modified the ability of depository institutions to affiliate with securities firms .

it did , however , include some arguably glass - steagall - like provisions , which were designed to , among other things , address perceived inadequacies of the financial regulatory system at the time of the great recession so as to promote financial stability going forward ; reduce various speculative activities of banks ; and reduce the likelihood that the u.s. government would have to provide taxpayer support to avert or minimize a future financial crisis .

some believe that a more effective way of accomplishing these policy objectives would be to fully reinstate the glass - steagall act .

in fact , multiple bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress with that stated purpose .

these bills include: s. 1709 / h.r .

3054 , the 21 st century glass - steagall act of 2015 , and h.r .

381 , the return to prudent banking act of 2015 .

the bills would attempt to restore glass - steagall in different ways , although none of them would simply re - enact the original glass - steagall statutory text that was repealed by glba .

the divergent approaches of these bills to reach the same policy objectives reinforce the lack of consensus on what it actually means to "restore glass - steagall. .

others argue that the glass - steagall act is ill - suited for the current financial system and that the recent financial crisis would have occurred even if glba had never partially repealed the glass - steagall act .

to inform this policy debate , this report provides background on the economic conditions in which the glass - steagall act was enacted and provides an economic and legal analysis of the glass - steagall act's enactment , erosion , and partial repeal by glba .

the report concludes with an analysis of the glass - steagall act's relationship with financial stability and the glass - steagall - like provisions of the dodd - frank act .

the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( fed ) was established in 1913 in order to respond to problems in the banking system as a lender of last resort .

yet , many components of the financial system collapsed in the years immediately following the stock market crash of 1929 — a period commonly referred to as the great depression .

banks failed in waves from 1930 through 1933 .

many small and mid - sized banks found it difficult to turn to the fed for assistance .

many of these banks were not members of the federal reserve system and , therefore , did not have access to the fed's lending facilities .

even those that were fed member banks often lacked assets that were eligible to be collateral for loans from the fed .

finding private alternatives to fed loans , including attempts to issue debt securities , also was difficult for small and mid - sized banks , in part because securities markets were also disrupted during the great depression and because smaller institutions often had not tapped securities markets frequently enough or on a large enough scale prior to the great depression to establish sufficient reputations in the market .

fearful of financial turmoil , bank depositors withdrew their funds en masse .

the 1929 crash also precipitated severe mark - downs in the value of securities held by a wide range of other financial institutions , causing many struggling financial firms to sell securities at distressed prices .

for these and other reasons , banks and securities markets spread and magnified economic losses in ways that current policymakers would describe using the terms "systemic risk" and "systemic event. .

in response to the financial crisis that followed the stock market crash of 1929 , the senate passed a resolution that authorized the senate committee on banking and currency to conduct an investigation into the "abusive" banking and securities practices that might have fueled financial instability .

the investigation is referred to as "the pecora commission" after the committee's chief counsel , ferdinand pecora .

the pecora commission identified a number of conflicts of interest and other "[a]buses arising out of the interrelationship of commercial and investment banking" that played a role in that crisis .

the pecora commission report explained: a prolific source of evil has been the affiliated investment companies of large commercial banks .

these affiliates have been employed as instrumentalities by commercial banks to speculate in their own stock , to participate in market operations designed to manipulate the price of securities , and to conduct other operations in which commercial banks are forbidden by law to engage .

commercial banks did not hesitate to violate their fiduciary duty to depositors seeking disinterested investment counsel by referring such inquiries to their affiliates .

the affiliates unloaded securities owned by them on unsuspecting investors and depositors .

the activities of investment affiliates encouraged speculation by officers and directors of commercial banks and resulted in the payment of excessive compensation and profits to these officials .

congress attempted to address many of the causes of systemic risk , as well as the abuses identified by the pecora commission through a series of legislative enactments from 1932-1935 .

these acts included the banking act of 1933 , as well as the securities act of 1933 and the securities and exchange act of 1934 .

the laws addressed a broad swath of banking and securities market issues , including ( 1 ) broadening the range of collateral eligible for loans from the fed ; ( 2 ) establishing the federal home loan bank ( fhlb ) system to enable smaller banks to access securities markets to fund mortgages on more favorable terms ; ( 3 ) establishing the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) to reduce fear among bank depositors ; ( 4 ) imposing a cap on the interest rate that banks could pay depositors ; and ( 5 ) prohibiting banks from participating in certain securities activities .

some of these measures have been repealed ( eg , interest rate caps ) ; some have been altered ( eg , maximum fdic deposit insurance coverage ) ; and some have been continued or expanded ( eg , range of eligible collateral for emergency fed loans ) .

through these acts , congress created distinct regulatory regimes for commercial banks and securities firms in the united states .

generally , these laws reinforced a regulatory system in which banks were subject to activity restrictions and prudential regulation , including on - site examination , while securities firms were subject to a regime based on preventing market manipulation and publicly disclosing information considered sufficiently detailed as to allow the investing public to make informed investment decisions .

the banking act of 1933 was intended "[t]o provide for the safer and more effective use of the assets of banks , to regulate interbank control , and to prevent the undue diversion of funds into speculative operations , and for other purposes. .

it included four sections — sections 16 , 20 , 21 , and 32 — collectively known as the glass - steagall act , which were designed to prevent banking firms from engaging in speculative securities operations .

the glass - steagall act attempted to address some of the specific "[a]buses arising out of the interrelationship of commercial and investment banking" that were identified by the pecora commission , including the following: commercial banks using securities affiliates "to speculate in their own stock , to participate in market operations designed to manipulate the prices of securities , and to conduct other operations in which commercial banks are forbidden by law to engage" ; commercial banks "violating their fiduciary duty to depositors seeking disinterested investment counsel by referring such inquiries to their affiliates" ; and bank - affiliated officers receiving "excessive compensation" for securities deals .

specifically , glass - steagall act section16 , which , although it has been amended over the years , is still in effect , preserves national banks as creatures of limited authority .

pursuant to section 16 , national banks generally are only authorized to engage in "the business of banking" and any "incidental power" thereto .

section 16 generally precludes banks from underwriting and dealing in securities ; however , it does authorize national banks to deal in , underwrite , and purchase certain enumerated securities without quantitative limitation .

these types of securities are referred to as "bank eligible securities," while all other securities are referred to as "bank ineligible securities. .

section 20 of the glass - steagall act prohibited member banks ( i.e. , all national banks and state - chartered banks that are members of the federal reserve system ) from affiliating with businesses that are "engaged principally" in securities activities .

section 21 , which is in force today in an amended form , makes it illegal for a firm to engage in both deposit taking and investment banking , except the "bank eligible securities" allowed under section 16 .

glass - steagall act section 32 prohibited interlocking directorates between member banks and securities firms .

in the short term , the glass - steagall act , in combination with complementary securities laws , erected a rigid wall separating commercial banks and securities firms .

this wall of separation was exemplified by the evolution of one - specific firm — j.p .

morgan & co .

prior to glass - steagall's enactment , j.p. morgan was a prestigious financial conglomerate that successfully engaged in both commercial banking and securities activities .

in response to the glass - steagall act , j.p. morgan & co. was forced to split into two distinct firms with separate boards , directors , officers , and management .

john pierpont morgan , jr. headed the commercial banking business , which took his name , while other partners and employees from the old firm established a separate securities firm called morgan stanley .

in lay language , the investment bank , morgan stanley , was separated from the commercial bank , jpmorgan .

equally important to this discussion is what the glass - steagall act and complementary securities laws did not do .

while the glass - steagall act generally prohibited depository banks from competing in securities markets as broker - dealers and underwriters , the only activities - based restriction on securities firms and their employees contained in the glass - steagall act and the complementary securities laws relevant to this discussion was the prohibition on accepting deposits .

these laws did not prohibit securities market professionals from using securities markets to fund private debt in competition with , or even in conjunction with , commercial banks .

thus , for example , during the glass - steagall era , commercial entities and individual consumers were free to borrow through either securities markets or the commercial banking market .

commercial and consumer borrowers could get a loan: 1. exclusively through the commercial banking market , where the loan was originated and held for its full term by a depository bank ( an originate - to - hold business model ) ; 2. exclusively through the securities markets , where the loan was originated by a nonbank and then sold to a trust , insurance company , or some other nonbank firm ( an originate - to - distribute model ) ; or 3. through a combination of both , where the loan was originated by a depository institution and then sold to a nonbank ( another originate - to - distribute model ) .

in other words , while j.p. morgan & co. could not conduct all of the same activities after glass - steagall as before its enactment within a single , affiliated financial conglomerate , the glass - steagall act did not prohibit all of the very same activities ( in type and volume ) from entering the marketplace through the combined efforts of the unaffiliated jpmorgan ( commercial bank ) and morgan stanley ( investment bank ) .

although glass - steagall limited the scope of the activities of jpmorgan the commercial bank , it had much less to do with the size or scale of the bank going forward .

for example , although the firm that morgan built was broken in two in reaction to the glass - steagall act , the act itself was not designed to cap the size of commercial or investment banks or to break up these banks with the intent of eliminating the risk that they would become "too - big - to - fail. .

it would not have been a violation of the four sections of the glass - steagall act for either jpmorgan or morgan stanley to have grown significantly after the firms were separated .

over the course of the nearly 70-year - long glass - steagall era , the separation of traditional commercial banking and securities activities gradually eroded .

as previously mentioned , this erosion was the result of a confluence of matters , including market changes , statutory changes , and regulatory and judicial interpretations , which are addressed in turn .

after statutory changes and administrative and judicial decisions of the 1970s , 1980s , and 1990s discussed above had increasingly eroded the strict separation between banking and securities dealing envisioned by the glass - steagall act , it was left to glba to eliminate the remaining state and federal barriers to affiliation among banks and securities firms .

glba repealed sections 20 and 32 of the glass - steagall act , which essentially had prohibited affiliations and management interlocks between banking firms and securities firms .

glba eliminated the language in the bhc act that had prevented bank holding companies from taking controlling interests in securities firms .

it also authorized bank holding companies to expand into "financial holding companies," after which the holding company ( through its affiliated subsidiaries ) could conduct a broad spectrum of financial activities and own a greater variety of nonbanking companies , including securities and insurance firms .

in short , universal banking services could be offered through a single ownership structure .

although glba authorized financial holding companies with securities and banking subsidiaries , it left unaltered various laws that imposed activity restrictions on certain types of financial institutions that could be affiliated within a single financial holding company ownership structure .

for example , glba left standing sections 16 and 21 of the glass - steagall act .

it , thus , continued section 16's general prohibition on the ability of depository institutions ( including depositories that are affiliated with securities broker - dealers through a financial holding company structure ) to underwrite and deal securities and to engage in proprietary trading activities with respect to most debt and equity securities .

it also continued section 21's prohibition on the acceptance of deposits by broker - dealers and other nonbanks .

thus , while a wide range of financial services could be offered through a single affiliated financial holding company , individual subsidiaries within the conglomerate are not permitted to offer universal banking services .

finally , glba also preserved laws , such as sections 23a and 23b of the federal reserve act , that restrict and limit the relationships of and transactions entered between affiliates within a single financial holding company conglomerate .

less than a decade after glba's repeal of the glass - steagall act's affiliation restrictions , the united states suffered its worst financial crisis since the great depression .

as previously mentioned , this has led some to argue that the repeal of the glass - steagall act either caused or exacerbated the negative impact of the recent crisis .

what follows is an analysis of the role that the glass - steagall affiliation restrictions played in financial stability , generally , as well as the likely impact that the repeal of those affiliation restrictions had on the recent financial crisis , with a specific focus on the bursting of the housing bubble , which many economists believe was a primary contributor to the crisis .

although the dodd - frank act neither reinstated the sections of the glass - steagall act repealed by glba nor eliminated the ability of banking firms to affiliate with securities firms , it included various provisions designed to meet some of the same policy objectives of the glass - steagall act .

these policy objectives include reducing speculative securities - related activities of commercial banks and eliminating sources of financial instability , including some sources that the glass - steagall act was never intended to address , such as the potential for securities markets to cause a crisis .

one illustration is section 619 of the dodd - frank act , commonly referred to as the volcker rule .

as mentioned in the introduction , trading securities for one's own account ( proprietary trading ) is riskier than mere brokering on behalf of customers .

when trading on behalf of customers , the firm derives a fee no matter which direction the security's price moves .

the volcker rule generally prohibits "banking entities" ( i.e. , commercial banks and their affiliates ) from engaging in the proprietary trading of securities , but permits customer - driven securities transactions .

the dodd - frank act arguably restricts proprietary trading even more than the glass - steagall act did because the volcker rule applies not just to depository institutions , but also to all a depository's affiliates and subsidiaries , including broker - dealers .

the volcker rule also restricts banking entities' ability to make investments in or have relationships with hedge funds and similar "covered funds" that are exempt from registering with the sec or commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) .

the dodd - frank act also includes multiple titles focused on promoting financial stability , many of which are not limited to depository institutions .

some of the examples include heightened prudential regulations under title i , which are applied not only to large banks , but also to systemic nonbank financial institutions .

some examples of heightened prudential regulations include emergency divestiture authority and floors for permissible regulatory standards set by regulators .

in addition , title i of the dodd - frank act established the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) to monitor systemic risks to the u.s. financial system and provided the fed enhanced prudential regulatory powers over systemically important bank and nonbank financial firms .

in addition , the dodd - frank act strengthens mortgage underwriting , origination , and securitization standards for both depository and nondepository institutions in an attempt to address the mortgage - related issues that seemed to play such a significant role in the recent financial crisis .

moreover , the dodd - frank act has left untouched sections 16 and 21 of the glass - steagall act , limiting the types of investments that banks may undertake and precluding securities firms from engaging in deposit taking .

the policy tools incorporated in the dodd - frank act can potentially address several sources of financial instability that the glass - steagall regime alone could not .

for example , not only were commercial banks kept separate from investment banks under the glass - steagall act , but some policy tools for addressing causes of financial instability were limited to the commercial banking sector .

in contrast , the dodd - frank act includes policy tools to provide prudential regulation for large systemic financial firms even if they are not commercial banks , and an administrative alternative to bankruptcy for nondepository financial institutions .

the separation of commercial and investment banking can help insulate insured depositories from volatility in securities markets .

it can also insulate investment decisions by depositors from conflicts of interest if depository bankers refer clients to their own affiliates .

this insulation comes at the cost of reducing the diversification of revenue sources for the banking system .

the separation , by itself , does not address how investment banks are regulated within securities markets or the ways in which nonbanks can use securities activities to fund consumer and commercial debt in competition with depository banks .

that is , the securities laws governing the treatment of debts funded through securities markets can be heightened or eased whether or not commercial banks may affiliate with securities broker - dealers .

separation of commercial and investment banking may help reduce the complexity of examining depositories , although it does not necessarily reduce the complexity of how securities markets fund debt .

over the 70 or so years of the glass - steagall era , economic conditions , regulatory interpretations , and legislative changes eroded the rigid wall it established between commercial and investment banking .

glba was the final step in this process .

the dodd - frank act attempts to promote financial stability and to limit some of the potential speculative activities of commercial banks in various ways , such as through the volcker rule , but it does not completely restore the glass - steagall act .

even if the dodd - frank act had completely re - enacted the repealed provisions of the glass - steagall act , the financial history of the 1970s , 1980s , and 1990s shows that regulatory walls could be difficult to maintain or enforce .

