the german automotive manufacturer volkswagen automotive group ( vw ) has admitted to installing a software algorithm in several of its diesel - fueled vehicle engines that acts as a "defeat device": the software detects wh en the vehicle is undergoing official compliance testing and activates certain pollution control devices to reduce tailpipe emissions .

during normal driving situations , however , the control devices are turned off , resulting in higher emissions of nitrogen oxides ( no x ) and other air pollutants than claimed by the company .

such software could allow higher on - road performance and fuel economy than otherwise attainable with fully active emissions systems .

federal and california regulators examined the use of this software — reportedly installed in 11 million vehicles worldwide from model years ( my ) 2009 to 2016 — and announced a $14.7 billion partial settlement in june 2016 .

the european union ( eu ) is also examining the use of the software .

congress' initial role was to establish the anti - defeat device provisions in the 1970 amendments to the caa .

on october 8 , 2015 , representatives of vw and epa testified on the vw anti - defeat devices before the house energy and commerce committee's subcommittee on oversight and investigations .

given the extensive reporting about and high visibility of vw's use of defeat devices , congress may wish to conduct further oversight .

potential issues include whether epa has sufficient resources to monitor vehicle emissions , whether the current penalty structure is sufficient , why epa failed to detect vw's defeat device when there have been similar cases in the past , and whether vw's response to the emissions problem and efforts to provide restitution to u.s. customers have been adequate .

congress may also look to provide more oversight of epa rulemaking for motor vehicle emissions standards .

the problems with vw's diesel emissions controls also are relevant to the proposed transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( ttip ) , now under negotiation between the united states and the european union .

among many other topics , the negotiators are discussing harmonization of u.s. and eu vehicle regulations to make it simpler to sell u.s. - made vehicles in the eu and vice versa .

harmonization of environmental regulations and testing procedures are among the issues under discussion .

