the american recovery and reinvestment act ( recovery act ; p.l .

111-5 , enacted february 17 , 2009 ) provided $3.4 billion for carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) projects and activities at the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) .

the large and rapid influx of funding for industrial - scale ccs projects was intended to accelerate development and demonstration of ccs in the united states .

recovery act funding represented the lion's share of ccs support at doe in the six - year period from fy2010 through fy2015 .

by comparison , doe separately allotted a total of approximately $2.3 billion over the same time period to ccs - related activities from annual appropriations — not recovery act funding — under its coal program activities within the office of fossil energy .

authority to spend recovery act funds expired on september 30 , 2015 .

of the $3.4 billion allocated for ccs activities , approximately $1.4 billion went unspent as of the 2015 spending deadline .

the largest portion of the unspent funds , $795 million , was intended for doe's flagship ccs project , futuregen , which doe suspended in february 2015 .

however , several other large ccs demonstration projects were canceled , suspended , or failed to spend all of their recovery act funding before the deadline .

this report provides a preliminary assessment of recovery act - funded ccs projects and discusses possible factors that led to project delay , suspension , or cancellation within the context of doe's broader ccs effort .

recovery act funding was intended , in part , to help doe achieve its research , development , and demonstration ( rd&d ) goals as outlined in the department's 2010 carbon dioxide capture and storage rd&d roadmap .

doe states that the mission for the doe office of fossil energy is "to ensure the availability of ultra - clean ( near - zero emissions ) , abundant , low - cost domestic energy from coal to fuel economic prosperity , strengthen energy security , and enhance environmental quality. .

over the past several years , the doe fossil energy research and development program increasingly shifted activities performed under its coal program toward emphasizing ccs as the main focus .

for example , the coal program represented between 60% and 70% of total fossil energy research and development appropriations from fy2010 to fy2015 — even without recovery act funding — indicating that ccs has come to dominate coal rd&d at doe .

this development reflects doe's view that "there is a growing consensus that steps must be taken to significantly reduce [greenhouse gas] emissions from energy use throughout the world at a pace consistent to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of [carbon dioxide] , and that ccs is a promising option for addressing this challenge. .

congress has long been interested in the future of ccs as a mitigation strategy for lowering global emissions of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) .

since fy2008 , it has appropriated more than $7 billion for ccs activities at doe .

several bills introduced in the 114 th congress address ccs directly or indirectly ( eg , s. 601 , s. 1283 , h.r .

3392 , and others ) .

the obama administration has promulgated rules on co 2 emissions from current and future fossil fuel - burning power plants and entered into a global agreement to limit co 2 emissions .

congress remains divided over those executive branch decisions .

doe , however , has continued to embrace ccs as part of the administration's strategy to reduce co 2 emissions from power plants: roughly one - third of u.s. carbon emissions come from power plants and other large point sources .

doe is committed to enabling the safe and permanent storage and utilization of co 2 captured from these sources .

building on available first generation technologies , next generation carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) technologies or carbon dioxide utilization technologies , expected to become commercially available in the mid - 2020s , will help put us on a path to a clean energy option for a world currently dependent on fossil fuels for 80% of its energy .

the recovery act provided a de facto doubling of appropriations for ccs rd&d from enactment until the end of fy2015 .

a preliminary assessment of recovery act - funded ccs projects might help to inform lawmakers about factors that affect the rate of progress of developing and demonstrating ccs technology .

understanding these factors also might help to clarify the potential for ccs as a greenhouse - gas ( ghg ) mitigation strategy as congress debates whether and how to reduce co 2 emissions from large , stationary sources .

 table 1 shows the doe office of fossil energy spending from fy2010 through fy2016 , including the amounts provided by the recovery act .

in the table , recovery act programs are organized under the ccs demonstrations category .

ccs - related programs funded by annual appropriations apart from the recovery act are organized under the coal ccs and power systems category .

the remainder of fossil energy spending is organized under other fossil energy r&d .

doe changed the program structure for coal after fy2010 , renaming and consolidating program areas .

in table 1 , the coal ccs and power systems bottom line total is provided for fy2010 , but the amounts for individual programs are not provided for that year because of the reorganization .

recovery act funding supported four main categories of activities: ( 1 ) futuregen ; ( 2 ) the clean coal power initiative ( ccpi ) ; ( 3 ) industrial carbon capture and storage ( iccs ) ; and ( 4 ) site characterization , training , and program direction .

futuregen , ccpi , and iccs garnered the bulk of recovery act funds for ccs ( $3.32 billion , or 98% ) .

funding was made available as a one - time appropriation , but doe had authority to spend recovery act funds through fy2015 .

accordingly , table 1 shows the recovery act funding amounts in one column for 2009 , but those funds were available through fy2015 .

zeroes in the columns for fy2010 through fy2015 indicate that no new recovery act funds were made available during those years .

however , doe continued to fund other ccs programs and activities with regular appropriations in each of those years , as shown by the rows in the table below recovery act programs .

under the 2010 doe ccs roadmap , and with the large infusion of funding from the recovery act , doe's goal has been to develop the technologies that will allow for commercial - scale demonstration in both new and retrofitted power plants and industrial facilities by 2020 .

the doe 2011 strategic plan set a more specific target: to bring at least five commercial - scale ccs demonstration projects online by 2016 .

the doe 2014-2018 strategic plan is less specific , stating that next - generation ccs technologies , available sometime in the 2020s , would put the united states on a path toward a clean - energy option for the world .

in its fy2016 budget justification , doe stated that the ccs and power systems research and development ( r&d ) program "supports secure , affordable , and environmentally acceptable near - zero emissions fossil energy technologies through research , development , and demonstration ( rd&d ) to improve the performance of advanced ccs technologies. .

some programs are directly focused on one or more of the three steps of ccs: capture , transportation , and storage .

for example , the carbon capture program supports r&d on post - combustion , pre - combustion , and natural gas capture .

the carbon storage program supports the regional carbon sequestration partnerships , geological storage technologies , and other aspects of permanently sequestering co 2 underground .

also shown in table 1 are funding levels under other fossil energy r&d .

activities in this category include programs pursuing fossil energy r&d and support activities .

the largest activity is program direction ( $114.2 million in fy2016 ) , which provides doe headquarters support and federal field and contractor support of the overall fossil energy r&d programs .

these activities support ccs - related activities directly and indirectly .

the next - largest activities are natural gas technologies ( $43 million in fy2016 ) and unconventional fossil ( $20.3 million in fy2016 ) , which support collaborative research to foster safe and prudent development of shale gas resources , the reduction of methane emissions from natural gas infrastructure , and research on gas hydrates .

the other activities listed in table 1 — plant and capital , environmental restoration , and special recruitment — total approximately $24.5 million for fy2016 .

the fy2016 appropriated amount for coal r&d is a 7.5% increase over the previous year's enacted amount .

the total fossil energy fy2016 appropriation is about 10% higher than the fy2015 appropriation ( in unadjusted dollars ) .

fy2016 marks the first year since fy2009 , however , in which recovery act funds are not available for ccs - related projects in addition to regular appropriations .

the following section reviews where doe allocated recovery act funds for ccs - related activities , the status of those endeavors , and which projects left portions of their recovery act awards unspent at the september 30 , 2015 deadline .

nine individual projects garnered approximately $2.65 billion of the $3.4 billion — about 78% — made available under the recovery act for ccs projects and activities .

five of the nine projects are large - scale demonstration projects that were intended to capture co 2 from electric power plants ( futuregen and four ccpi round iii projects , see table 2 ) .

the remaining four projects listed in table 2 are large , industrial - scale demonstration projects under the iccs program .

the projects in each category were awarded more than $100 million .

they are listed to illustrate that doe prioritized large - scale demonstration projects with recovery act funding .

for comparison , the iccs projects not included in table 2 ( combined in the all other projects category ; see appendix for detailed listing by project ) are smaller in scope and received recovery act funds in amounts ranging from less than $1 million to $72 million , averaging about $12 million .

the ccpi program originally provided federal support to new coal technologies that helped power plants to cut sulfur , nitrogen , and mercury pollutants .

as ccs became the focus of coal rd&d , the ccpi program shifted to reducing ghg emissions by boosting plant efficiencies and capturing co 2 .

the iccs program demonstrates carbon capture technology for the non - power plant industrial sector .

both these program areas focus on the demonstration component of rd&d .

futuregen was unique as originally conceived because it was intended to include the full ccs spectrum — capture , transportation , and storage — as one state - of - the - art , unified facility .

approximately 60% of the nearly $995 million in recovery act funds allocated to futuregen went to capture , with the remaining 40% used for transportation and storage .

stakeholders and observers long have emphasized the importance of large - scale demonstration projects to the future commercial deployment of ccs at large , stationary sources of co 2 , such as power plants and large industrial facilities .

doe's shift in emphasis to the demonstration phase of carbon capture technology within its fossil energy rd&d program is therefore not surprising .

it was manifest in doe's allocation of approximately $2.65 billion of the $3.4 billion in recovery act funds to nine large - scale demonstration projects ( listed in table 2 ) .

in addition , doe's decision to allocate the majority of recovery act ccs funding to support demonstration projects aligns with the evolution of cost estimates for new environmental technologies , in which the demonstration phase is the costliest , as illustrated in figure 1 .

in comparative studies of cost estimates for other environmental technologies , such as scrubbers that remove sulfur and nitrogen compounds from power plant emissions , some experts note that the farther away a technology is from commercial reality , the more uncertain is its estimated cost .

as figure 1 portrays , at the beginning of the rd&d process , initial cost estimates could be low , but they typically increase through the demonstration phase before decreasing after successful deployment and commercialization .

some stakeholders argue that doe ccs programs have been inadequately funded , and that the doe incentive programs for deploying ccs are not as effective as they should be .

one study concluded that even the financial boost from the recovery act was insufficient support for development and commercialization of ccs technology: while the $3.4 billion allocated for ccs in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) of 2009 was a good start in providing the kind of federal funding assistance needed for ccs technology development , much of those funds were returned to treasury due to canceled projects .

because ccs projects are more complex and carry higher risk , several of the projects that received arra funding awards have had challenges achieving financial close .

arra funding falls short of what will be needed to successfully commercialize and support widespread development of ccs technology .

large - scale ccs projects are complex endeavors , requiring large capital investment and multiyear planning and construction schedules .

nevertheless , the conclusion that more federal funding by itself — per the quote above — is what is needed to support development and commercialization of ccs technology may be overly simplistic .

the ability for projects to achieve "financial close" goes beyond lack of sufficient funding for several projects discussed above , notably futuregen , the aep mountaineer project , and the other projects listed in table 3 that were initially selected to receive recovery act funding but withdrew for various reasons .

further , delays in the timelines for the hydrogen energy california and summit texas clean energy projects , under doe ccpi round iii , led to each project relinquishing more than $100 million in recovery act funding .

the complexity and risk inherent in each of these projects no doubt affected the projects' ability to attract private financing , which may have led to project delay , but financial considerations were one of many challenges .

futuregen , in particular , faced various impediments that led to its cancellation despite receiving nearly $1 billion of recovery act funds .

as briefly discussed above ( see " challenges and delays " ) , these impediments included delays in receiving the required injection - well permits from the environmental protection agency , court challenges to its plan to sell electricity , and a lawsuit from an environmental advocacy group .

futuregen , a genuine first - mover project with a more than 10-year lifespan , may have been the highest - profile ccs project in the united states , which could have drawn additional attention from ccs opponents .

for these reasons and likely others , futuregen was unable to move its construction schedule forward at a sufficient pace , despite having more than $990 million in recovery act funds available to expend over a five - year period .

at the end of five years , futuregen had spent only 20% of its recovery act award .

of the four ccpi large - scale ccs demonstration projects listed in table 2 , three projects — hydrogen energy california , summit texas clean energy , and nrg energy / petra nova — are still viable and could eventually become operational .

two of the three projects had to return about $226 million of the $486 million in awarded recovery act funds , however , which put further strain on private - sector financing for those projects .

including futuregen and aep mountaineer , the five electricity - generating large - scale ccs demonstration projects expended 55% of awarded recovery act funds and left the remaining 45% unspent .

of the ccpi projects funded by recovery act dollars , nrg energy / petra nova was the only one to expend all its recovery act - awarded funds .

this project has begun construction and appears to be closest to becoming operational of all the ccpi round iii projects .

of the three iccs large - scale demonstration projects in table 2 , only one — leucadia energy , llc — failed to expend its recovery act award and left about $249 million unspent .

the air products & chemicals , inc. , large demonstration project is currently operational and has captured and stored more than 2 million metric tons of co 2 since late 2012 .

the archer daniels midland large demonstration project is scheduled to begin operations sometime in 2016 .

all other iccs projects appear to have expended their recovery act funds prior to the september 30 , 2015 , deadline .

the example of the kemper county energy facility in kemper county , ms , an integrated gasification combined - cycle ( igcc ) power plant that will be owned and operated by mississippi power company , a subsidiary of southern company , provides insight into several recovery act - funded projects .

doe awarded southern company services a cooperative agreement under the ccpi round ii program , prior to enactment of the recovery act and the ccpi round iii awards , to develop gasification technology called transport integrated gasification ( trig tm ) .

the kemper project may be the first electricity - generating power plant with ccs to begin operations in the united states .

doe awarded kemper $270 million , a figure comparable to recovery act awards for ccpi and iccs large demonstration projects shown in table 2 .

similar to many of those projects , the complex kemper project experienced schedule delays and cost overruns .

currently , the projected start date is the third quarter of 2016 , and the project's overall cost has increased from less than $3 billion to more than $6.6 billion .

the technical challenges for a first - mover demonstration plant of its kind , and the concomitant escalating cost estimates , lend credence to the shape of the cost curve trend shown in figure 1 , in which demonstration plants are at peak cost between development and deployment .

most , if not all , of the large ccpi projects likely fall along that portion of the cost curve depicted in figure 1 .

in contrast to the recovery act - funded projects listed in table 2 , the kemper project did not face a september 30 , 2015 spending deadline .

doe acknowledges that many of the recovery act - funded projects were technologically difficult and challenging , but it does not consider the relinquishment of unspent funds to signify project failure ; rather , doe takes the relinquishment of funds to mean that the projects simply did not meet the requirement to spend the funds by the deadline .

doe notes that due to its spending on ccs and its partnerships with industry , the costs of capturing co 2 have dropped significantly and its projects have stored more than 10 million metric tons of co 2 .

despite these achievements , some stakeholders conclude that the doe ccs program "has not reached critical mass with regard to the commercialization of ccs in the time frame needed to meet stated u.s. goals for co 2 emissions reductions. .

even though recovery act funding predominantly targeted large - scale demonstration projects , "significantly more ccs / ccus pilot and demonstration projects are needed in order to commercially deploy the technology... .

without adequate demonstration , there can be no commercialization. .

the level of funding for ccs projects is a perennial issue for congress .

given that a substantial amount of appropriated funding through the recovery act for ccs demonstration projects went unspent , congress may examine the broader policy , financial , and regulatory factors that posed challenges to several large recovery act - funded demonstration projects and led to their delay or cancellation .

