title xvii of the carl levin and howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 ( p.l .

113-291 ) established the national commission on the future of the army ( ncfa ) to conduct a comprehensive study of the structure of the army ( see the appendix ) .

the ncfa reported its findings to congress and the administration on january 28 , 2016 , and made a number of recommendations that may or may not be acted upon .

the ncfa is likely to participate in congressional briefings and / or hearings detailing the ncfa's recommendations .

some have suggested the historical post - war practice of reducing defense budgets , in part , contributed to the perceived need for a commission to address proposed changes to the army .

one defense analyst characterized this situation , noting: the decline in the size of the active - duty force caused by reduced budgets has sparked tension among the active , guard , and reserve components over their respective missions and corresponding resources .

lacking the ability to fund the existing arrangement of active , reserve , and guard forces adequately , service chiefs have had to reallocate funding , forcing reconsideration of what each component needs to have and for what purpose .

on may 6 , 2014 , senators patrick leahy and lindsey graham introduced a bill to establish an ncfa and highlighted the concerns of some members: mr. leahy .

mr. president , yesterday senator graham and i introduced a bill to establish a national commission on the future of the army , an independent panel that will bear the responsibility of analyzing some major changes to the u.s. army that were proposed in the president's budget .

the army's budget for fiscal year 2015 sets a path toward major , irreversible changes to army capacity and capability , particularly in the army national guard and army reserves that cannot be ignored by the congress .

senator graham , my fellow co - chair of the senate national guard caucus , has said repeatedly that these changes fundamentally alter what it means for the national guard to be a combat reserve of the army .

the changes would also render the nation's operational reserve insufficient in its ability to retain gains in experience and readiness that the reserve has achieved over a decade of continuous deployment .

most dramatically , these changes would transfer all of the national guard's ah – 64 apaches to the active component , leaving the nation without any combat reserves for one of the aircraft most essential to ground operations .

the decision to establish an ncfa was also likely influenced by two previous commissions that also addressed contemporary military issues — the 2014 national commission on the structure of the air force and the 2015 military compensation and retirement modernization commission .

both commissions provided a number of recommendations that have been either adopted by the air force or , in the case of the military compensation and retirement modernization commission , enacted through legislation or policy changes and applicable to all u.s. servicemembers .

on january 28 , 2016 , the ncfa released its final report .

as part of the report , the ncfa produced a classified appendix ( see topic outline and access instructions in appendix e of the report ) , which is available to those with the appropriate clearance and a "need to know. .

the 208-page report contained 63 recommendations for the nation , the president , congress , the department of defense , the joint staff , combatant commands , the army , and army service component commands , and these recommendations are summarized in appendix b of the report .

the commission's major findings and recommendations are summarized below: an army of 980,000 soldiers ( regular army of 450,000 ; army national guard of 335,000 ; and an army reserve of 195,000 ) is the minimally sufficient force to meet current and anticipated missions with an acceptable level of risk .

this finding is consistent with the endstrength and force mix minimums established by army leadership in 2014 .

the army should retain an 11 th regular army combat aviation brigade ( cab ) instead of drawing down to 10 cabs as proposed under the ari .

this 11 th cab should be forward stationed in south korea .

the commission believes there is significant risk in terms of aviation safety given terrain and aviation mission complexities for rotational aviation forces in korea .

forward stationing of this cab in south korea would provide aircrew greater familiarity with the demanding environment and enhance interoperability with south korean allies .

the army should forward station an armored brigade combat team ( abct ) in europe .

while the army is currently rotating an abct through europe , both the changing european security environment , as well as the advantages of deploying from europe if the abct is required for a middle eastern contingency , support the permanent stationing of an abct in europe .

based on its analysis , the commission believes little additional staffing would be required to accommodate the forward stationed abct .

the commission noted a significant shortfall in army air defense capability as a result of post - cold war changes in force structure .

noting the security situations in the ukraine and syria , concern was expressed that no short - range air defense battalions were in the regular army and a sizeable percentage of the national guard's short - range air defense capability was devoted to protecting the national capital region , leaving little spare capacity for contingency operations .

the commission also found shortfalls in tactical mobility ; missile defense ; chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear ( cbrn ) defense — particularly as it relates to homeland defense ; field artillery ; fuel distribution ; water purification ; army watercraft ; and military police .

if the army's 980,000 soldier strength cannot be increased to address the creation of units to address the aforementioned shortfalls , the army should consider eliminating two regular army infantry brigade combat teams ( ibcts ) to free up spaces to create these units .

while such an action might provide the needed spaces , equipping these units would likely require the dedication of significant budgetary resources unless equipment already exists within the army's inventory .

regarding the army's proposed aviation restructuring initiative ( ari ) , the commission recommends the army maintain 24 manned ah - 64 apache battalions — 20 in the regular army and 4 in the national guard .

the regular army apache battalions would be equipped with 24 ah - 64s , and the national guard battalions would have 18 apache helicopters and would need to cross level helicopters between units prior to deploying .

to help decrease the costs to the commission's recommendation , only 2 uh - 60 black hawk transport helicopter battalions would be added to the national guard as opposed to the 4 black hawk battalions under the army's ari proposal .

as previously noted , title xvii of the fiscal year 2015 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

113-291 ) established the national commission on the future of the army ( ncfa ) .

it is detailed in the appendix , but the commission's charter , structure , and operations are summarized in the following sections .

apart from the commission's major findings detailed earlier in this report , the commission presented thematic findings , each of which contains a number of specific recommendations , and it is here where the vast majority of the commission's 63 recommendations are found .

it should be noted that many of these less prominent recommendations , like the major findings , could prove to be both difficult and costly to implement .

with the issuance of the final report , two potential questions arise .

first , by what means or process would the administration , congress , and the army evaluate the ncfa's recommendations and then decide which ones to implement ? .

second , should the administration , congress , and the army agree upon which recommendations to implement , how would this be accomplished ? .

without an established process to vet evaluations and an implementation plan , the commission's work might become more informative in nature as opposed to an actionable plan .

the commission's 63 recommendations run the gamut from creating new units , forward stationing units overseas , creating new military school and pay systems , to not implementing the army's aviation restructuring initiative .

one common aspect of these varied recommendations is they each have an associated cost , and finding "offsets" might not be practical or possible to fund these initiatives .

another consideration , dependent on the number of recommendations adopted for implementation , is that in many cases , costs must be established for these recommendations and this might prove to be a difficult and lengthy undertaking .

once costs are estimated , there would likely be some process initiated to determine what recommendations are affordable under current and projected budget constraints and which recommendations might have to be deferred .

there are a number of potential difficulties associated with implementing the commission's recommendations .

perhaps the most significant hurdle to implementation is affordability but this can be addressed by a variety of means including "offsets," providing the army additional budgetary authority , or modifying or time - phasing the implementation of the commission's recommendations .

developmental and technical issues and bureaucratic opposition can also pose significant challenges to the implementation of the commission's recommendations .

just as it is important to have a clear understanding of the costs associated with a recommendation , policymakers may wish to consider potential developmental and technical problems and possible bureaucratic push - back in order to facilitate the effective implementation of the commission's recommendations .

the final stage of implementation is oversight .

while some recommendations can be implemented in fairly short order , others might take a number of years to fully realize .

it is not readily apparent how congress would choose to oversee the implementation of potentially dozens of the commission's recommendations .

one possible mechanism might be to establish special hearings dealing exclusively with ncfa recommendation implementation or possibly the army's annual posture or modernization hearings might be the appropriate oversight venue .

other possible means of oversight could be semiannual or annual reports to congress or periodic updates to members , staffs , and congressional defense committees .

the formal establishment and designation of a means of congressional oversight could prove to be beneficial to all concerned parties .

title xvii — national commission on the future of the army subtitle a — establishment and duties of commission sec .

1701 .

short t itle .

sec .

1702 .

national commission on the future of the army .

sec .

1703 .

duties of the commission .

sec .

1704 .

powers of the commission .

sec .

1705 .

commission p ersonnel m atters .

sec .

1706 .

termination of the commission .

sec .

1707 .

funding .

subtitle b — related limitations sec .

1701 .

short title .

this subtitle may be cited as the "national commission on the future of the army act of 2014'' .

sec .

1702 .

national commission on the future of the army .

 ( a ) establishment. — there is established the national commission on the future of the army ( in this subtitle referred to as the ( "`commission'' ) .

 ( b ) membership. — ( 1 ) composition. — the commission shall be composed of eight members , of whom — ( a ) four shall be appointed by the president ; ( b ) one shall be appointed by the chairman of the committee on armed services of the senate ; ( c ) one shall be appointed by the ranking member of the committee on armed services of the senate ; ( d ) one shall be appointed by the chairman of the committee on armed services of the house of representatives ; and ( e ) one shall be appointed by the ranking member of the committee on armed services of the house of representatives .

 ( 2 ) appointment date. — the appointments of the members of the commission shall be made not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this act .

 ( 3 ) effect of lack of appointment by appointment date. — if one or more appointments under subparagraph ( a ) of paragraph ( 1 ) is not made by the appointment date specified in paragraph ( 2 ) , the authority to make such appointment or appointments shall expire , and the number of members of the commission shall be reduced by the number equal to the number of appointments so not made .

if an appointment under subparagraph ( b ) , ( c ) , ( d ) , or ( e ) of paragraph ( 1 ) is not made by the appointment date specified in paragraph ( 2 ) , the authority to make an appointment under such subparagraph shall expire , and the number of members of the commission shall be reduced by the number equal to the number otherwise appointable under such subparagraph .

 ( 4 ) expertise. — in making appointments under this subsection , consideration should be given to individuals with expertise in national and international security policy and strategy , military forces capability , force structure design , organization , and employment , and reserve forces policy .

 ( c ) period of appointment ; vacancies. — members shall be appointed for the life of the commission .

any vacancy in the commission shall not affect its powers , but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment .

 ( d ) chair and vice chair. — the commission shall select a chair and vice chair from among its members .

 ( e ) initial meeting. — not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the commission have been appointed , the commission shall hold its initial meeting .

 ( f ) meetings. — the commission shall meet at the call of the chair .

 ( g ) quorum. — a majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum , but a lesser number of members may hold hearings .

sec .

1703 .

duties of the commission .

 ( a ) study on structure of the army. — ( 1 ) in general. — the commission shall undertake a comprehensive study of the structure of the army , and policy assumptions related to the size and force mixture of the army , in order — ( a ) to make an assessment of the size and force mixture of the active component of the army and the reserve components of the army ; and ( b ) to make recommendations on the modifications , if any , of the structure of the army related to current and anticipated mission requirements for the army at acceptable levels of national risk and in a manner consistent with available resources and anticipated future resources .

 ( 2 ) considerations. — in undertaking the study required by subsection ( a ) , the commission shall give particular consideration to the following: ( a ) an evaluation and identification of a structure for the army that — ( i ) has the depth and scalability to meet current and anticipated requirements of the combatant commands ; ( ii ) achieves cost - efficiency between the regular and reserve components of the army , manages military risk , takes advantage of the strengths and capabilities of each , and considers fully burdened lifecycle costs ; ( iii ) ensures that the regular and reserve components of the army have the capacity needed to support current and anticipated homeland defense and disaster assistance missions in the united states ; ( iv ) provides for sufficient numbers of regular members of the army to provide a base of trained personnel from which the personnel of the reserve components of the army could be recruited ; ( v ) maintains a peacetime rotation force to avoid exceeding operational tempo goals of 1:2 for active members of the army and 1:5 for members of the reserve components of the army ; and ( vi ) manages strategic and operational risk by making tradeoffs among readiness , efficiency , effectiveness , capability , and affordability .

 ( b ) an evaluation and identification of force generation policies for the army with respect to size and force mixture in order to fulfill current and anticipated mission requirements for the army in a manner consistent with available resources and anticipated future resources , including policies in connection with — ( i ) readiness ; ( ii ) training ; ( iii ) equipment ; ( iv ) personnel ; and ( v ) maintenance of the reserve components as an operational reserve in order to maintain as much as possible the level of expertise and experience developed since september 11 , 2001 .

 ( c ) an identification and evaluation of the distribution of responsibility and authority for the allocation of army national guard personnel and force structure to the states and territories .

 ( d ) an identification and evaluation of the strategic basis or rationale , analytical methods , and decision - making processes for the allocation of army national guard personnel and force structure to the states and territories .

 ( b ) study on transfer of certain aircraft. — ( 1 ) in general. — the commission shall also conduct a study of a transfer of army national guard ah - 64 apache aircraft from the army national guard to the regular army .

 ( 2 ) considerations. — in conducting the study required by paragraph ( 1 ) , the commission shall consider the factors specified in subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) .

 ( c ) report. — not later than february 1 , 2016 , the commission shall submit to the president and the congressional defense committees a report setting forth a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the commission as a result of the studies required by subsections ( a ) and ( b ) , together with its recommendations for such legislative and administrative actions as the commission considers appropriate in light of the results of the studies .

sec .

1704 .

powers of the commission .

 ( a ) hearings. — the commission may hold such hearings , sit and act at such times and places , take such testimony , and receive such evidence as the commission considers advisable to carry out its duties under this subtitle .

 ( b ) information from federal agencies. — the commission may secure directly from any federal department or agency such information as the commission considers necessary to carry out its duties under this subtitle .

upon request of the chair of the commission , the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the commission .

 ( c ) postal services. — the commission may use the united states mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the federal government .

sec .

1705 .

commission personnel matters .

 ( a ) compensation of members. — each member of the commission who is not an officer or employee of the federal government may be compensated at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of $155,400 for each day ( including travel time ) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the commission .

all members of the commission who are officers or employees of the united states shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the united states .

 ( b ) travel expenses. — the members of the commission shall be allowed travel expenses , including per diem in lieu of subsistence , at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter i of chapter 57 of title 5 , united states code , while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the commission .

 ( c ) staff. — ( 1 ) in general. — the chair of the commission may , without regard to the civil service laws and regulations , appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the commission to perform its duties .

the employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the commission .

 ( 2 ) compensation. — the chair of the commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to chapter 51 and subchapter iii of chapter 53 of title 5 , united states code , relating to classification of positions and general schedule pay rates , except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level v of the executive schedule under section 5316 of such title .

 ( d ) detail of government employees. — any federal government employee may be detailed to the commission without reimbursement , and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege .

 ( e ) procurement of temporary and intermittent services. — the chair of the commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109 ( b ) of title 5 , united states code , at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level v of the executive schedule under section 5316 of such title .

sec .

1706 .

termination of the commission .

the commission shall terminate 90 days after the date on which the commission submits its report under this subtitle .

sec .

1707 .

funding .

amounts authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2015 by section 301 and available for operation and maintenance for the army as specified in the funding table in section 4301 may be available for the activities of the commission under this subtitle .

