for more than a decade , congress and the federal government have focused on ending homelessness among the chronically homeless population , a group characterized by extended periods of time spent living on the street or other places not meant for human habitation and having one or more disabling conditions .

the strategy embraced by the federal government for ending chronic homelessness for more than a decade is permanent supportive housing ( psh ) — housing in conjunction with services for chronically homeless individuals .

one model of psh , called housing first , emphasizes consumer choice and lack of preconditions , and has gained prominence in recent years .

psh interventions are a change from an earlier philosophy that chronically homeless individuals must address underlying issues like substance abuse and mental illness to become "housing ready" prior to moving into permanent housing .

an impetus for prioritizing chronically homeless individuals for permanent housing resources is evidence that they use many high - cost services such as emergency rooms , hospitals , law enforcement resources , and emergency shelters .

according to some research , providing psh could be more cost - effective than providing emergency shelter or transitional housing , or even no intervention .

research regarding housing interventions for chronically homeless individuals has had a part in driving federal policy , and studies are often cited as supporting psh as an effective intervention .

this crs report summarizes the research surrounding psh for chronically homeless individuals .

in doing so , it attempts to examine the nuance in the research to determine where psh could be considered successful and where gaps may remain .

the report discusses what it means to be chronically homeless ( " what is chronic homelessness ? .

" ) , the way in which assistance for chronically homeless individuals has evolved ( " evolution of the permanent supportive housing strategy " ) , and how federal programs target assistance to individuals experiencing chronic homelessness ( " federal actions to assist people experiencing chronic homelessness " ) .

in addition , it summarizes the research regarding chronically homeless individuals who move into psh ( " research on permanent supportive housing for chronically homeless individuals " ) .

the final section discusses questions and implications of the research .

tables in appendix b contain summaries of all research reviewed by crs .

the term "chronic homelessness" describes individuals who have spent long periods of time experiencing homelessness and have one or more disabling conditions .

the term began to appear in research literature in the 1980s .

for example , a 1988 institute of medicine report described three patterns of homelessness based on the amount of time spent homeless , including chronically homeless individuals who spent a year or more at a time experiencing homelessness and who were more likely to suffer from mental illness and substance abuse issues .

in the late 1990s , researchers randall kuhn and dennis culhane tested a way of characterizing homeless individuals based on the number of days they used emergency shelter and number of episodes of homelessness .

although theirs was not the first research that based homelessness categories on duration of time spent homeless , it tied chronic homelessness to shelter days used , and has often been cited in efforts to end chronic homelessness .

their research defined three categories: transitionally homeless individuals tend to be homeless for short periods of time and do not return to homelessness .

they are also less likely than other groups to face health or substance use barriers to attaining housing .

episodically homeless individuals are homeless on a more frequent basis , but with stays in shelter not exceeding several months .

chronically homeless individuals may have fewer stays in shelter than those who are episodically homeless , but stay for long periods of time , to the point where "shelters are more like long - term housing than an emergency arrangement. .

kuhn and culhane found that chronically homeless individuals , while estimated to account for about 10% of all users of the homeless shelter system in the new york and philadelphia areas , used nearly 50% of the total days of shelter provided .

chronically homeless individuals were also more likely to suffer from physical and mental health problems and have substance abuse issues , though episodically homeless individuals also have these issues in greater numbers than those considered transitionally homeless .

kuhn and culhane theorized that assistance could be targeted to individuals based on the nature of their homelessness .

while short - term assistance such as income supports may be sufficient for someone who is transitionally homeless , a person experiencing chronic homelessness may need long - term housing subsidies and ongoing supportive services .

homeless services providers responded to this research by focusing attention on the needs of chronically homeless individuals and how best to serve them .

policy recommendations also followed .

in 2000 , the national alliance to end homelessness released a plan to end homelessness , which included a first priority to end chronic homelessness .

the george w. bush administration also took up the goal of ending chronic homelessness within 10 years , announcing it as part of the fy2003 budget .

within a year , hud had issued proposed regulations to define the term "chronically homeless," and federal projects began to target assistance to chronically homeless individuals .

prior to the late 1990s and early 2000s , the primary strategy for addressing homelessness among high - need populations , such as those with mental illness and substance abuse issues , was a "continuum of care" or linear approach to housing for homeless individuals .

a linear approach typically involves interim requirements before achieving housing , such as abstinence from drugs and alcohol and medication compliance .

the notion behind a linear approach is that some high - need homeless individuals must gradually ease into housing through shelters and transitional housing while addressing these issues .

for example , the federal task force on homelessness and severe mental illness published a report in 1992 describing the need for safe havens where homeless individuals with severe mental illness can be assisted in "overcoming specific problems that impede access to permanent housing and develop the integrated supports needed for successful residential tenure. .

shortly after the release of the task force's report , president clinton issued an executive order asking federal agencies , through the u.s. interagency council on homelessness ( usich ) , to "develop a single coordinated federal plan for breaking the cycle of existing homelessness and for preventing future homelessness. .

the usich released a report in which it noted that "[t]o be effective , a homeless system must provide three distinct components of organizations," emergency shelter , transitional or rehabilitative services , and — permanent housing .

part of the transitional phase included substance abuse treatment , mental health services , and independent living skills .

the report noted that "a homeless person with a substance abuse problem may be referred to a transitional rehabilitation program before being assisted with permanent housing. .

in a report released in 1996 , hud adopted a "continuum of care" model for administering its homeless assistance grants , echoing the components articulated in the usich approach .

the continuum of care included four components , including "transitional housing with supportive services appropriate to the problems faced by the persons or families not prepared to live on their own. .

the continuum or linear approach came to be seen as an appropriate approach for assisting high - need homeless individuals .

an alternative to the linear approach developed around the research regarding chronic homelessness .

researchers found that chronically homeless individuals used expensive services , often paid with public funds .

in addition , there began to be some evidence that providing permanent housing together with supportive services , rather than temporary housing and treatment , could reduce costs of services such as hospitalizations , prison and jail stays , and emergency shelter stays for some populations .

 ( for more discussion of this research , see the section of this report entitled " public service use and costs ". ) .

the federal government embraced ending chronic homelessness at least in part due to research indicating that chronically homeless individuals use a number of expensive services .

in addition to spending nights in shelter , chronically homeless individuals use resources such as emergency rooms , hospitals , psychiatric institutions , and jails to a greater degree than those experiencing homelessness for shorter durations .

chronically homeless individuals also make up a relatively small percentage of the homeless population , and solving their homelessness through housing is achievable in a way that might not be possible for the homeless population overall .

starting in the early 2000s , around the time that the federal government announced its plan to end chronic homelessness , several federal programs began to target resources and technical assistance toward helping chronically homeless individuals , much of which continues today .

the george w. bush administration undertook several interagency collaborations to reach its goal of ending chronic homelessness using existing program funding .

these included ( 1 ) a collaboration among hud , hhs , and va ( the collaborative initiative to help end chronic homelessness ) that funded housing and treatment for chronically homeless individuals ; ( 2 ) a hud and dol project called ending chronic homelessness through employment and housing , through which hud funded permanent supportive housing and dol offered employment assistance ; and ( 3 ) a hud pilot program called housing for people who are homeless and addicted to alcohol that provided supportive housing for chronically homeless persons .

the hud homeless assistance grants are the primary way the federal government funds housing for people experiencing homelessness .

through the grants , which in recent years have totaled approximately $2 billion per year , grantees provide permanent housing , transitional housing , and supportive services for all populations of people experiencing homelessness .

over the last decade , the homeless assistance grants have prioritized funding for psh to assist chronically homeless individuals through its grant application process .

the fy2003 notice of funding availability ( nofa ) encouraged grantees to target chronic homelessness ; in fy2004 , 10% of funds were prioritized for serving chronically homeless individuals ; and in fy2005 , a permanent housing bonus was available for grant applicants who proposed new projects to serve chronically homeless individuals .

since then , the nofas have continued to prioritize new psh projects for chronically homeless individuals .

hud also requests that grantees give priority to chronically homeless individuals when units of psh become available .

in addition , the hearth act , the law authorizing the homeless assistance grants , ensures that at least 30% of homeless assistance grants funding for new housing be devoted to permanent housing for homeless individuals with disabilities and their families .

while this population need not have been homeless for the duration required for chronic homelessness , there is overlap in the populations .

 ( for more information about the hud homeless assistance grants generally , see crs report rl33764 , the hud homeless assistance grants: programs authorized by the hearth act , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the hud - va supported housing ( hud - vash ) program began in 1992 as a collaboration between the va and hud whereby hud provided housing to homeless veterans through a set - aside of tenant - based section 8 vouchers and the va provided supportive services .

the program targeted veterans with severe psychiatric or substance use disorders .

later , when hud - vash was codified ( p.l .

107-95 ) , eligible veterans continued to be those who have chronic mental illness or chronic substance use disorders .

from fy2008 through fy2015 congress appropriated $575 million to provide vouchers for approximately 80,000 homeless veterans .

 ( the funding is sufficient for one year of vouchers , after which funding is absorbed in hud's section 8 account. ) .

while hud and va waived the requirement that veterans have chronic mental illness or substance use disorders , they have prioritized housing for chronically homeless veterans .

 ( for more information about hud - vash , see crs report rl34024 , veterans and homelessness , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

after the george w. bush administration announced its initiative to end chronic homelessness , the u.s. interagency council on homelessness ( usich ) encouraged local communities to develop 10-year plans to end homelessness , the majority of which targeted chronic homelessness .

the hearth act directed the usich to develop a national plan to end homelessness , to be updated every year .

the first usich plan , released in 2010 , discussed ending homelessness among subpopulations , including ending homelessness among chronically homeless individuals within five years .

 ( the target has since been updated to 2017. ) .

the department of health and human services , through its office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation , has released a primer and best practices for state medicaid directors and others to use in linking health care and housing for chronically homeless individuals .

the federal government has used research regarding chronic homelessness as support for efforts to end it .

the research and findings may therefore be relevant to ongoing policymaking .

the remainder of this report discusses the research findings regarding how psh affects outcomes for people experiencing chronic homelessness .

since the 1990s , numerous studies have examined the outcomes of individuals who move from homelessness to psh , whether through housing first or arrangements that involve varying contingencies and service engagement .

the majority of research involves unaccompanied chronically homeless individuals rather than those in families .

this may largely be due to the fact that hud did not include chronically homeless families in its definition of chronic homelessness until 2009 .

 ( see " federal definition of chronic homelessness ." ) .

the primary purpose of most research is to determine whether housing reduces homelessness .

as a result , outcomes tend to be measured as days individuals spend housed compared to baseline or returns to homelessness .

however , some researchers may also look at other , secondary , outcomes that could result from housing stability , including reduced substance use , improved mental health , or increases in overall life satisfaction .

crs conducted searches for articles that examine outcomes for chronically homeless individuals who moved from homelessness to psh .

only articles in peer - reviewed journals were included , so a number of studies of chronic homelessness , including those conducted by nonprofits or local or state governments into their local housing situations , are not included .

for more information on how crs selected studies , see appendix a .

full citations for all studies referenced can be found in tables in appendix b .

tables in appendix b also provide information about the type of housing and services received by the intervention groups and comparison groups ( if any ) and whether researchers characterized the intervention as housing first .

the outcomes measured by researchers are then summarized , and statistical significance is noted .

there are five common outcomes that appeared most frequently in the research: housing status and stability — typically measured by the number of days housed or days spent homeless after moving into housing ; p ublic service use and costs — evidenced by the number of visits to service providers or the amount of public funds spent on services such as hospitalizations , counseling , or shelter before and after a housing intervention ; substance use — measured based on whether days drinking or using drugs increase or decrease after moving into housing ; mental health — evaluated by such factors as psychiatric symptoms or time spent in treatment or psychiatric hospitals ; resident satisfaction and quality of life — evaluated based on residents' impressions of housing and other aspects of their lives based on residents' responses to survey questions after moving into housing .

a successful outcome in one area — such as stable housing — may not necessarily translate to a successful outcome in other areas , such as improved mental health or less use of alcohol and drugs .

crs found evidence that providing psh reduced chronic homelessness , but outcomes in other areas were somewhat mixed .

each outcome is discussed in separate subsections , below .

research shows that permanent supportive housing is successful at reducing days spent homeless and increasing days housed for many individuals experiencing chronic homelessness .

while the evidence shows that psh can be a solution to chronic homelessness , it is less clear whether psh will "solve" other issues faced by homeless individuals or reduce treatment and other service costs for all homeless individuals .

as some researchers have said , the challenge may be identifying "what works for whom" rather than just what works .

while cost reductions are often cited as a reason for providing psh for chronically homeless individuals , research indicates that cost reductions or service reductions may not occur in every case .

the costs associated with placement in psh may be offset for homeless individuals with the most serious issues and who use numerous services at high rates .

for example , according to research conducted by poulin et al .

 ( 2010 ) in philadelphia , "only the consumers with relatively higher costs of services are likely to have sufficiently high current costs to fully or mostly offset the costs of a psh placement. .

an option may be to tailor housing subsidies and services to homeless individuals based on their needs .

as poulin , et al .

 ( 2010 ) point out , lower - need chronically homeless individuals ( eg , those without co - occurring disorders ) may not have the same housing and services requirements .

clark and rich ( 2003 ) found that "high impairment" individuals with high psychiatric symptom severity and high levels of alcohol and drug use had better housing stability and functional homelessness outcomes with supportive housing , but that low - and medium - impairment individuals did just as well with case management only .

it may also be good practice to intervene with homeless individuals before health conditions and substance use issues become too severe .

cost reductions could occur over the long run if less intensive interventions occur earlier and prevent increased need .

in cases where there are cost or service use reductions after chronically homeless individuals move into housing , the reductions may not accrue to the entity funding the housing .

in many situations , funding for psh is provided by hud .

however , cost reductions may occur for provider hospitals , state medicaid programs ( which are jointly financed by states and the federal government ) , and law enforcement .

similarly , cost reductions could be seen at the state and local levels rather than by federal programs .

this could be an issue in the era of the budget control act spending limits , where additional funding for federal discretionary appropriations , including hud programs , may not be available .

in order to end chronic homelessness with psh , flat funding may not be sufficient .

looking to other parts of the budget where agencies may have an interest in reducing service use and costs and improving outcomes may be a consideration .

for example , in states that expanded medicaid under the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 as amended ) , many chronically homeless individuals who were not eligible under previous criteria are likely to be eligible under the expansion .

housing providers are partnering with medicaid providers to improve the housing stability , health care , and outcomes for chronically homeless individuals .

in june 2015 , the center for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) released an informational bulletin describing how medicaid funds could be used to pay for housing - related activities and services .

the bulletin identifies three areas in which funds can be used ( 1 ) housing transition services such as assistance with housing applications and help obtaining resources to pay for security and utility deposits or furniture , ( 2 ) housing and tenancy sustaining services such as intervening when behaviors arise that could lead to eviction and training on how to be a good tenant , and ( 3 ) state - level housing related collaborative activities such as developing housing locator systems for people transitioning from institutional settings to housing .

providing housing for high - need medicaid recipients is seen by some as a way of reducing health system use and costs , with providers and state medicaid agencies working to find stable housing for clients .

although medicaid can be used for the services outlined in the cms informational bulletin , it cannot be used to pay the costs of housing directly ( unless the housing is an institutional setting such as a nursing home ) .

if housing can help reduce the costs incurred by medicaid in providing care to chronically homeless individuals , it may not be unreasonable to think that medicaid funds could directly support housing costs .

at least two states are using their state share of medicaid for supportive housing .

for example , pennsylvania's healthchoices behavioral health medicaid managed care program allows cost savings to be used for psh .

similarly , new york set aside funds from its state share of medicaid funding for psh , with the notion of recouping at least some of the costs through reductions in medicaid spending .

states and communities are also addressing the need to pay for psh through pay for success initiatives ( sometimes called social impact bonds ) .

in the pay for success model , a government entity partners with philanthropic organizations or private sector investors .

the non - governmental partners provide up - front funding for a program that will help individuals in some way .

if success is achieved according to a pre - determined measurable outcome , the government pays back the initial investment to the outside investors .

for example , in the state of massachusetts a pay for success initiative will create 500 units of psh for chronically homeless individuals with success based on housing stability .

similarly , the city of denver and partners will provide housing for 300 chronically homeless individuals .

in addition , pursuant to provisions in fy2014 and fy2015 appropriations laws , hud and the department of justice are to release nearly $9 million for a pay for success demonstration for grantees to provide psh to homeless individuals who cycle through the criminal justice and homeless services systems .

a benefit of a model like pay for success is that governments can identify where spending reductions occur and target their budgets accordingly .

the service use and cost issues raise a question: even if a psh intervention results in increased costs , could the benefits of ending homelessness justify the added expense ? .

or perhaps there is an expenditure level at which governments may find investing in housing cost - effective .

there may be positive outcomes for participants whose benefits are not as easily quantified .

for example , mares and rosenheck ( 2011 ) found that housed participants were more likely to have health care providers and had more contact with health professionals , including more outpatient visits for physical health , mental health , and substance use .

the same was true of case managers and visits with case managers .

parker ( 2010 ) found significant increases in social security receipt , snap receipt , qualification for special needs bus passes , use of a primary care physician , and use of mental health services .

these outcomes can improve the health and quality of life for recipients and may eventually lead to cost reductions elsewhere ( and outside the scope of study follow - up periods ) .

perhaps there should not be the expectation of a full cost offset , and consideration that some reduction or even increase in service use may be a positive development as individuals may be gaining access to needed services .

research selection crs conducted searches for journal articles that examined outcomes for chronically homeless individuals who moved from homelessness to permanent supportive housing .

crs primarily searched three databases for research published from 2000 through 2013: ebscohost academic search complete , proquest databases , and pubmed central .

search term variations included "housing first," "homeless / homelessness," "chronic / chronically," and "permanent supportive housing / supportive housing. .

crs also reviewed bibliographies of the studies .

some of the studies referenced in bibliographies pre - date 2000 , and others were previously known to crs , so in a few cases the dates of publication are before 2000 .

in addition , in the course of writing the report the authors became aware of several studies published after 2013 ; three of these are included .

therefore , the range of publication dates is from 1996-2014 .

once articles were identified using search terms , crs included only those published in peer reviewed journals , where housing was provided as an intervention for individuals considered chronically homeless or who had histories of homelessness and disability , where the housing was provided within the united states , where the housing for at least one group was permanent housing ( not time - limited ) , and where formerly homeless individuals had access to supportive services .

the articles only included chronically homeless individuals , not those in families , perhaps because until recently the federal definition did not include families .

it is possible that not every group met the requirements of the federal definition of chronic homelessness , but each study involved a high - need homeless population that fulfilled some aspects of the definition .

the specifics of the arrangements , including whether researchers characterized the intervention as housing first , are noted in the tables in appendix b .

crs did not exclude articles based on methodology .

some are more statistically rigorous than others ( eg , some include random assignment and large numbers of participants while others may not have comparison groups and look at small numbers of individuals ) .

details about each article , including comparison groups and statistical significance , are provided in the tables in appendix b .

research articles were grouped based on the outcomes that they measured .

overall , there were five categories of outcomes commonly found within the articles: housing status and stability , service use and costs , substance use , mental health , and resident satisfaction / quality of life .

while there are other outcomes measured by some researchers , including employment , income , criminal justice , and physical health outcomes , very few of the studies found by crs look at these outcomes , and they have not been included in this discussion .

research summaries in this appendix are five tables summarizing the journal articles surveyed by crs .

each table is based on outcomes measured by researchers , with table b - 1 reporting housing status ( eg , days spent in housing or days homeless ) , table b - 2 reporting public service use and costs ( eg , use and cost of hospitals and emergency rooms after housing ) , table b - 3 reporting substance use ( eg , increases or decreases in substance use or treatment ) , table b - 4 reporting mental health ( eg , improved symptoms or treatment compliance ) , and table b - 5 reporting resident satisfaction and quality of life ( eg , satisfaction with housing and social contacts ) .

because many articles looked at multiple outcomes , several of them may appear in more than one table .

each table arranges research by date from oldest to most recent and contains links to citations for journal articles in the table notes .

there is also information about the type of housing and services received by the intervention ( or treatment ) groups and comparison groups ( if any ) .

the entries also note if researchers characterized the intervention as housing first .

the outcomes measured by researchers are then summarized , and statistical significance is noted .

