the constitution provides congress with broad powers over the armed forces , including the power "to raise and support armies," "to provide and maintain a navy," and "to make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces. .

it also provides the senate with the authority to provide "advice and consent" on presidential nominations of "all other officers of the united states," which includes military officers .

on the basis of its constitutional authority , congress has passed a number of laws which govern important aspects of military officer personnel management , including appointments , assignments , grade structure , promotions , and separations .

the most senior officers in the army , air force , and marine corps are known as general officers .

the most senior officers in the navy are known as flag officers .

the phrase "general and flag officers" or "gfo" refers to all officers in paygrades o - 7 through o - 10 , thereby including one - star , two - star , three - star , and four - star officers .

at the highest level , o - 10 , gfos hold the most visible and important military positions in the department of defense , including the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , the chiefs of the four military services , and the combatant commanders .

at the lowest level , o - 7 , they hold positions that span an array of roles , including commanders , deputy commanders , and key staff roles in large organizations .

this report provides an overview of active duty gfos in the united states armed forces — including authorizations , duties , and compensation — historical trends in the proportion of gfos relative to the total force , criticisms and justifications of gfo to total force proportions , and statutory controls .

national guard and reserve gfos are not addressed in this report , unless they are serving on active duty in a manner that counts against the active duty caps on gfos .

given the authority granted to general and flag officers , congress has developed a statutory framework applicable to this elite group , and considers changes to these laws as it deems appropriate .

congress also periodically reviews the number , duties , and compensation of gfos .

a frequent tension during these reviews has been dod requests for additional gfos versus congressional concerns that there are too many gfos .

as one senior dod official noted during a 1997 congressional hearing: throughout our history there has been a dialogue , just as is going on now , that has ebbed and flowed between the congress and the military on the number of general and flag officers we need... .

i think it is fair to say that over the years , the congress has consistently taken the view that we have needed fewer general and flag officers , and that we have taken the opposite view , that we needed more than the congress would allow .

these debates tended to intensify during periods of major downsizing and restructuring of our forces , such as after world war ii , the korean war , the vietnam war , and now after the cold war .

references in this report to specific grades ( ranks ) within the general and flag officer corps will use the appropriate capitalized title , insignia , or paygrade as indicated in table 1 .

there are three main ways in which military personnel , including general and flag officers , are compensated: cash compensation ( pay and allowances ) , non - cash compensation ( benefits ) , and deferred compensation ( retired pay and benefits ) .

in this report , only the compensation elements which make up r egular m ilitary c ompensation will be discussed .

congress has established a statutory framework for gfos which limits their numbers by grade , requires presidential determination of many three - star and four - star positions , and specifies the grade and / or duties of certain key positions .

this framework provides for greater congressional control over the most senior gfo positions , while providing substantial latitude to the executive branch in the management of the remaining gfos .

congress has a long - standing interest in the military officer corps in general , and has periodically focused additional attention on its most senior officers .

should congress elect to address gfo authorizations , duties , compensation , or other related topics in more detail , it may wish to consider the following: what is the most appropriate way to determine how many gfos the department of defense should have ? .

how closely should this be linked to total force size ? .

what other factors would be useful in determining what the right number of gfos is ? .

how do advances in information technology and decisionmaking tools impact the need for gfos ? .

could use of these technologies result in flattened management structures and decrease the need for gfos ? .

should congress modify the current statutory framework that governs gfos ? .

should it modify the caps set out in 10 u.s.c .

§§525 , 526 , and 526a ? .

to what extent do other statutory requirements , such as the goldwater - nichols act ( gna ) , drive gfo requirements ? .

should gna be revised to alter this effect ? .

could organizational restructuring of the joint staff and service staffs decrease the need for gfos , or allow positions to be held by lower graded gfos ? .

could certain organizations be merged to reduce the requirements for gfos ? .

could military relations with international partners be restructured so as to lessen the need for gfo representation ? .

how important is rank equivalence when senior u.s. military personnel work with their allied peers ? .

could national guard and reserve gfos be used to reduce the need for active duty gfos ? .

are there gfo positions that could be eliminated or "downgraded" to a lower rank ? .

are there gfo positions that could be replaced by civilian employees ? .

what are the costs and benefits associated with these actions ? .

how might this impact military effectiveness ? .

can the direct and indirect costs associated with gfos be reduced ? .

for example , could compensation or staff costs be reduced without significantly affecting the ability of gfos to carry out their duties ? .

regular military compensation ( rmc ) , as defined in law , is "the total of the following elements that a member of the uniformed services accrues or receives , directly or indirectly , in cash or in kind every payday: basic pay , basic allowance for housing , basic allowance for subsistence , and federal tax advantage accruing to the aforementioned allowances because they are not subject to federal income tax. .

each of these elements is described below .

basic pay all members of the armed forces receive basic pay , although the amount varies by pay grade ( rank ) and years of service ( also called longevity ) .

for most servicemembers , basic pay is the largest element of the compensation they receive in their paycheck and typically accounts for about two - thirds of an individual's rmc .

it is roughly analogous to civilian salary .

basic allowance for housing all servicemembers living in the united states are entitled to either government - provided housing or a housing allowance , known as basic allowance for housing ( bah ) .

about 17% of gfos living in the united states receive government - provided housing with the remainder receiving bah to offset the costs of the housing they rent or purchase in the civilian economy .

the amount of bah a servicemember receives is based on three factors: paygrade ( rank ) , geographic location , and whether or not the servicemember has dependents .

however , there is no increase in bah after paygrade o - 7 .

therefore , the amount of bah for gfos does not vary by rank , but only by locality and dependency status .

paygrade and dependency status are used to determine the type of accommodation — or "housing profile" — that would be appropriate for the servicemember ( for example , one - bedroom apartment , two - bedroom townhouse , or three - bedroom single family home ) .

geographic location is used to determine the average costs associated with each of these housing profiles .

the average costs of these housing profiles are the basis for bah rates .

as a result of this methodology , bah rates are much higher in some areas than others , but servicemembers of similar paygrade and dependent status should be able to pay for roughly comparable housing regardless of their duty location .

basic allowance for subsistence nearly all servicemembers receive a monthly payment to defray their personal food costs .

this is known as basic allowance for subsistence ( bas ) .

bas is provided at a flat rate , with separate rates for officers and enlisted personnel .

in 2019 , all officers , including gfos , received $254.39 a month .

federal tax advantage military allowances are generally not considered part of gross income and are not subject to federal income tax , thus generating a tax benefit for servicemembers .

rmc considers only the federal income tax advantage provided by the exemption of housing and subsistence allowances from gross income .

the precise value of the federal tax advantage for an individual servicemember will vary depending on his or her unique tax situation .

