the process by which lower federal court judges are nominated by the president and approved by the senate during the final year of a presidency has , in recent decades , been of continuing interest to congress .

the eighth year of a presidency is significant , in part , because it is the final opportunity for a president to appoint individuals as u.s. circuit and district court judges .

such judges have what effectively has come to mean life tenure , holding office "during good behaviour. .

this report , in light of continued senate interest in the judicial confirmation process , provides statistics related to final senate action on u.s. circuit and district court nominations during the eighth year of the george w. bush , clinton , and reagan presidencies .

for the purposes of this report , a president's eighth year in office is defined as the period from january 1 of his eighth calendar year in office to when he leaves office on january 20 of his ninth calendar year in office .

additionally , for the purposes of this report , final senate action occurs either when the senate confirms a nomination during a president's eighth year or when a nomination is returned to the president during his eighth year ( and not resubmitted by the president and ultimately approved by the senate ) .

the specific statistics and data discussed below include ( 1 ) the number and percentage of u.s. circuit and district court nominees confirmed or returned during the eighth year of each presidency ; ( 2 ) the number and percentage of u.s. circuit and district court nominees confirmed during a president's eighth year who were nominated either during a president's eighth year or prior to his eighth year ; ( 3 ) the number of u.s. circuit and district court nominees confirmed each month during a president's eighth year ; and ( 4 ) the final date during each president's eighth year on which the senate confirmed u.s. circuit and district court nominees .

the statistics provided in this report were generated from an internal crs judicial nominations database .

the statistics account only for nominations made to u.s. circuit and district court judgeships .

this report does not analyze or take a position on the number or percentage of judicial nominations that would be appropriate for the senate to approve during the final year of a presidency .

the statistics reported in table 4 show final senate action ( i.e. , the final disposition ) on all u.s. district court nominations that were pending before the senate , either in committee or on the executive calendar , during a president's eighth year in office .

of the three most recent presidents with a full eighth year in office , the number of u.s. district court nominees confirmed during the eighth year ranged from a low of 24 ( in 2008 , during the george w. bush presidency ) to a high of 33 ( in 1988 , during the reagan presidency ) .

the number of nominations not approved by the senate and returned at the end of a president's eighth year in office ranged from a low of 12 during the reagan presidency to a high of 25 ( in 2000 , during the clinton presidency ) .

in contrast to final senate action on circuit court nominations , a majority of district court nominations that received final action during each president's eighth year in office were confirmed by the senate ( rather than returned ) .

specifically , as shown by table 4 , at least 50.0% of all district court nominations on which the senate acted during a president's eighth year in office were confirmed — specifically , 54.5% , 55.4% , and 73.3% were confirmed during the eighth year of the george w. bush , clinton , and reagan presidencies , respectively .

consequently , fewer than half of the district court nominations that were pending before the senate during each president's final year in office were not approved by the senate — 45.5% , 44.6% , and 26.7% were returned during the eighth year of the george w. bush , clinton , and reagan presidencies , respectively .

also in contrast to u.s. circuit court nominations , a majority of new district court nominations made for the first time during each president's eighth year were confirmed by the senate .

of the 44 district court nominations that received final senate action during the final year of the george w. bush presidency ( as reported in table 4 ) , 26 were first submitted to the senate in 2008 , his final year in office .

of the 26 , 15 ( 57.7% ) were confirmed and 11 ( 42.3% ) were returned ( i.e. , not confirmed ) .

of the 56 district court nominations that received final senate action during the final year of the clinton presidency , 38 were first submitted to the senate during his final year ( 2000 ) .

of the 38 , 24 ( 63.2% ) were confirmed and 14 ( 36.8% ) were returned .

of the 45 district court nominations that received final senate action during the final year of the reagan presidency , 26 were first submitted to the senate during his final year ( 1988 ) .

of the 26 , 19 ( 73.1% ) were confirmed and 7 ( 26.9% ) were returned .

the statistics reported in table 5 show , for district court nominees confirmed during a president's eighth year in office , the number and percentage first nominated at some point prior to the eighth year , as well as the number and percentage who were first nominated during the eighth year itself .

for each president in the comparison group , a majority of district court nominees confirmed during his eighth year in office were also nominated for the first time during the eighth year — specifically , 62.5% , 77.4% , and 57.6% were nominated for the first time ( and confirmed ) during the eighth year of the george w. bush , clinton , and reagan presidencies , respectively .

there is variation across presidencies as to when the senate approves district court nominations during a president's eighth year in office .

for the three most recent presidents with a full eighth year in office , figure 2 shows the number of district court nominees confirmed each month during a president's eighth year .

as shown by the figure ( and in contrast to circuit court nominations ) , senate confirmation of district court nominations extended , for all three presidencies , into the final three or four months of each presidency .

there was one month in common during each president's eighth year in which the senate confirmed at least one district court nominee ( i.e. , july in the eighth year of each presidency ) .

there were another five months in common in which two of the three presidents had at least one district court nominee confirmed ( february , april , may , june , and october ) .

additionally , during each president's eighth year in office , there were at least two months in which the senate confirmed more than five district court nominees each month ( june 2008 and september 2008 during the george w. bush presidency ; may 2000 and june 2000 during the clinton presidency ; and february 1988 , april 1988 , october 1988 during the reagan presidency ) .

for presidents clinton and reagan , a majority of the district court nominees confirmed during each of their eighth years were approved during the second quarter of each president's final year in office ( april through june ) .

for president george w. bush , a majority of the district court nominees confirmed during his eighth year were approved during the third quarter of his final year ( july through september ) .

 table 6 reports the final date during a president's eighth year in office on which the senate approved one or more district court nominations , as well as other information about each nomination .

each of the three presidents had multiple district court nominees approved , for the final time , by the senate on the same date .

specifically , there were 10 district court nominees approved by the senate for the final time , on september 26 , 2008 , during the george w. bush presidency .

there were 4 nominees approved for the final time , on october 3 , 2000 , during the clinton presidency .

and there were 8 nominees approved for the final time , on october 14 , 1988 , during the reagan presidency .

