the federal perkins loan program is one of three postsecondary student financial aid programs that are collectively referred to as the campus - based programs .

the program authorizes institutions of higher education ( ihes ) to capitalize revolving loan funds for the purpose of making low - interest loa ns to students with exceptional financial need .

the program is authorized under title iv , part e of the higher education act ( hea ) .

it supersedes title ii — loans to students in institutions of higher education — of the national defense education act of 1958 ( p.l .

85-864 ) , which was incorporated into the hea through the education amendments of 1972 ( p.l .

92-318 ) .

previously , these loans were known as national defense student loans and national direct student loans .

in general , perkins loans are available to undergraduate and graduate and professional students and must be made reasonably available to all eligible students , with priority given to students with exceptional financial need .

interest on perkins loans is fixed at a rate of 5% per year , and no interest accrues prior to a student beginning repayment , nor while repayment is suspended or in deferment .

individuals who have engaged in a variety of public service endeavors ( eg , teachers in low - income schools , law enforcement officers ) are eligible to have part or all of their perkins loan cancelled .

historically , ihes capitalized their revolving perkins loan funds with a combination of federal capital contributions ( fccs ) and matching institutional capital contributions ( iccs ) .

the fcc was allocated according to statutorily prescribed procedures .

the hea authorized appropriations to enable the secretary of education ( the secretary ) to make new fccs to institutional revolving loan funds through fy2014 , and through fy2015 with an automatic one - year extension under the general education provisions act ( gepa ) .

in addition , a limited grandfathering provision authorized the appropriation of funds through fy2020 , and through fy2021 under gepa , for fccs to ihes' perkins loan funds for the purpose of making loans to continuing students who were prior perkins loan recipients .

although appropriations were last provided for this purpose in fy2004 , ihes continued to make new perkins loans to students from their revolving loan funds .

in academic year 2013-2014 , approximately 1,500 ihes disbursed $1.2 billion in new perkins loans to approximately 539,000 students .

authorization of appropriations for the secretary to allocate fccs to participating ihes and for ihes to award new perkins loans to students expired on october 1 , 2015 .

for approximately two and one - half months thereafter , the operation of the perkins loan program was curtailed and loans could only be made to continuing students .

then , on december 18 , 2015 , congress enacted the federal perkins loan program extension act of 2015 ( the extension act ; p.l .

114-105 ) .

it extended the authorization of ihes to make new perkins loans to eligible students through september 30 , 2017 , but prohibited additional appropriations beyond fy2015 for the purpose of making new perkins loans and prohibited an automatic extension of the program under gepa .

in addition , the extension act amended several key perkins loan program provisions relating to student eligibility to receive new perkins loans , institutional disclosures required to be made to students borrowing new perkins loans , and the distribution of perkins loan fund assets upon the program's conclusion .

this report begins by giving a brief summary of the authorization for the perkins loan program prior to its expiration on september 30 , 2015 .

it then provides brief descriptions of the amendments made to the perkins loan program under the extension act .

finally , table 1 provides a summary of selected perkins loan program provisions prior to and after the extension act .

hea section 461 ( b ) ( 1 ) previously authorized appropriations for the purpose of enabling the secretary to make fccs to ihes for their revolving perkins loan funds through fy2014 .

however , gepa section 422 provides that , generally , in the absence of legislation to extend or repeal a program administered by the department of education ( ed ) , the authorization of appropriations , or the duration of a program , is extended for one additional fiscal year beyond its terminal year .

the authorized level of appropriations for a program in the additional year shall be the same as that for the terminal year of the program .

congress neither extended nor repealed the perkins loan program prior to its expiration on september 30 , 2014 ; thus , the authorization of appropriations for the program was automatically extended for an additional year , through fy2015 .

ed considered the authorization of appropriations under hea section 461 ( b ) ( 1 ) to control the duration of the perkins loan program and had interpreted this section , along with the automatic one - year extension under gepa section 422 , to mean that the perkins loan program was authorized through september 30 , 2015 .

congress did not extend the perkins loan program's authorization before october 1 , 2015 .

thus , the program's authorization expired , and ed and ihes began taking steps to wind down the program .

on december 18 , 2015 , several months after the perkins loan program's authorization of appropriations had expired , congress enacted the federal perkins loan program extension act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-105 ) , which extends the program through september 30 , 2017 .

under the terms of the extension act , ihes are permitted to award new perkins loans to eligible students through september 30 , 2017 , at the latest .

the remainder of this report identifies changes made to the perkins loan program under the extension act .

unless otherwise stated , perkins loan provisions not addressed in this report were neither amended nor repealed by the extension act and remain in effect .

 table 1 presents a summary of the amendments made to the perkins loan program by the federal perkins loan program extension act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-105 ) .

it presents the provisions of the perkins loan program prior to and following the enactment of the extension act .

unless otherwise noted , perkins loan provisions not presented here were neither amended nor repealed by the extension act and remain in effect .

