congress's role and operation in national politics is fundamentally shaped by the design and structure of the governing institutions in the constitution .

one of the key principles of the constitution is separation of powers .

the doctrine is rooted in a political philosophy that aims to keep power from consolidating in any single person or entity , and a key goal of the framers of the constitution was to establish a governing system that diffused and divided power .

experience with the consolidated power of king george iii had led them to believe that "the accumulation of legislative , executive , and judicial powers in the same hands … [was] the very definition of tyranny. .

these objectives were achieved institutionally through the constitutional separation of powers .

the legislative , executive , and judicial branches of the government were assigned distinct and limited roles under the constitution , and required to be comprised of different political actors .

the elected branches have separate , independent bases of authority , and specific safeguards prevent any of the branches from gaining undue influence over another .

the constitutional structure does not , however , insulate the branches from each other .

while the design of the constitution aims to prevent the centralization of power through separation , it also seeks the same objective through diffusion .

thus , most powers granted under the constitution are not unilateral for any one branch ; instead they overlap .

the president has the power to veto legislation ; the senate must approve executive and judicial nominations made by the president ; the judiciary has the power to review actions of congress or the president ; and congress may , by supermajority , remove judges or the president from power .

this report provides an overview of separation of powers .

it first reviews the philosophical and political origins of the doctrine .

then it surveys the structure of separation of power in the constitution .

it next discusses the consequences of the system , for both the institutions and for individual political actors .

finally , there is a discussion of separation of powers in the context of contemporary politics .

in order to fully illuminate the contemporary implications of our separation of powers system , it is helpful to understand its origins .

the structure of the constitution reflects the collective preferences of the state delegates who drafted it in 1787 .

these preferences were chiefly shaped by two things: the political philosophy of the colonial americans , and their actual political experiences as english colonists .

the fingerprints of both can be found throughout the legislative debate at the constitutional convention , the arguments for and against the constitution during the ratification debate in the states , and , of course , in the text of the constitution itself .

undoubtedly , the colonists' philosophy also shaped how they understood their colonial interactions with london , and vice versa , making it difficult if not impossible to untangle the degree to which either had primacy in shaping the constitution .

what is clear , however , is that by 1787 , the philosophy and the experiences of the framers had created something of a consensus among them about how an optimal government should be structured .

translating the collective political philosophy of the founders and their constituents into a government required the construction of institutional structures that reflected and , hopefully , sustained their preferences .

institutional design of the new constitution , therefore , required careful consideration .

the legislative , executive , and judicial branches of the government were assigned distinct and limited roles under the constitution , and political actors are restricted from serving simultaneously in the legislature and another branch .

the elected branches have separate , independent bases of authority , and specific safeguards were designed to prevent any of the branches from gaining undue influence over another .

although not constitutionally guaranteed , longstanding norms also now exist that provide each branch with its own independent resources for staffing , research , and advice .

the following section discusses four key aspects of the constitutional separation of powers: separate roles and authorities ; separate personnel ; independent electoral bases ; and separate institutional supports .

it then discusses the checks and balances placed with the various separate institutions .

the constitutional structure of separation of powers is directly consequential for the practice of american politics .

it incentivizes specific strategies and behaviors of both individual political actors and the branches of the federal government as a whole .

this section discusses three broad consequences of the separation of powers: the inevitability of conflict in the american political system ; the desire of each of the branches , in aggregate , to increase its relative institutional power ; and the cross - pressures faced by individual political actors as they balance the accumulation and maintenance of power for their institution with policy or other goals that are often at cross purpose with such accumulation .

clashes between the branches over the proper division of constitutional power and authority have arisen routinely in recent congresses , as they have throughout american history .

recent issues include the following: war powers .

the 2011 u.s. military operations in libya raised concerns among some in congress that the president lacked authority to engage in such operations without congressional approval .

what limits can congress place on presidential military action ? .

policy implementation .

in 2014 , the house of representatives voted to authorize the speaker to initiate legal action against the executive branch for implementing aspects of the affordable care act in a manner contrary to the statutory language .

what implementation latitude does the administration have under law , and can congress seek legal enforcement against administration implementation decisions ? .

congressional organization of the judiciary .

in 2015 , the supreme court examined the question of whether congress could charge non article - iii courts with certain adjudication tasks .

what types of courts can congress create that do not provide article iii protections to their judges ? .

recess a ppointments .

in 2011 , president obama made several recess appointments while the senate was in pro - forma session , which led to a lawsuit and ultimately a supreme court decision invalidating the appointments .

under what conditions can the president make a recess appointment ? .

recognition of foreign governments .

does congress have a role in foreign policy that gives it the authority to recognize foreign governments for some purposes , or does the sole power of recognition lie with the president ? .

congressional oversight and contempt power .

after the department of justice refused to provide subpoenaed documents to the house oversight and government reform committee , the committee voted to cite the attorney general for contempt , and the administration invoked executive privilege as the justification for withholding the documents .

to what extent does congress have a right to executive branch documents ? .

can congress force a criminal contempt prosecution to be opened ? .

two general observations warrant mentioning .

first , the contemporary balance of power between the president , congress , and the courts is not the same as it was in 1789 , and is perhaps not the balance intended or expected by the framers of the constitution .

a myriad of changes , developments , and specific events in the united states — ranging from amendments to the constitution to development in technology to the continuing evolution of american political culture — have continually influenced public opinion , political norms , and the behavior of political actors in ways that have rearranged the relative powers of the institutions .

second , the relative power of the president , congress , and the courts is not on any specific trajectory .

at various times since the ratification of the constitution , the power of each institution has been at times ascendant and at other times on the decline .

while specific events and developments may predictably lead to an increase or decrease in relative power for one of the branches , predicting the actual future direction of power shifts between the branches is an inherently difficult task .

many events that alter the power balance are either contingent or otherwise rely on the individual actions of political actors .

