s ection 401 of federal food , drug and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) grants the food and drug administration ( fda ) the authority to promulgate regulations that create "standards of identity" for certain foods .

these standards establish the composition of the food , including mandatory and optional ingredients .

industry participants who do not follow the standard of identity for a particular food may be liable for misbranding under the ffdca , which could lead to fda enforcement action .

fda creates standards of identity through the administrative rulemaking process , with opportunity for public notice and comment .

while congress has not modified fda's authority for promulgating standards of identity , it has called for fda to promulgate specific standards for certain foods .

for example , the proposed trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 ( h.r .

644 ) includes a provision that would encourage a standard of identity for honey .

this report discusses various legal issues related to food standards of identity .

these issues include the legal authority for the fda to promulgate regulations creating standards of identity , fda's administrative rulemaking process to create standards of identity , and fda's enforcement of these standards .

this report also provides an overview of related legislation in the 114 th congress .

a standard of identity establishes the composition of a food , including mandatory and optional ingredients , and fixes the amounts or relative proportions of each ingredient or a specific method of manufacture .

congress intended that standards of identity would resemble "recipes" for specific foods .

these standards of identity seek to prohibit economic adulteration and mislabeling of food by providing consumers with the "assurance that they will get what they may reasonably expect to receive. .

section 401 of the ffdca provides the primary statutory authority for the fda to promulgate standards of identity for food via regulation .

the provision states that [w]henever in the judgment of the secretary such action will promote honesty and fair dealing in the interest of consumers , he shall promulgate regulations fixing and establishing for any food , under its common or usual name so far as practicable , a reasonable definition and standard of identity , a reasonable standard of quality , and / or reasonable standards of fill of container .

thus , an appropriate standard of identity for a particular food is one that "will promote honesty and fair dealing in the interest of consumers. .

once the fda creates a standard of identity , no product that fails to meet the composition requirements of that standard may be marketed under the name the fda has appropriated to that particular standard .

section 403 ( g ) of the ffdca states that the fda shall deem a food misbranded if "it purports to be or is represented as" a food for which the fda has established a standard of identity and whose composition deviates from the standard .

after the enactment of the nutrition labeling and education act ( nlea ) , the fda promulgated regulations that allow for the addition of safe and suitable ingredients to a "standardized" food .

under these regulations , a manufacturer may refer to the adapted standardized food by the nutrient content claim and the original standardized food term .

for example , under fda regulations , a manufacturer may use safe and suitable artificial sweeteners that are not expressly listed in a particular standard of identity .

according to the fda , these regulations "assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary practices by providing for a modified version of a traditional standardized food to achieve a nutritional goal ... [while maintaining] a descriptive name that is meaningful to consumers. .

the fda relies on concepts like "safe and suitable" when regulating food to allow for technological flexibility with food development .

permitting such flexibility , according to the fda , encourages oversight of food "without adversely affecting the characteristics of food" and "minimizes any future amendment of the standards for additional specific ingredients. .

the fda also adopts food standards established by the codex alimentarius commission , formed by the world health organization and the food and agriculture organization of the united nations .

the codex alimentarius is a collection of international recognized food standards and guidelines promoting food safety .

the fda publishes these food standards in the federal register for public review and comment before accepting the standard with or without any changes .

the fda promulgates standards of identity for food through the rulemaking process .

the formal rulemaking procedure followed by the fda in adopting a standard of identity can be organized into three stages .

first , the fda or any "interested person" via a citizen petition may propose a standard of identity for adoption .

a private petitioner must state "reasonable grounds" for the proposal in order for the fda to publish the order and proceed with the process .

thus , a successful petition must assert provable facts demonstrating that the proposal , if adopted , "would promote honesty and fair dealing in the interest of consumers. .

the petitioner must also assert that he commits himself to substantiate the information in the petition with additional evidence in a public hearing , if such a hearing becomes necessary .

if the proposal satisfies this requirement , the fda publishes the proposal in the federal register as a "notice of proposed rulemaking," and all interested persons are invited to file comments orally or in writing .

after the agency studies the public comments submitted , the agency can decide to reject the proposal or to accept the proposal by publishing an order .

the agency is not bound to issue the order within a specific timeframe after the comment period .

generally , the order , which establishes the standard of identity , is effective on the date specified in the order .

within 30 days of the order's publication , the agency begins the second stage of the rulemaking process .

during this stage , all persons adversely affected by the order may submit objections and demand a public evidentiary hearing to resolve disputed factual issues that the objections have raised .

the filing of such objections serves as a stay of the disputed provisions in the order , until the fda takes final action .

the public hearing is open to all interested persons and is on the record .

the participants of the hearing may present documentary evidence and oral testimony and have the ability to cross - examine the witnesses .

following the hearing , the final stage of the process involves the agency issuing a tentative order , including detailed findings of fact and conclusions upon which the order is based .

any party of record may object to this proposed order and request an oral argument before the fda .

the fda then publishes the final order setting forth the standard of identity .

the fda enforces standards of identity through the misbranding provision in the ffdca ( section 403 ) .

once the agency deems a food to be misbranded under this provision , then the agency can exercise various enforcement options against the manufacturer or other industry representatives .

while congress has not amended the fda's legal authority to create standards of identity , congress has introduced legislation in the past to encourage fda's promulgation of specific standards of identity .

for example , the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 includes a provision declaring that it "is the sense of congress that the commissioner of food and drugs should promptly establish a national standard of identity for honey for the commissioner responsible for u.s. customs and border protection to use to ensure that imports of honey are ( 1 ) classified accurately and for purposes of assessing duties ; and ( 2 ) denied entry into the united states if such imports pose a threat to the health or safety of consumers in the united states. .

in support of this provision , senator gillibrand has stated the united states should adopt a national standard of identity for honey in order to protect consumers and to safeguard the integrity of honey products by preventing unscrupulous importers from flooding the market with misbranded honey products .

if such a provision becomes law , the fda may then promulgate a standard of identity for honey through the administrative rulemaking process .

