the central states , southeast and southwest areas pension plan ( central states ) is a multiemployer defined benefit ( db ) pension plan and is projected to become insolvent by 2026 and then will be unable to pay benefits .

on september 26 , 2015 , central states submitted an application to the u.s. department of the treasury to reduce benefits to two - thirds of the plan participants .

multiemployer pension plans are sponsored by two or more employers in the same industry and are maintained under collective bargaining agreements .

participants continue to accrue benefits while working for any participating employer .

multiemployer pension plans pool risk to minimize financial strain if one or more employers withdraw from the plan .

however , in recent years , an increasing number of employers have left multiemployer pension plans , either voluntarily or through employer bankruptcy .

as a result of withdrawals and declines in the value of plan assets ( such as those that occurred during the 2008 financial market decline ) , there are insufficient funds in the plan from which to pay benefits to some participants who worked for employers that have withdrawn from the plan .

central states is one of the largest multiemployer db pension plans and is the largest ( by number of participants ) among plans that may be eligible to reduce benefits as a result of the multiemployer pension reform act ( mpra ) , enacted as division o in the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) .

table 1 contains information about the central states plan from its most recent form 5500 annual disclosure , which is a required disclosure that pension plans must file with the u.s. department of labor .

a multiemployer db pension plan is considered insolvent when it no longer has sufficient resources from which to pay any benefits to participants .

central states has indicated that it is likely to become insolvent by 2026 .

mpra allows certain multiemployer plans that are expected to become insolvent to apply to treasury for authorization to reduce benefits to participants in the plan , if the benefit reductions can restore the plan to solvency .

the reductions may include both active participants ( eg , those still working ) and those in pay status ( eg , those who are retired and receiving benefits from the plan ) .

prior to the passage of mpra , under the anti - cutback provision in the employee retirement income security act ( erisa , p.l .

93-406 ) , pension plans generally did not have the authority to reduce participants' benefits .

by reducing benefits to participants in the immediate term , the plan expects to avoid insolvency and therefore ensure that future retirees will be able to receive plan benefits .

the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) was established by erisa to insure participants in single - employer and multiemployer private - sector db pension plans .

pbgc indicated that in fy2015 it covered about 10.3 million participants in about 1,400 multiemployer db pension plans .

when a multiemployer db pension plan becomes insolvent , pbgc provides financial assistance to the plan to pay participants' benefits .

when a multiemployer plan receives financial assistance from pbgc , the plan must reduce participants' benefits to a maximum per participant benefit .

the maximum benefit is $12,870 per year for an individual with 30 years of service in the plan .

the benefit is lower for individuals with fewer than 30 years of service in the plan .

however , if central states ( or another large multiemployer plan ) were to become insolvent , pbgc would likely be unable to provide sufficient financial assistance to pay participants' maximum insured benefit .

pbgc's multiemployer program receives funds from premiums paid by participating employers ( $212 million in fy2015 ) and from the income from the investment of unused premium income ( $68 million in fy2015 ) .

premium revenue is held in a revolving fund , which is invested in treasury securities .

pbgc's multiemployer program does not receive any federal funding .

if the amount of financial assistance exceeds premium revenue , pbgc would pay benefits from the revolving fund .

if pbgc were to exhaust the funds in the revolving fund , pbgc would be able to provide financial assistance equal only to the amount of premium revenue .

if a large plan such as central states were to become insolvent , pbgc would only be able to pay financial assistance equal to the amount of its premium revenue .

participants in multiemployer plans that receive financial assistance from pbgc would not receive 100% of their promised benefits .

in the event of pbgc's insolvency , financial assistance from treasury is not assured .

erisa states that "the united states is not liable for any obligation or liability incurred by the corporation. .

as shown in table 1 , central states paid $2.8 billion in benefits in 2014 .

if pbgc were required to provide financial assistance to the central states plan , it is likely that pbgc would quickly become insolvent .

participants in plans that receive financial assistance from pbgc would likely see their benefits greatly reduced .

the coalition of multiemployer pension plan stakeholders that formulated the proposal to reduce participants' benefits assumed that congress would not authorize financial assistance for pbgc .

table 2 summarizes the financial position of pbgc's multiemployer program .

the value of pbgc's expected future assistance to central states is included as a liability for pbgc .

under mpra , only plans in critical and declining status may cut benefits .

one criterion for a plan to be in critical status is that the plan's funding ratio must be less than 65% .

a plan is in declining status if the plan actuary projects the plan will become insolvent within the current year or , depending on certain circumstances as specified in mpra , within either the next 14 or 19 years .

mpra requires that plans demonstrate that benefit reductions are distributed equitably .

it lists a number of factors that plans may , but are not required to , consider .

these factors include the age and life expectancy of the participant ; the length of time an individual has been receiving benefits ; the type of benefit ( such as early retirement , normal retirement , or survivor benefit ) ; years to retirement for active employees ; and the extent to which participants are reasonably likely to withdraw support for the plan , which could cause employers to withdraw from the plan .

mpra requires that benefit reductions be made only to the extent that the plan will be restored to solvency .

it also requires that an individual's benefit be reduced to no less than 110% of the pbgc maximum guarantee .

for example , with the maximum guarantee for an individual with 30 years of service in a plan being $12,870 per year , a participant whose benefit is suspended would have to receive a benefit of at least $14,157 .

the pbgc maximum guarantee is less than $12,870 for individuals with fewer than 30 years of service in a plan .

in addition , disabled individuals and retirees aged 80 or older may not have their benefits reduced .

the benefits of individuals between the ages of 75 and 80 may be reduced , but to a lesser extent than those younger than 75 .

a provision in mpra requires plans that meet specific conditions to reduce benefits in a specified manner .

this provision only applies to the central states plan .

the central states application for benefit reductions lists three tiers of benefits .

tier 1 includes benefits for participants who worked for an employer that withdrew and failed to pay , in full , the required payments to exit the plan ( known as withdrawal liability ) .

tier 2 includes all other benefits not attributable to either tier 1 or tier 3 .

tier 3 includes benefits for individuals who worked for an employer that ( 1 ) withdrew from the plan , ( 2 ) fully paid its withdrawal liability , and ( 3 ) established a separate plan to provide benefits in an amount equal to benefits reduced as a result of the financial condition of the original plan .

tier 3 includes only benefits for participants who worked for united parcel service ( ups ) , are receiving benefits from the central states plan , and for which the ups plan would be required to offset any benefit reductions .

central states indicated that there are 100,377 tier 1 participants , 322,560 tier 2 participants , and 48,249 tier 3 participants .

the total amount of proposed benefit reductions will be $1.9 billion in tier i ; $7.1 billion in tier 2 ; and $2.0 billion in tier 3 .

central states has also indicated that its proposed benefit reductions are equitable and in accordance with the provisions of mpra .

table 3 summarizes the distribution of the proposed benefit reductions in central states .

about two - thirds of the participants in the plan are facing benefit reductions .

central states submitted its proposal to reduce participants' benefits on september 25 , 2015 .

treasury held a comment period on central states' application from october 23 , 2015 , to december 7 , 2015 .

on december 10 , 2015 , treasury extended the deadline for comments until february 1 , 2016 .

in addition , treasury has been holding conference calls and hosting regional public meetings with affected participants .

treasury is currently evaluating central states' application .

under mpra , treasury must approve or deny the application within 225 days of receipt , which is may 7 , 2016 .

in general , the secretary of the treasury must approve the application for benefit suspensions if central states' financial condition ( such as the plan being in critical and declining status ) and proposed benefit suspensions meet the criteria specified in mpra ( such as the benefit suspensions being equitably distributed and no benefit suspensions for participants aged 80 and older ) .

mpra requires the treasury to accept the plan sponsor's determinations with respect to the criteria for the benefit suspensions and may reject the application [only] if the plan sponsor's determinations were "clearly erroneous. .

in general , treasury is required to administer a vote of plan participants not later than 30 days after it approves an application for benefit reductions .

unless a majority of all plan participants and beneficiaries reject the proposal , benefit reductions would go into effect .

if a majority of plan participants reject the proposal to reduce benefits , the plan sponsor may submit a new proposal to the treasury to suspend benefits .

under mpra , if treasury determines that a plan is systematically important then treasury may permit ( 1 ) the benefit suspensions to occur regardless of the participant vote or ( 2 ) the implementation of a modified plan of benefit suspensions to take effect , provided the modified plan would enable the pension plan to avoid insolvency .

a systemically important plan is a plan that pbgc projects would require more than $1.0 billion in future financial assistance in the event of the plan's insolvency .

at the end of fy2013 , pbgc indicated the present value of future financial assistance to central states to be $20.2 billion .

treasury would most likely determine that central states is a systematically important plan .

in the 114 th congress , a number of bills have been introduced that would affect potentially insolvent multiemployer db pension plans .

h.r .

2844 / s. 1631 .

representative marcy kaptur and senator bernie sanders introduced companion legislation , the keep our pension promises act , on june 19 , 2015 , that would , among other provisions , repeal the benefit suspensions enacted in mpra .

h.r .

4029 / s. 2147 .

representative david joyce on november 17 , 2015 , and senator rob portman on october 7 , 2015 , introduced companion legislation , the pension accountability act , that would ( 1 ) change the participant vote to approve a plan to reduce benefits from a majority of plan participants to a majority of participants who vote and ( 2 ) eliminate the ability of systematically important plans to implement benefit suspensions regardless of the outcome of the participant vote .

