c ombatting trafficking in persons has been a major legislative priority of the 114 th congress .

trafficking is a human rights concern as well as a significant area of modern day criminal activity .

moreover , it involves violations of labor , public health , and human rights standards , as well as criminal law .

the united states has a varied role in human trafficking .

it is "a source , transit , and destination country for men , women , transgender individuals , and children — both u.s. citizens and foreign nationals — subjected to sex trafficking and forced labor. .

there are no current , reliable data on the total number of human trafficking victims in the united states .

however , some studies provide snapshots of the victim pool by estimating specific victim populations ; for instance , one study suggests that perhaps 100,000 u.s. citizen children may be victims of trafficking within the united states .

human trafficking in the united states is broadly conceptualized in two categories: sex trafficking and labor trafficking .

notably , it "can occur in both legal and illicit industries , including in commercial sex , hospitality , sales crews , agriculture , manufacturing , janitorial services , construction , shipyards , restaurants , health and elder care , salon services , fairs and carnivals , peddling and begging , and domestic service. .

the united states initiates more investigations and prosecutes more individuals for sex trafficking than for labor trafficking offenses .

noncitizens are more susceptible than u.s. citizens to labor trafficking , and more foreign victims are found in labor trafficking than in sex trafficking .

although labor trafficking can happen to u.s. citizens , significantly more u.s. citizens are found in sex trafficking .

research also indicates that most of the victims of sex trafficking into and within the united states are women and children .

u.s. efforts to counter trafficking in persons include protection for victims , education of the public , and the investigation and prosecution of trafficking offenses .

several departments ( the primary being the departments of justice [doj] , health and human services [hhs] , and labor [dol] ) have programs , or administer grants to other entities , that provide victim assistance tailored to trafficking victims .

such assistance may include temporary housing , independent living skills , cultural orientation , transportation , job training , mental health counseling , and legal assistance .

a number of federal agencies administer public awareness campaigns on identifying human trafficking victims .

the department of homeland security's ( dhs's ) blue campaign is one such example .

the majority of cases investigated at the federal level are handled by agents in doj's federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and dhs's u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , who coordinate with others as appropriate .

these cases are prosecuted by doj .

congress began legislating to counter domestic human trafficking more than a decade ago .

the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( tvpa ; division a of p.l .

106-386 ) and its four reauthorizations ( tvpras ) have collectively aimed to reduce human trafficking within the united states .

they have established grant programs for victims and law enforcement , strengthened criminal laws , and provided for oversight on the effectiveness and implications of u.s. policies on countering human trafficking .

countering human trafficking has also been a prolific area of legislative activity for the 114 th congress .

notably , the justice for victims of trafficking act of 2015 ( jvta ; p.l .

114-22 ) was signed into law on may 29 , 2015 .

this report discusses domestic human trafficking issues addressed by the jvta .

the issues are grouped under the following themes: ( 1 ) restoring victims through services and benefits , ( 2 ) criminal justice , ( 3 ) domestic sex trafficking of children , and ( 4 ) other issues that include inter - agency coordination , training , sex offender registration , and children conceived through rape .

the report supplements crs report r43917 , domestic human trafficking legislation in the 114th congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

in general , the trafficking business feeds on continuing demand and conditions of vulnerability such as youth , gender , poverty , and social exclusion .

actors engaged in human trafficking range from family - run organizations to sophisticated transnational organized crime syndicates .

trafficking victims are often subjected to mental and physical abuse in order to control them .

abuse may include debt bondage , social isolation , removal of identification cards and travel documents , violence , and threat of reprisals against the victims or their families .

a major aspect of u.s. anti - trafficking efforts is victim assistance — providing immediate services when victims are identified and helping them recover from the victimization .

the jvta seeks to improve services to victims .

while the united states has a number of statutes that can and have been used to combat human trafficking , law enforcement and policymakers remain interested in ways to enhance investigations and prosecutions of individuals who commit trafficking offenses .

in general , federal law enforcement has targeted criminal networks that may involve individuals operating in a number of capacities .

in an effort to help law enforcement combat the advertising side of commercial sexual exploitation , the jvta permits the prosecution of traffickers if they know or recklessly disregard the fact that those whose services they advertise are coerced , deceived , or under age .

for - profit advertisers , including website operators , may not be prosecuted based only on reckless disregard ; they must know that those being advertised are coerced , deceived , or under age .

the jvta expands the ability of federal , state , and local prosecutors to obtain wiretap orders from courts for certain investigations by including additional trafficking - related offenses as allowable investigations .

it also expands law enforcement's "toolbox" for prosecuting individuals who travel interstate or internationally to engage in commercial sexual activity with a child .

it modifies the affirmative defense that defendants enjoy in such cases to require that they prove by "clear and convincing evidence," rather than the less demanding "preponderance of the evidence" standard , that they reasonably believed the child was an adult .

in addition , the jvta clarifies that the u.s .

marshals service has the authority to help ( upon request ) federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies in locating and recovering missing children .

the jvta also makes changes to increase financial penalties for traffickers and heighten the federal response to trafficking offenses .

domestic sex trafficking of children is trafficking within the united states involving a commercial sex act in which the person induced to perform such act has not attained 18 years of age .

regardless of whether a child is believed to have consented to sex or whether the child represents himself / herself as an adult , the child is considered a trafficking victim under federal law .

the exact number of child victims of sex trafficking in the united states is unknown because of challenges in defining the population and varying methodologies used to arrive at estimates .

most of the victims are thought to be u.s. citizens and lprs .

commercial sexual exploitation of children appears to be fueled by a variety of individual ( eg , homelessness or history of child abuse ) , relationship ( eg , family conflict or dysfunction ) , community ( eg , peer pressure or gang involvement ) , and societal ( eg , sexualization of children ) variables .

these factors may interact in ways that can increase the risk of exploitation .

as part of its 2013 report on child sex trafficking , the national academy of sciences recommended that multiple stakeholders — such as the federal government , state and local governments , academic and research institutions , foundations and nongovernmental organizations , and the commercial sector — collaborate to address this issue .

the jvta addresses sex trafficking of children through changes to a few policy areas , including missing and exploited children , runaway youth , the child welfare system , and juvenile justice .

there have been concerns about possible duplication of efforts and a lack of coordination among the agencies that conduct anti - trafficking activities , and whether the fact that so many agencies are involved with anti - trafficking policy leads to duplication or funds not being used in the most efficient manner .

the tvpa , as amended , established both the president's interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking ( pitf ) and the senior policy operating group ( spog ) in part to facilitate coordination on anti - trafficking policy across u.s. government agencies to ensure that there is not a duplication of efforts .

in addition , the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) requires hhs to establish , by september 2016 , the national advisory committee on sex trafficking of children and youth in the united states to improve the nation's response to sex trafficking and develop best practices and recommendations for states to combat sex trafficking of children , among other duties .

the federal government does not currently have a national strategy broadly directed at combating human trafficking .

the jvta directs the president's interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking to conduct a review of human trafficking prevention within the united states .

the report is to include ( 1 ) a catalog of the u.s. government's efforts to prevent individuals from committing trafficking offenses and prevent children from becoming victims ; ( 2 ) a survey of the literature related to deterring individuals from trafficking and preventing children from becoming victims ; ( 3 ) identification of best practices related to preventing human trafficking of children ; and ( 4 ) identification of gaps in research and data that would be helpful in formulating strategies to prevent child trafficking .

the jvta also requires a government accountability office ( gao ) report to congress on each program or initiative authorized under the law and the following five statutes to determine whether any program or initiative is duplicative: ( 1 ) trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2005 , ( 2 ) trafficking victims protection act of 2000 , ( 3 ) victims of child abuse act of 1990 , ( 4 ) runaway and homeless youth act , and ( 5 ) missing children's assistance act .

the report is to be submitted to the house and the senate judiciary committees within 180 days of the law's enactment .

the report must include a description of the cost of any duplicative program or initiative and recommendations on how to achieve cost savings with respect to each such duplicative program or initiative .

the jvta initiates the creation of the united states advisory council on human trafficking ( council ) , which is to be comprised of between 8 and 14 human trafficking survivors .

the council is to serve as an advisory body to the senior policy operating group on trafficking in persons , reviewing federal anti - trafficking policy and programs .

in addition , the council is to serve as the point of contact for federal agencies seeking input of trafficking survivors on programs and policies .

the group is to formulate assessments and recommendations to ensure that federal policies conform , to the extent practicable , to the best practices in the field of human trafficking prevention , and it is required to produce an annual report regarding its review of anti - trafficking policies and programs .

the council is to terminate at the end of fy2020 .

finally , the jvta directs the attorney general to implement and maintain a national strategy for combating human trafficking that includes ( 1 ) integrating federal , state , local , and tribal efforts to investigate and prosecute human trafficking cases ; ( 2 ) coordinating cases within doj ; ( 3 ) addressing annual budget priorities and federal efforts dedicated to preventing and combating human trafficking ; ( 4 ) continually assessing future trends , challenges , and opportunities to enhance federal , state , local , and tribal efforts to combat human trafficking ; and ( 5 ) encouraging cooperation , coordination , and mutual support between the private sector and federal agencies to combat human trafficking .

while u.s. immigration and customs enforcement is one of the two lead agencies responsible for human trafficking investigations , personnel from several agencies within dhs may encounter instances and victims of trafficking during the course of their regular duties .

for example , agents from the transportation security administration ( tsa ) may encounter trafficking victims at airports as traffickers attempt to move the victims around the country .

the jvta directs the secretary of dhs to implement a training program within 180 days on deterring , detecting , and disrupting human trafficking during the course of their primary roles and responsibilities for personnel from tsa , customs and border protection ( cbp ) , and any other agency that the secretary deems appropriate .

the law also requires the secretary to ensure that such personnel regularly receive current information related to the detection of human trafficking .

the secretary is required to certify to the appropriate congressional committees no later than one year after enactment that the training has been completed .

the jvta also requires the secretary to submit an annual report to these committees on the effectiveness of the training program required under the law , including the number of cases in which dhs personnel suspected human trafficking and the number of confirmed cases of human trafficking .

the jvta allows the secretary to provide the training curricula to any state or local government , or any private organization to assist such entities in creating their own programs to identify human trafficking .

the jvta requires the attorney general to assure that each doj anti - trafficking program , including training programs for federal , state , or local law enforcement , includes technical training on effective measures for ( 1 ) investigating and prosecuting an individual who obtains , patronizes , or solicits a commercial sex act involving a trafficking victim ; and ( 2 ) facilitating the provision of physical and mental health services to trafficking victims .

it also requires that any doj anti - trafficking program for u.s .

attorneys or other federal prosecutors includes training on seeking restitution for trafficking offenses .

in addition , it mandates that the federal judicial center provide training to judges related to ordering restitution for trafficking offenses .

the jvta amends the tvpa to include members of the foreign service as persons who are required to be trained on how to identify and protect trafficking victims , and it specifies minimum requirements for the training .

for example , the law requires that all ambassadors and deputy chiefs of missions receive a briefing on trafficking issues prior to departing for their posts .

as noted previously , the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) amended federal child welfare law to require state child welfare agencies to develop procedures needed to ensure relevant training for caseworkers .

these procedures must be developed in consultation with state and local law enforcement , juvenile justice systems , health care providers , education agencies , and organizations with experience in dealing with at - risk children and youth .

the jvta similarly amends a separate child welfare law to ensure that state child welfare agencies develop provisions and procedures for training child protective services ( cps ) workers about identifying and assessing children who are victims of sex trafficking .

the jvta also requires hhs to competitively award a grant to one medical or nursing school for developing best practices for health care professionals to recognize and appropriately respond to victims of severe forms of human trafficking .

this entity would be required to analyze and evaluate , in consultation with others , existing best practices for interprofessional collaboration , and develop training for health care professionals on such best practices .

it also requires hhs to later disseminate the best practices identified by the medical or nursing school .

the sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) provides a set of minimum standards for sex offender registration and notification in the united states .

it requires those convicted of federal , state , or military sex offenses to register with state or tribal authorities after they have been sentenced or after their release from prison .

they must register in each jurisdiction in which they live , work , or attend school , and they must periodically update the information in the registry .

in an august 2014 report , the inspector general for the department of defense questioned whether sorna provided access to information on as many military sex offenders as it should .

the jvta requires the secretary of defense to provide the attorney general with information on individuals released from military corrections facilities or convicted during a court - martial without confinement , and who are required to register under sorna .

such information is included in the national sex offender registry and the dru sjodin national sex offender public website .

there have been cases of a rapist suing his victim for custody of the child conceived during the rape .

in some cases , the rapist volunteers to surrender his parental rights if the woman refuses to testify in the criminal case .

while some states have statutes that allow the court to terminate the parental rights in the case of rape , others either do not have such statutes or have restrictions , such as requiring the person to be convicted of the assault before his parental rights can be terminated .

the jvta requires the attorney general to increase grant funding under the stop ( services , training , officers , prosecutors ) violence against women formula grant program and sexual assault services program to states that have a law that allows the mother of a child conceived through rape to seek court - ordered termination of the parental rights of her rapist .

the laws would apply without regard to the age or marital status of the child's parents at the time of the offense .

the increase in formula grants is allowed to be provided for a total of four two - year periods ( eight years ) , and is equal to not more than 10% of the total amount of funding provided to the state averaged over the previous three years .

of the increased funding , 25% is for stop grants , and 75% for the sexual assault services program .

the jvta authorizes $5 million a year for fy2015 through fy2019 for the grant increases .

