at the beginning of the 112 th , 113 th , and 114 th congresses — in 2011 , 2013 , and 2015 respectively — a number of reform - minded senators unsuccessfully urged the senate to adopt its rules on opening day by majority vote ( as the house does on its first day ) without having to overcome a supermajority hurdle required under existing procedures .

for example , on january 6 , 2015 , a reform - minded senator stated , "it has been the tradition at the beginning of many congresses that a majority of the senate has asserted its right to adopt or amend the rules .

just as senators of both parties have done in the past , we do not acquiesce to any provision of senate rules — adopted by a previous congress — that would deny the majority that right. .

the senator's comments highlight a two - fold conundrum that suffuses this report: ( 1 ) a majority of the senate can amend the chamber's rules ; ( 2 ) however , before that may occur , reform advocates might be required under existing senate rules — which carry over from one congress to the next ( part of the "continuing body" thesis ) — to first muster a supermajority to bring interminable debate to a close on proposals to amend senate rules .

only then would senators have the opportunity to vote directly on proposals to alter the chamber's rules .

contemporary attempts to change senate rules mirror similar opening day efforts that became biennial rituals nearly every new congress from 1953 to 1975 — the principal focus of this report .

a major impetus for the repeated attempts at filibuster reform during this period was the frustration of liberal senators in winning enactment of civil rights legislation .

prolonged debate and other procedural tactics by southern and other members often blocked passage of those measures .

the revival of the idea that the senate has the constitutional right on the opening day of a new congress to change its procedures by majority vote regardless of entrenched rules or traditions merits detailed analysis .

why ? .

because this topic addresses perhaps the most distinctive procedural characteristic of the senate: the filibuster ( extended debate ) .

an examination of the 1953 to 1975 initiatives to change senate rules on the first day of a new congress — unhindered by supermajority voting requirements carried over from the previous congress — might provide useful context and analysis for today's advocates and opponents of this approach .

then and now , the procedural / political struggles associated with this idea focus less on rewriting many senate rules and more on making it somewhat easier to constrain obstructive filibusters .

worth brief mention is that "filibustering," in its broadest sense , refers to more than prolonged debate .

it encompasses a range of acts to delay and frustrate the senate , such as objecting to a unanimous consent request to end quorum calls , raising numerous points of order , or forcing repetitive roll call votes .

even so , the right of every senator to engage in extended debate is probably the chamber's most famous feature .

it is so well - known that hollywood even made a classic movie in 1939 ( mr. smith goes t o washington ) that highlighted the filibuster's educative and political value .

a solo , around - the - clock filibuster was launched by fictitious senator jefferson smith ( played by actor james stewart ) .

senator smith / stewart collapsed from exhaustion at the movie's end , but his filibuster mobilized public opinion and member sentiment against a tawdry land deal .

in short , the senator's talkathon exposed wrongdoing , aroused public support , and , importantly , persuaded his colleagues of the rightness of his views .

senators value extended debate for many other reasons , such as preventing bills they disagree with from becoming law , dramatizing issues for the public , protecting minority rights against majority steamrolling , ensuring thorough analysis of legislation , and checking overzealous presidents .

on the other hand , opponents contend that prolonged debate — its actual or threatened use — thwarts majority rule , promotes gridlock , delays or kills legislation , exacts unwarranted concessions on measures or matters backed by senate majorities , and , at times , blocks consideration of proposals that enjoy majority support in the country .

in the view of senator robert c. byrd , d - wv , one of the most knowledgeable parliamentary experts in senate history: "the liberties of a free people will always be safe where a forum exists in which open and unlimited debate is allowed. .

he added: "the good outweighs the bad , and not all filibusters have been bad , even though they may have been exasperating , contentious , and perceived as iniquitous. .

senator byrd's views underscore that extended debate is the core procedural feature that distinguishes the senate from the house of representatives , where almost every second of debate time is limited by some rule , precedent , or practice .

critics , by contrast , emphasize that filibusters contravene a fundamental principle of democratic governance: majority rule .

in federalist no .

2 2 , alexander hamilton wrote: "to give a minority a negative upon the majority ( which is always the case where more than a majority is requisite to a decision ) , is , in its tendency , to subject the sense of the greater number to that of the lesser. .

or as thomas jefferson said in the parliamentary manual he prepared for the senate when he served as president of the senate ( 1797-1801 ) : "the voice of the majority decides .

for the lex majoris partis [law of the greatest part , or majority rule] is the law of all councils , elections , &c. where not otherwise expressly provided. .

in addition , the framers did expressly provide in the constitution a limited number of instances where supermajorities are required , such as a two - thirds vote of each chamber to override a presidential veto or two - thirds of the senators voting to win the senate's consent to a treaty .

nothing in either the constitution or senate rules defines a filibuster , let alone what constitutes an appropriate length of time for debating a measure or matter .

from the first congress , senators recognized that debates for dilatory purposes would occasionally be used , but "they were not used frequently enough to give the senate any trace of the notoriety which the filibuster later attached to the upper chamber. .

during much of the 19 th century , unrestricted debate aroused rather little senatorial concern , in large measure because the senate's smaller size and workload ( compared to today ) made lengthy debates easier to accommodate .

once the motion for the previous question disappeared from the senate's standing rules in 1806 , it was not until 1917 that the senate adopted a rule ( rule xxii ) to allow a supermajority to bring debate to close .

over time , however , lengthy debate , and its threat , evolved to become a potent obstructive practice for delaying or preventing chamber consideration of measures or matters .

there is significant frustration in the present - day senate with extended debate because it is difficult to end talkathons .

a key reason for the difficulty is that on most measures and matters , a vote of three - fifths of the senators duly chosen and sworn ( 60 if all 100 seats are filled ) is required to invoke cloture under rule xxii , which imposes limits on overall consideration .

little surprise that in a sharply divided and polarized senate , the number 41 is stronger than 59 .

an even higher threshold ( two - thirds of those voting , a quorum being present ) is required to end debate on measures to amend the standing rules of the senate .

the supermajority vote required to invoke cloture on both substantive issues and amendments to senate rules is among the major factors that explain why in recent years various senators have urged procedural revisions .

among current proposals are changes to limit opportunities for prolonged debate on certain motions , to reduce the length of time required to end debate under rule xxii , to lower the 60-vote threshold to invoke cloture , or to require senators to remain in the chamber and engage in a so - called "talking filibuster" — as portrayed in the aforementioned mr. smith goes t o washington — rather than use other methods ( repeated quorum calls , for example ) to stall senate action .

with heightened interest in revising senate procedures that permit lengthy debate , this report has several purposes .

first , it provides a general overview of the senate's contemporary legislative context that has triggered renewed interest in amending the standing rules of the senate at the beginning of — even during — a new congress .

second , the report focuses mainly on issues associated with what some call the "constitutional option," as distinguished from the "nuclear option. .

proponents of the constitutional option cite article i , section 5 , of the constitution — "each house may determine the rules of its proceedings" — as granting them the authority to amend the rules of the senate on opening day by majority vote and without filibusters .

senate rules require a supermajority vote to end debate on proposals to amend chamber procedures .

the nuclear option refers to the creation by majority vote of new precedents to curb filibusters of specific measures or matters .

third , the report reviews three congresses ( 1953 , 1957 , and 1959 ) where various senators professed that a complete rewrite of senate rules was in order at the start of a new congress .

fourth , an analysis of the 1961 through 1975 cloture revision proposals is presented .

these initiatives focused principally on amending rule xxii rather than adopting a new senate rulebook .

as with the reform attempts of the 1950s , this analysis summarizes several of the key parliamentary and political considerations or challenges likely to confront contemporary advocates who would like to change senate rules at the opening of a new congress .

fifth , the report examines several issues that emerged during these past attempts to change senate rules that might affect contemporary efforts to revise senate rules .

the report concludes with an afterword that highlights significant cloture developments post - 1975 , especially the november 21 , 2013 , precedent that established majority cloture on most presidential nominations ( see the discussion in part vi ) .

the legislative work of the contemporary senate is regularly influenced by at least two key procedural and political factors .

first , the senate remains at its core a "minority rule" institution .

the chamber's rules , precedents , and practices accord extraordinary procedural prerogatives to every senator .

no other democratic legislative assembly worldwide , so far as is known , grants its members such wide - ranging freedom as are accorded to u.s .

senators to debate and to offer amendments , including amendments unrelated to the pending question .

restrictions can be imposed on each of these freedoms , but both are mostly available to all senators to employ as they personally determine .

one consequence is that any senator is well - positioned to stall or frustrate chamber action on measures or matters , sometimes temporarily , sometimes permanently .

procedural actions by senators who oppose a measure are particularly potent when time is at a premium near the close of a session .

as a frustrated senate majority leader lamented: "only in the united states senate and only in the last few days of a session can 85 senators vote one way: yes , for this bill ; 12 senators vote another way: no against the bill — and the no's prevail. .

second , the senate is currently highly polarized .

collaboration and compromise across the party divide can be much harder to attain than in the post - depression and world war ii eras .

many factors account for this development .

for example , members of the two senate parties hold sharply divergent views on many of the major issues of the day ( the proper role of government , for example ) .

another factor that inhibits biparty cooperation is intense electoral competitiveness of the two parties as each struggle to win governing power .

bipartisan coalitions , as a result , are very difficult to forge on consequential measures and matters .

recent senates also have witnessed minority party senators , whether democratic or republican , using an array of parliamentary tools to make governance by the majority party extraordinarily difficult .

in response , senate majority party leaders have employed parliamentary countermoves to try to advance their policy and political priorities .

aggressive use of chamber rules and practices — such as routine threats to filibuster legislation or nominations — has triggered calls for procedural reform .

the filibuster is perhaps the prime target for change because its goal is often to delay or prevent votes on measures or matters that might otherwise pass the senate with majority support .

as former senate republican whip thomas kuchel of california explained: "what is a filibuster ? .

my definition would be that it is irrelevant speechmaking in the senate , designed solely and simply to consume time , and thus to prevent a vote from being taken on pending legislation. .

of course , extended debate serves a variety of purposes , as previously noted , such as to inform and enlighten colleagues and the attentive citizenry ; inflame public opinion ; focus attention on emerging issues ; foster reasoned deliberation on legislation ; influence lawmakers' votes ; or highlight the strengths and weaknesses of legislative proposals and presidential nominations .

a filibuster marathon by one or more senators is not easy to stop , however .

the senate has only one formal rule ( rule xxii ) to terminate prolonged debate on measures or matters .

it is a time - consuming , multi - step procedure that impacts at least three session days .

this salient fact compounds the difficulty of managing a deadline - driven and workload - packed institution ; further , as noted earlier , rule xxii requires a three - fifths vote of the senators duly chosen and sworn to bring debate to a close .

even then , rule xxii commonly allows for up to 30 more hours of post - cloture consideration on most matters before a vote could occur on the clotured measure or matter .

the procedural reality is that the mere threat of extended debate — perhaps foreshadowed by objections to unanimous consent requests — is often enough to block action on measures or matters , not because proponents lack majority support but because the 60-vote threshold is beyond reach barring , perhaps , various concessions to opposition lawmakers .

even if a party has 60 or more members , chamber leaders may not want to consume valuable time to go through the cloture process , thus empowering smaller minorities .

significantly , rule xxii stipulates that a two - thirds vote of senators present and voting ( interpreted to mean two - thirds of the senators voting , a quorum being present ) is required to invoke cloture on proposals to amend the standing rules of the senate .

the proposals themselves only need the support of a majority — even a simple majority , 26 of 51 — of senators to pass the senate .

the conundrum for reform - minded senators: if they mobilize at least a majority of members who favor altering rule xxii , they cannot accomplish their objective under the terms of the rule they want to change .

in short , the reformers face a "catch - 22" parliamentary dilemma .

as senator jacob javits , r - ny , pointedly noted: "true , the senate by a majority [even a simple majority] at any time can work its will on any piece of legislation , including a change in the rules , but the question is: what does it take to get to the point where the majority can manifest its will ? .

in the case of rules changes , the answer is that it could first require the support of a two - thirds supermajority of members voting to bring to an end , as rule xxii states , a filibuster against "a measure or motion to amend senate rules. .

only then could a senate majority vote on the revision itself .

the "constitutional" and "nuclear" terms are often used interchangeably because at their heart each seeks to change senate rule xxii ( or any senate rule ) by majority vote , circumventing the two - thirds cloture requirement to bring debate to an end on proposals to alter senate rules .

the term "nuclear" can apply to both options in this specific sense: the success of either the constitutional or nuclear option might trigger a parliamentary meltdown , an explosion of dilatory and obstructive tactics by senators who vehemently oppose limitations on their ability to filibuster measures or matters .

both options might also use novel procedures to achieve their objectives .

for ease of comparison , this report considers the two options separately , which emulates a study by two acknowledged senate procedural experts .

the "constitutional" option refers to efforts at the start of a new congress to amend senate rules by majority vote , without regard to rule xxii's two - thirds requirement for ending debate .

proponents of this approach cite the constitutional provision that "each house may determine the rules of its proceedings. .

opponents exclaim that "the constitution says nothing of the sort .

it merely says ... that both houses can make their own rules. .

opponents also emphasize that the senate has rules that require a supermajority vote to end debate on proposals to amend chamber procedures .

the nuclear option refers to the creation of new precedents that prevent filibusters of specific measures or matters .

as senate precedents state: "any ruling by the chair in response to a point of order made by a senator is subject to an appeal .

[if there is an appeal , a majority vote of the senate upholds the decision of the chair. .

if no appeal is taken , the ruling of the chair stands as the judgment of the senate and becomes a precedent for the guidance of the senate in the future. .

in the view of two senate procedural experts , the nuclear option is "essentially a variant of the 'constitutional option. .

the difference is that this parliamentary maneuver would be applied [during] a congressional session" rather than at the beginning of a new congress .

senators often turn to one or the other option in their attempt to amend the standing rules of the senate by majority vote , bypassing the supermajority impediment .

the use of either option to try to amend a major rule of the senate is almost certain to rile many members as being outside the conventional legislative process: proposals to amend senate rules are typically referred to the committee on rules and administration for study and review .

attempts to amend rule xxii can arouse considerable notice by the media , outside groups , and the attentive public .

to summarize: the nuclear option involves the creation of new debate - ending precedents using proceedings that may require actions in contravention of existing precedents or rules .

precedents are the common law of the senate and govern scores of chamber proceedings .

as freshman senator jeff flake of arizona noted in his maiden speech , the senate is "an institution bound by tradition and precedent. .

former senator judd gregg of new hampshire , a four - term veteran of the senate , underscored senator flake's observation .

"to the extent that there are precedents," he said , "they're extraordinarily important .

in the parliamentary process , precedent is what controls. .

precedents do not change the formal text of senate rules , but they do affect their interpretation and application in senate proceedings .

the other route to amending the standing rules of the senate by majority vote emphasizes the senate's constitutional rulemaking authority under article i , section 5 .

this approach has often occurred biennially at the beginning of a new congress .

it is the principal focus of this report .

remember that a senate majority can amend the standing rules at any time .

at issue is rule xxii's two - thirds vote requirement to invoke cloture before the senate might adopt by majority vote a pending amendment to its standing rules .

a further review of the two reform options — creating precedents or amending senate rules — merits additional discussion because each option can provoke contentious floor struggles .

it is useful to note that several parliamentary topics discussed herein vary in their salience in the debates of different years .

even so , they are subjects that have been raised repeatedly over the decades during debates on revising senate rules .

the topics include such matters as the role of the majority leader and the vice president as presiding officer ; the continuing body doctrine ; interim procedural rules pending adoption of new senate rules ( or amendments thereto ) ; the "opening day" concept ; parliamentary strategies ; and ending debate .

to be sure , many of these general issues also orient much of the cloture reform discussion in subsequent decades .

during the 1960s and 1970s , the reformers' strategic purpose shifted from the broad goal of rewriting the senate's rulebook to a specific focus on amending rule xxii .

all their attempts at revision failed during this era except for the 1975 change .

the political context for these initiatives , especially during the 1960s , was shaped to a large extent by the civil rights struggle of african americans .

later , with enactment of civil rights legislation , many senators who previously opposed attempts to curb extended debate began to vote for cloture ; they realized that prolonged debate could be employed to achieve their policy / political objectives .

noteworthy is that the filibuster itself was undergoing change .

in the decade from 1961 through 1971 , there were more cloture votes ( 40 ) than in the period from 1917 — the year the cloture rule was adopted — through 1971 .

double and even triple digit cloture votes became the norm in subsequent congresses .

significantly , for the first time ever , cloture was invoked to end a southern - led filibuster against the landmark civil rights act of 1964 .

gradually , the public's strong association of filibusters with southern senators against civil rights bills waned as filibusters became a procedural tool for senators of all ideological stripes .

in 1970 , for example , liberal democratic senator william proxmire of wisconsin and his supporters talked to death a bill to fund development of a supersonic transport plane .

along with the usual arguments against changing rule xxii ( protection of minority rights and small state interests , for example ) , there were others that emerged during this era .

for example , heightened concern among many members with the growth of executive power , particularly in the defense and foreign policy arenas , bolstered support for extended debate as a means to challenge presidential initiatives and protect congressional power .

the willingness of members to filibuster also increased during this period for other reasons , such as the decline of informal folkways ( for example , newcomers should be seen and not heard ) and the election of assertive senators who were not averse to using chamber rules to achieve their personal , policy , and political goals .

thus , efforts continued during the 1961-1975 period ( and beyond , of course ) to revise the senate's cloture procedure .

for each year discussed — 1961 , 1963 , 1965 , and so on — this section will highlight the political context and the major parliamentary / procedural issues that influenced the eventual outcome .

it appears evident from this discussion that it is usually difficult — barring consensus among senators as in the 1959 and 1975 cases — to amend senate rules , especially amendments that affect the chamber's deliberative character .

when attempts are made to amend rule xxii , two fundamental values are in conflict: the right to debate versus the right to decide .

the two can be reframed as minority protection versus majority rule .

to be sure , it can be quite difficult to reach an appropriate balance between these values when the senate has before it controversial and contentious issues .

how long and thorough debate must be is not always clear , partly because today's complex , interconnected , and many - sided issues typically require extensive debate and discussion .

noteworthy is that even the threat of extended debate — which today might be viewed as a "silent" filibuster — can stall action on various issues .

given a crowded senate agenda , it may not be practical for majority party leaders to call up measures and spend considerable time ( a scarce and precious resource ) to try to end an expected talkathon .

it is also not easy to determine the goals or motives of a senator who engages in unending debate: is it to thwart senatorial action on "bad" ideas or is it to highlight an urgent national issue ? .

over time senators can fathom when the purposes of prolonged debate are to educate and inform rather than to block and frustrate legislative issues .

as senator robert byrd once said: "i will be able to perceive [a filibuster] , because i know one when i see it. .

"opening day" initiatives to amend senate rules commonly expose sharp divisions between and among senators .

on one side are members who claim that the senate , at the commencement of a new congress , has the right under its constitutional rulemaking authority to amend senate rules by majority vote , uninhibited by any inherited supermajoritarian rules from previous congresses .

many of the "majoritarian" senators do not want to eliminate filibusters but to impose constraints on unlimited debate , such as imposing debate limits on the motion to proceed to legislation .

on the other side are members who contend that initiatives to amend senate rules at the beginning of a congress must follow the senate's existing rules because the senate is a continuing body .

"minoritarian" senators emphasize the virtues of extended debate , such as protecting minority views , encouraging bipartisanship and comity , and allowing even one senator to challenge the agenda of the white house .

if an attempt is made at the start of the 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) to amend senate rules by majority vote , what key concerns might senators on either side of the issue bear in mind ? .

this summary examination of earlier attempts to alter rule xxii suggests that at least four elements could influence the fate of the constitutional option .

they are: the sympathetic support of the presiding officer ; the assistance of the majority leader ; the mobilization of a determined and united majority ; and skillful use of procedural moves and countermoves .

needless to say , senate champions of change are essential , as are elections that produce an influx of lawmakers supportive of procedural reform .

the senate's cloture rule ( rule xxii ) was revised a number of times between 1917 , when it was first adopted , and 1975 .

in 1917 , rule xxii required two - thirds of those present and voting to invoke cloture .

subsequently , there were these formal changes to rule xxii during the 1949 to 1975 period ; thereafter , from 1977 to 2013 , other important changes occurred .

1949: ( a ) to invoke cloture , two - thirds of the entire membership , and ( b ) cloture could not be applied to motions to proceed to consider proposals to change senate rules ( though it could , for the first time , be applied to other motions to proceed ) .

1959: ( a ) to invoke cloture , two - thirds of the senators present and voting , and ( b ) cloture could be applied to motions to proceed to a change in senate rules .

1975: ( a ) to invoke cloture , three - fifths of all senators duly chosen and sworn: 60 of 100 , except a two - thirds vote of senators present and voting is still required to close debate for measures or motions to amend senate rules .

the parliamentary ingenuity of senator allen in 1975 and democratic senators james abourezk , sd , and howard metzenbaum , oh , in 1977 during the post - cloture period set the stage for two follow - on amendments to rule xxii: one in 1979 and the other in 1986 .

both rule changes limited the time for post - cloture consideration .

why ? .

because senator allen created and senators abourezk and metzenbaum further developed a procedural innovation , dubbed a "post - cloture filibuster," that exploited loopholes in rule xxii to prevent or delay final action on clotured legislation .

for example , under the provisions of rule xxii , once cloture is invoked , each senator is limited to one hour of post - cloture debate .

however , the time for reading amendments , appeals , roll call votes , quorum calls , and so on did not count against the one hour .

these dilatory tactics could consume many days before they might conclude .

their effect was to end the tradition that , once cloture was invoked on a measure , opponents would bow to the will of the senate and allow a final vote on the legislation without further procedural maneuvers .

once new dilatory tactics emerge on the legislative scene , senators are likely to use these devices for their own purposes .

such was the case in 1977 when democratic senators abourezk and metzenbaum waged a nearly unbreakable post - cloture filibuster against an energy bill supported by president jimmy carter and backed by a substantial bipartisan majority of the senate .

the dilatory tactics of the two senators provoked the 1979 and 1986 revisions to rule xxii .

 ( worth mention is that senator allen and his allies engaged in a post - cloture filibuster in 1976 on an antitrust enforcement measure .

majority leader mansfield exclaimed that the post - cloture filibuster against the antitrust bill was an "attempt to murder" rule xxii. ) .

legislating in the contemporary senate can be a difficult enterprise .

the chamber's rules and precedents grant significant procedural powers to each senator regardless of party , geography , or ideology .

in the senate , the policymaking advantage usually goes to those who wish to delay or obstruct legislative action .

history demonstrates that senatorial delay can be a virtue as the senate can block or "cool" hastily conceived measures that emanate from the house of representatives , the white house , or from other quarters .

the senate , in short , is an institution largely structured to promote deliberation — both to educate and persuade as well as to induce gridlock — and to protect minorities from majorities willing to steamroll measures or matters quickly through the senate .

a senator or group of senators can also use the possibility of a filibuster to extract important information from a reluctant executive branch agency or department .

indeed , the ability of any senator to delay senate action through prolonged debate might lead to a compromise acceptable to all sides .

of course filibusters or their threat also can prevent passage of legislation .

this reality means that the daily life of today's senate is often replete with filibusters , threats of extended debate , and cloture votes .

as one senator explained: you have to think of the senate as if it were 100 different nations and each one had the atomic bomb and at any moment any one of you could blow up the place .

so that no matter how long you've been here or how short you've been here , you always know you have the capacity to go to the leader and threaten to blow up the entire institution .

and , naturally , he'll deal with you .

understandably , senators have struggled for decades over when or whether senate rules , procedures , or traditions require change .

the procedural quandary is that most senators value the benefits to them as individuals provided by unlimited debate ( or the threat thereof ) .

yet the senate has often reformed and revised its rules and procedures in big and little ways .

consider the filibuster and rule xxii , and how each has changed over time .

for example , as a former senate parliamentarian noted , "for nearly 50 years after its adoption [in 1917] , rule xxii served a purpose more symbolic than real .

from 1917 to 1927 , cloture was voted on 10 times but it was adopted only four times .

from 1931 to 1964 , cloture was successful only twice. .

today , filibusters , filibuster threats , and cloture votes are commonplace and employed on major and minor issues — with cloture votes often occurring multiple times on the same measure or nomination — and throughout various policymaking stages .

since 1917 , both the vote to invoke cloture and the amount of time for post - cloture debate have been revised several times .

rule xxii is the focus of so much attention because it is the only formal rule to limit debate in the senate .

debates surrounding changes to rule xxii often concentrate on the right to debate versus the right to decide ( or protecting minority rights versus allowing the majority to vote on a matter ) ; the uniqueness of the senate as an institution ; the intent of the framers ( majority versus supermajority decision making ) ; or who is advantaged or disadvantaged from proposed amendments to rule xxii .

typically , revisions occur to rule xxii when several conditions are met , such as: a determined and unified majority long frustrated in achieving their goals by the 60-vote hurdle required for cloture ; a leader or set of leaders who craft a successful procedural and political strategy for achieving change , including persuading colleagues that their loss of personal power is more than offset by the senate's enhanced ability to govern ; and a public relations , or messaging , strategy designed to explain the necessity of the change and to rebut criticisms from those who might oppose the revision , whether colleagues , pundits , journalists , or outside groups .

other political and procedural forces are also relevant , such as the election of change - oriented lawmakers or crises of one sort or another ( the sinking of u.s. merchant ships by german submarines that led to the 1917 adoption of rule xxii or the once unbreakable post - cloture filibuster ) .

what appears at issue today — and what members of earlier eras also confronted — is whether senate rules and practices require alteration to better meet the challenges of the day .

in brief , do they require "modernization" to enhance the senate's governing capacity and its role as a co - equal branch of government ? .

some senators might suggest that the legislative system is working as intended and requires only periodic , small - bore improvements .

they might also view the senate and its individual members as one of the few effective counterweights to an increasingly powerful executive branch .

other members , mindful that many of today's lawmakers are not reluctant to exploit the chamber's procedures and practices for individual or political gain , might favor a senate whose procedures tilt in a more majoritarian direction .

they recognize that today's senate has morphed into a 60-vote institution for passing measures and matters — a fundamental transformation from earlier senates .

there are also people who suggest that it is not the procedural rules that require amendment but the "culture" of the senate that requires change , such as the revival of norms and values that strengthen civility , habits of cross - party compromise and collaboration , and vigorous debate anchored more in influencing policy and less in political messaging for the next election .

ultimately , it is the procedural context that shapes how individual members , committees , or the two parties raise issues and make — or avoid making — decisions .

if certain senate procedures cause unnecessary delay and hamper the senate's ability to address clear , festering , and pressing national problems , then the time might be right for procedural , structural , or other changes .

a comment made in 1971 by senator phil hart of michigan still resonates more than four decades later .

"the apparent inability of [the senate] to take action on our domestic ills when the needs are so painfully clear is a basic cause of unrest and disaffection" among the citizenry .

change is obligatory if institutions like the senate are to have the capacity to handle a large and growing workload and a complex array of overlapping domestic and international issues .

long ago thomas jefferson said , "as new discoveries are made , new truths discovered , and manners and opinions change with the change of circumstances , institutions must advance also and keep pace with the times. .

in short , the senate itself would determine whether or when to "keep pace with the times. .

that the senate undergoes change constantly is a given .

it responds to events , issues , and crises in different ways and speeds .

the election of new members every two years brings to the senate additional energy , issues , and ideas .

procedural change , whether formal or informal , is commonplace .

yet a basic philosophical conflict suffuses many reform initiatives: preserving the senate's important functions and traditions — for example , cooling popular passions with due deliberation — while enhancing its policymaking performance , oversight capacity , and longer - term focus .

as senator byrd of west virginia explained to a class of newly elected senators , the senate's "purpose was and is to examine , consider , protect , and to be a totally independent source of wisdom and judgment on the actions of the lower house and on the executive .

as such , the senate is the central pillar of our constitutional system. .

a final observation: it is understandable that there are many difficulties in managing the contemporary senate where bipartisanship , collegiality , and compromise are sometimes in short supply .

one consequence is that the senate has evolved from an institution where the filibuster ( or its threat ) was an infrequent occurrence , to be used on significant matters only , to a new institutional reality where 60 votes are required to approve scores of measures and matters , major or minor .

history suggests that this development , too , will change when the sentiments and votes of enough senators are favorable to another approach , perhaps encouraged by politically active constituents and outside groups and organizations .

meanwhile , the many demographic , geographical , and ideological differences in the nation mean that determination , patience , and sheer hard work are fundamental to negotiating , reconciling , and resolving partisan , policy , and procedural disagreements among senators and between the two parties .

illinois senator everett mckinley dirksen , a renowned republican minority leader ( 1959-1969 ) , made an apt comment about the art of governance in the mid - 1960s that also applies to today's senate: "there are 100 diverse personalities in the u.s. senate .

o great god , what an amazing and dissonant 100 personalities they are ! .

what an amazing thing it is to harmonize them .

what a job it is. .

