certain individuals and families without access to subsidized health insurance coverage may be eligible for premium tax credits .

these premium credits , authorized under the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) , apply toward the cost of purchasing specific types of health plans offered by private health insurance companies .

individuals who receive premium credits also may be eligible for subsidies that reduce cost - sharing expenses .

to be eligible for premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies , individuals and families must enroll in health plans offered through health insurance exchanges and meet other criteria .

exchanges operate in every state and the district of columbia ( dc ) .

exchanges are not insurance companies ; rather , they are marketplaces that offer private health plans to qualified individuals and small businesses .

the aca specifically requires exchanges to offer insurance options to individuals and to small businesses , so exchanges are structured to assist these two different types of customers .

consequently , each state has one exchange to serve individuals and families ( an individual exchange ) and another to serve small businesses ( a small business health options program , or shop , exchange ) .

health insurance companies that participate in the individual and shop exchanges must comply with numerous federal and state requirements .

among such requirements are restrictions related to the determination of premiums for exchange plans ( rating restrictions ) .

insurance companies are prohibited from using health factors in determining premiums .

however , they are allowed to vary premiums by age ( within specified limits ) , geography , number of individuals enrolling in a plan , and smoking status ( within specified limits ) .

the dollar amount of the premium tax credit is based on a statutory formula and varies from individual to individual .

individuals who are eligible for the premium credits generally are required to contribute some amount toward the purchase of their health insurance .

the premium credit is refundable , so individuals may claim the full credit amount when filing their taxes , even if they have little or no federal income tax liability .

the credit also is advanceable , so individuals may choose to receive the credit in advance of filing taxes on a monthly basis to coincide with the payment of insurance premiums ( technically , advance payments go directly to insurers ) .

advance payments automatically reduce monthly premiums by the credit amount .

therefore , the direct cost of insurance to an individual or family eligible for premium credits generally will be lower than the advertised cost for a given exchange plan .

an individual who qualifies for the premium tax credit , is enrolled in a silver plan ( see text box above , "actuarial value and metal plans" ) , and has annual household income no greater than 250% fpl is eligible for cost - sharing subsidies .

the purpose of these subsidies is to reduce an individual's ( or family's ) expenses when he or she receives health services covered under the silver plan .

there are two types of subsidies , and both are based on income ( see descriptions below ) .

individuals who are eligible for cost - sharing assistance may receive both types of subsidies , as long as they meet the applicable eligibility requirements .

the aca requires the hhs secretary to provide full reimbursements to insurers that provide cost - sharing subsidies .

federal outlays for such reimbursements totaled the following amounts: fy2014: $2.111 billion ; fy2015: $5.382 billion ; fy2016: $5.652 billion ; and fy2017: $7.317 billion .

although the aca authorized the cost - sharing subsidies and payments to reimburse insurers , it did not address the source of funds for such payments .

the obama administration made cost - sharing subsidy payments to insurers using an appropriation that finances the premium tax credits .

the house of representatives filed suit , claiming that the payments violated the appropriations clause of the u.s. constitution .

after holding that the house has standing to sue the obama administration , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia concluded that the payment of the cost - sharing subsidies was unconstitutional for lack of a valid appropriation enacted by congress .

the court barred the obama administration from making the payments but stayed its decision pending appeal of the case .

following the november 2016 election , the court delayed the case to allow for nonjudicial resolution , including possible legislative action .

congress did not provide appropriations , and on october 13 , 2017 , the trump administration filed a notice announcing it would terminate payments for these subsidies beginning with the payment that was scheduled for october 18 .

however , the administrative decision to terminate cost - sharing reduction payments provides no relief to insurers that are required under federal law to provide subsidies to eligible individuals .

each metal plan limits the total amount an enrollee will be required to pay out of pocket for use of covered services in a year ( referred to as an annual cost - sharing limit in this report ) .

in other words , the amount an individual spends in a given year on health care services covered under his or her plan is capped .

for 2018 , the annual cost - sharing limit for self - only coverage is $7,350 ; the corresponding limit for family coverage is $14,700 .

one type of cost - sharing assistance reduces such limits ( see table 5 ) .

this cost - sharing subsidy reduces the annual limit faced by premium credit recipients with incomes up to and including 250% fpl ; greater subsidy amounts are provided to those with lower incomes .

in general , this cost - sharing assistance targets individuals and families that use a great deal of health care in a year and , therefore , have high cost - sharing expenses .

enrollees who use very little health care may not generate enough cost - sharing expenses to reach the annual limit .

for example , consider the hypothetical individual who resides in lebanon , ks , and has household income at 150% fpl ( as discussed in the " premium tax credit examples " section of this report ) .

a person eligible to receive cost - sharing subsidies would face an annual cost - sharing limit of $2,450 .

the practical effect of this reduction would occur when this individual spent up to that amount .

for additional covered services received by the individual , the insurance company would pay the entire cost .

therefore , by reducing the annual cost - sharing limit , eligible individuals are required to spend less before benefitting from this financial assistance .

the second type of cost - sharing subsidy also applies to premium credit recipients with incomes up to and including 250% fpl .

for eligible individuals , the cost - sharing requirements ( for the plans in which they have enrolled ) are reduced to ensure that the plans cover a certain percentage of allowed health care expenses , on average .

the practical effect of this cost - sharing subsidy is to increase the actuarial value ( av ) of the exchange plan in which the person is enrolled ( table 6 ) , so enrollees face lower cost - sharing requirements than they would have without this assistance .

given that this type of cost - sharing subsidy directly affects cost - sharing requirements ( eg , lowers a deductible ) , both enrollees who use minimal health care and those who use a great deal of services may benefit from this assistance .

to be eligible for cost - sharing subsidies , an individual must be enrolled in a silver plan , which already has an av of 70% ( see text box above , "actuarial value and metal plans" ) .

for an individual who receives the subsidy referred to in table 6 , the health plan will impose different cost - sharing requirements so that the silver plan will meet the applicable increased av .

the aca does not specify how a plan should reduce cost - sharing requirements to increase the av from 70% to one of the higher avs .

through regulations , hhs requires each insurance company that offers a plan subject to these cost - sharing subsidies to develop variations of its silver plan ; these silver plan variations must comply with the higher levels of actuarial value ( 73% , 87% , and 94% ) .

when an individual is determined by an exchange to be eligible for a cost - sharing subsidy , the person is enrolled in the silver plan variation that corresponds with his or her income .

consider the same hypothetical individual discussed in the previous section .

since this person's income is at 150% fpl , if he or she receives this type of subsidy , the silver plan in which he or she is enrolled will have an av of 94% ( as indicated in table 6 ) , instead of the usual 70% av for silver plans .

this marked change in av entails notable reductions in cost - sharing requirements .

for example , the annual medical deductible of the standard plan in the local area for this hypothetical individual is $3,000 in 2018 .

however , the plan variation with a 94% av has a deductible of $250 .

the practical effect for this hypothetical person is that he or she would have to spend $250 , instead of $3,000 , before the insurer would begin to pay for medical claims associated with that person's use of covered services .

