p roduction of natural gas and crude oil from shales and other unconventional formations in the united states has expanded significantly due to new technologies such as hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling .

this boom in production has increased investment in new pipeline infrastructure to gather and transport these resources from producing regions to domestic and foreign consumers .

pipelines represent a relatively safe means of transporting oil and gas as compared to other modes of transportation , but have the potential to cause harm to public health and the environment because of the hazardous materials they carry and the proximity of some pipelines to highly populated areas .

construction of new pipelines and related facilities may prompt congressional interest in the relationship between federal and state authority over siting and safety of pipeline infrastructure .

states and localities arguably have an interest in oversight and regulation of pipeline projects within their borders .

such projects could potentially have environmental and safety impacts that could affect their residents .

however , the federal government has in the past sought national uniformity in regulation of some aspects of pipeline transportation to provide consumers throughout the united states with access to an adequate supply of oil or gas resources at reasonable prices and to ensure safety and reliability of pipeline infrastructure .

this report discusses the relationship between federal and state authority over siting and safety of crude oil and natural gas transmission and gathering pipelines and related facilities .

the report does not examine authority over other modes of transportation such as rail , truck , or vessel transport .

nor does it examine in detail oil spill response or liability laws ; underground storage of natural gas ; or the relationship between federal and tribal authority over pipelines that cross indian lands .

authorization for "siting" of a pipeline facility generally involves approval of the route and location of the pipeline and related facilities ( eg , compressor stations that push natural gas through pipelines ) .

notably , siting of interstate natural gas transmission pipelines involves a centralized federal approval process overseen by the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) , while siting of interstate crude oil transmission pipelines typically involves a state - by - state approval process .

commentators that have studied regulatory treatment of natural gas and crude oil pipelines have pointed to various reasons for these differences , including the fact that most natural gas is transported over land by pipeline because of the prohibitive cost of converting it into liquefied natural gas ( lng ) in large volumes for transport by other modes ; the political and economic background of the regulatory regime for each resource ; and "varying concerns over monopoly power," among other things .

this section also addresses federal and state laws that contain additional requirements for construction or operation of an oil or gas pipeline .

pipelines represent a relatively safe means of transport , but they have the potential to cause harm to public health and the environment because of the hazardous materials they carry and the proximity of some pipelines to highly populated areas .

recent oil and gas pipeline accidents have drawn new attention to pipeline risks .

in addition , specific concerns have arisen regarding shale gas gathering lines , which the dot has noted "are generally of much larger diameter and operating at higher pressure than traditional rural gas gathering lines , increasing the concern for safety of the environment and people near operations. .

this section reviews federal and state authority over pipeline safety under federal laws codified in chapters 601-605 of title 49 of the united states code ( "pipeline safety act" or "psa" ) .

the psa's stated purpose "is to provide adequate protection against risks to life and property posed by pipeline transportation and pipeline facilities by improving the regulatory and enforcement authority" of dot .

the act directs to dot to promulgate minimum federal safety standards for transportation of gas and hazardous liquids ( eg , crude oil ) by pipeline facilities to fulfill this purpose .

the psa also authorizes dot to enforce these pipeline safety standards .

for example , dot may order an operator of a pipeline facility determined to be hazardous to life , property , or the environment to take corrective action , including repair of the facility or suspension of its operations .

the office of pipeline safety within the pipeline hazardous materials and safety administration ( phmsa ) of dot has responsibility for administering and enforcing the psa .

section 60105 of the psa establishes a state pipeline safety program certification process by which states may become authorized to administer and enforce phmsa's baseline safety standards for intra state pipeline facilities and pipeline transportation .

this provision prohibits , with certain exceptions , phmsa from prescribing or enforcing safety standards for an intrastate pipeline facility "to the extent that the safety standards and practices are regulated by a state authority ... that submits to the secretary annually a certification for the facilities and transportation...." however , for a state's certification to be valid , the state must certify that it has adopted , by the date of certification , "each applicable standard prescribed [by phmsa under the psa] or , if a standard under [49 u.s.c .

chapter 601] was prescribed not later than 120 days before certification , is taking steps to adopt that standard. .

in addition , even if a certification is in effect for a state , section 60105 ( d ) provides that such a certification does not apply to phmsa safety standards promulgated after the date of the certification .

thus , section 60105 would not prevent phmsa from promulgating and enforcing new safety standards for an intrastate facility .

each state could then become authorized to administer and enforce the new federal standard by submitting a valid certification for that standard .

if phmsa has accepted a certification for a state , the agency may also enter into an agreement allowing the state to become an agent of dot with respect to inspections of inter state pipelines for compliance with federal standards ; however this does not authorize states to adopt or enforce safety standards for these pipelines .

the dot must also consider comments from committees that include states when promulgating minimum safety standards .

congress has shown interest in safety of gathering lines .

various provisions in the psa and dot regulations determine whether dot regulates an onshore or offshore pipeline as a gathering line and how it regulates the pipeline .

onshore gas gathering lines in rural areas are not federally regulated for safety .

federal oversight of offshore pipeline safety , including producer - operated offshore pipelines on the ocs and gathering lines , may fall within the jurisdiction of doi , dot , or another federal agency — or be subject only to state regulation .

states that have submitted a proper certification to dot may promulgate more stringent safety standards for intrastate gathering lines regulated by dot , provided they are compatible with federal minimum safety standards .

in addition , some intrastate gathering lines are not federally regulated for safety , and thus states may regulate them without becoming certified .

one study found that a few states have laws regulating safety of intrastate gathering lines that appear to be stricter than federal minimum safety standards ; however , these state laws may not apply to rural gathering lines .

another component of the relationship between federal and state authority is the degree to which the psa preempts state laws on pipeline safety .

on this issue , the psa provides the following: a state authority that has submitted a current certification under section 60105 ( a ) of this title may adopt additional or more stringent safety standards for intrastate pipeline facilities and intrastate pipeline transportation only if those standards are compatible with the minimum standards prescribed under this chapter .

a state authority may not adopt or continue in force safety standards for interstate pipeline facilities or interstate pipeline transportation .

federal courts have found that , under the supremacy clause of the u.s. constitution , federal laws preempt state laws , thereby rendering them invalid , generally in three ways: ( 1 ) when congress , acting within its constitutional powers , expressly provides that state law is preempted ; ( 2 ) when state law conflicts with federal law because it is impossible to comply with both or state law would frustrate federal objectives ; and ( 3 ) when federal regulation in a particular field is so pervasive that it demonstrates congress' intent to "occupy" that subject to the exclusion of supplementary state regulation .

because congress has included an express preemption clause in the psa , it is not necessary to analyze whether type ( 3 ) would apply .

as indicated above , the psa contains an express preemption clause that distinguishes between state laws regulating intrastate pipelines and laws regulating interstate pipeline safety .

additional or more stringent state "safety standards" for "intrastate pipeline facilities" and "intrastate pipeline transportation" will be preempted unless ( 1 ) dot has authorized the state to adopt and enforce intrastate safety standards ; and ( 2 ) the standards are compatible with federal minimum standards .

state "safety standards" for "interstate pipeline facilities" and "interstate pipeline transportation" will also be preempted .

in determining the scope of the express preemption clause , a court would likely seek to define the scope of the term "safety standard. .

while the plain meaning suggests that "safety standards" set forth binding rules for safe operation of pipelines that must be attained , a court might also look to industry usage of the term to gain additional insight into its meaning , as well as related statutory provisions , regulations , and judicial interpretations .

a court might also derive the meaning of "safety standard" from the actual standards promulgated by phmsa under the psa .

the regulations , which are located at 49 c.f.r .

parts 190-195 , address minimum safety standards for design , construction , operation , testing , inspection , and maintenance of pipeline facilities , as well as pipeline personnel qualifications and emergency response plans for oil pipelines , with stricter standards to be applied in some areas of high population and environmental sensitivity .

other statutory provisions appear to limit the preemptive effect of the psa .

in particular , the psa "does not authorize the secretary of transportation to prescribe the location or routing of a pipeline facility," and thus state laws falling within this category would appear to survive preemption unless they affect safety .

the psa also has no effect on state tort liability .

federal court opinions may also shed light on when the psa would preempt a state law affecting pipeline safety .

several cases have addressed whether a state or local siting law is a preempted "safety standard. .

in texas midstream gas services llc v. city of grand prairie , the fifth circuit held that a city could impose on an interstate natural gas pipeline and compressor station: setback requirements ; noise reduction and aesthetic requirements ; and a requirement to pave roads for vehicle access .

however , the court held a requirement pertaining to a security fence to be preempted .

the court held that the psa did not expressly preempt the setback requirement because it was designed to address aesthetic concerns and preserve property values and only incidentally ( rather than directly and substantially ) affected safety .

the fourth circuit held that local land use regulations are not preempted by pipeline safety standards even when they forbid a company from siting a facility in a proposed location .

conflict preemption could occur when a state law or action conflicts with the psa or regulations promulgated thereunder because it is impossible to comply with both federal and state law or the state action poses an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of congressional objectives in the psa to "provide adequate protection against risks to life and property posed by pipeline transportation and pipeline facilities. .

without examining a specific state law , it is difficult to speculate as to when this would occur .

