rwanda has achieved a rare degree of political stability , public safety , and economic growth in a sub - region plagued by armed conflicts and humanitarian crises .

government programs to improve health , agricultural output , private investment , and gender equality have received international plaudits and donor support .

rw anda's development and security gains are particularly remarkable in the wake of the 1994 genocide , in which extremist members of the ethnic hutu majority orchestrated a three - month killing spree targeting the minority tutsi community , along with members of the tiny indigenous twa ethnic group and hutus who opposed the massacres .

the ruling rwandan patriotic front ( rpf ) seized power in mid - 1994 , stopping the genocide .

since then , president paul kagame has been widely viewed as the architect of rwanda's development "miracle" and of its autocratic political model .

he has repeatedly won reelection by wide margins , most recently in 2017 ( see " politics " ) .

the united states and rwanda have cultivated close ties since the mid - 1990s , underpinned by u.s. aid in support of rwanda's ambitious socioeconomic development initiatives and participation in international peacekeeping .

over the past decade , u.s. officials and some members of congress have continued to promote u.s. - rwanda partnership on shared objectives , while voicing concerns regarding rwanda's authoritarian political system and its periodic support for rebel groups in neighboring countries .

congress has held multiple hearings examining these and related issues , and has enacted restrictions on aid to rwanda if it is found to be supporting rebel groups ( see " u.s. relations and aid " ) .

in late 2017 , then acting assistant secretary of state for africa donald yamamoto testified to congress that u.s. - rwandan relations were "close but complex," acknowledging democracy shortfalls and human rights concerns .

president trump met with president kagame at the world economic forum in davos , switzerland , in january 2018 , and expressed appreciation for bilateral economic ties , rwanda's contributions to peacekeeping operations , and kagame's pursuit of african union ( au ) institutional reforms as then - chairman of the institution .

in line with the administration's broad proposals to decrease foreign aid worldwide , it has advocated cuts to funding for rwanda , including health and development aid .

in 2018 , president trump also suspended rwanda's trade benefits under the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa , reauthorized via p.l .

114-27 ) in response to rwanda's allegedly protectionist policies , in the context of the administration's skepticism toward nonreciprocal trade preference programs .

international perspectives on rwanda tend to be polarized .

kagame's supporters assert that he is a visionary and that rwanda represents an extraordinary post - conflict success story .

to some , rwandan voters' support for kagame is easily explained: "he has kept them from killing each other ... [and] has also given them a sense of hope and pride. .

others argue that restrictions on political and civil rights may ultimately undermine rwanda's hard - won stability , and that limits on civil liberties may mask ethnic , political , and social tensions .

given evident constraints on free expression , some observers argue that "we simply don't know ... what rwandans want from their political leaders. .

some critics separately have questioned the reliability of rwanda's development statistics — a key justification for donor aid .

critics also posit that the ruling party's reportedly extensive involvement in the economy may be stifling independent private sector growth .

kagame has dismissed external criticism as inaccurate , irrelevant , neocolonialist , and / or morally vacuous given the international community's failure to halt the genocide .

the rpf - led government has pursued rapid economic development and social transformation while effectively suppressing political dissent and public discussion of ethnic identity .

president kagame , leader of the rpf and a former military intelligence figure and rebel commander , is widely viewed as the country's preeminent decision - maker .

he first ascended to the presidency in an internal party election in 2000 , and has won reelection with over 90% of the popular vote in every subsequent contest ( in 2003 , 2010 , and 2017 ) .

an rpf - led coalition holds the majority of seats in parliament ; nearly all remaining seats are held by parties that refrain from directly criticizing the rpf or kagame .

the state department has noted concerns with aspects of each election conducted under rpf rule , such as apparent procedural irregularities , a lack of transparency in vote tabulation , media restrictions , and legal challenges , threats , or criminal prosecutions targeting opposition candidates and parties .

public criticism of the government is rare ; human rights advocates assert that "years of state intimidation and interference" have weakened the capacity of local civil society or media outlets to act as a check on state power .

over the years , political opponents have been jailed , fled the country , or died under murky circumstances .

laws criminalizing genocide ideology and denial , along with state security charges , have been wielded against opposition figures , journalists , and other government critics .

some researchers have described pervasive official surveillance and involvement in citizens' daily lives , part of an apparent effort to ensure rapid implementation of development initiatives , mobilize support for the rpf , suppress criminal activity , and monitor potential opposition activity , ethnic tensions , or security threats .

kagame has defended rwanda's political system as rooted in popular support , asserting that "imposing a style of democracy without understanding the context , culture or norm of a country is ignorant. .

rwandan officials generally reject allegations of abusing human rights , while asserting that restrictions on civil liberties are necessary to prevent ethnic violence in a fragile post - conflict setting .

some rwandans , including journalists and civil society actors , agree .

kagame would have been subject to a constitutional two - term limit on the presidency in 2017 , but a new constitution approved in 2015 via referendum — with a reported 98% of the vote — exempted the sitting president , allowing him to run for a third term .

he won with 99% of the vote .

after kagame's current term expires , the presidential term is to be shortened to five years per the new constitution ; kagame could then run for two more consecutive terms , thus potentially remaining in office until 2034 .

he has denied any intention to do so , stating that he is preparing rwanda for an unspecified future leadership transition .

tolerance of opposition voices seems to have increased slightly since kagame's reelection in 2017 , although a significant shift in the contours of rwandan politics appears unlikely .

two prominent opposition figures were released from jail in 2018 .

diane rwigara , a vocal kagame critic ( and daughter of a well - known businessman and tutsi genocide survivor ) who was jailed on charges of forgery and inciting insurrection shortly after seeking to run for president in 2017 , was acquitted following international advocacy on her behalf , including from some members of congress .

victoire ingabire , who had sought to run against kagame in 2010 and was serving a prison sentence for alleged genocide denial and seeking to form an armed group , received a presidential pardon .

so did several other members of ingabire's fdu - inkingi party ( "united democratic forces - pillar" ) , which remains illegal .

several other fdu - inkingi supporters remain in prison ; others have been killed in unclear circumstances .

also in 2018 , the democratic green party , a relatively independent opposition movement ( and not affiliated with rwigara or ingabire ) , won two seats in parliament after competing for the first time in legislative elections .

the green party was not granted legal registration in time to run candidates in the 2013 legislative vote ; its presidential candidate , frank habineza , won less than 1% in the 2017 presidential vote .

the party's deputy leader was killed in unclear circumstances prior to the 2010 presidential election , soon after the party was founded in 2009 .

the rpf's political leadership appears to have narrowed from a diverse set of actors in the 1990s to an apparently small circle around the president .

over the years , various top rpf officials and military officers have faced criminal charges , some on national security grounds , or have fled the country .

in 2010 , several prominent rfp defectors formed an exiled opposition movement , the rwandan national congress ( rnc ) .

some members have been the target of armed attacks or apparent assassinations in foreign countries , including several in south africa .

president kagame has denied state involvement , while assailing the individuals in question as traitors .

the state department's 2018 human rights report on rwanda cites forced disappearances , alleged extrajudicial killings , arbitrary detention , and torture by state security forces ( "including asphyxiation , electric shocks , mock executions" ) , noting "impunity" involving civilian officials and some members of the security forces .

the report also documents political prisoners , threats and violence against journalists , censorship , and "substantial interference" with freedoms of assembly and association , along with "restrictions on political participation. .

it further finds that "the government continued to monitor homes , movements , telephone calls , email , other private communications , and personal and institutional data," often using extrajudicial means and / or embedded informants .

human rights watch has reported patterns of arbitrary detention and torture of rwandans accused or suspected of supporting the rnc , ingabire's political movement , or the democratic forces for the liberation of rwanda ( fdlr ) , a militia founded in drc by perpetrators of the genocide .

the organization also has accused rwandan security forces of killing petty criminals extra - judicially , allegations that rwanda's national commission for human rights ( nchr ) has rejected .

rwanda has expelled international researchers working for human rights watch ; in 2018 , a local employee was temporarily detained incommunicado .

in 2018 , the government shuttered thousands of churches and dozens of mosques , citing safety violations or other regulatory concerns , and proposed stricter registration requirements for religious groups .

one expert asserted that these moves targeted non - denominational places of worship ( i.e. , not affiliated with roman catholicism or established protestant denominations ) because they "are harder to control because they don't report to a central hierarchy. .

rwanda is a top peacekeeping troop contributor in africa ; u.n. officials and donors value its military professionalism and commitment to civilian protection .

as chair of the au in 2018 , president kagame also sought to bolster the financial sustainability of african - led stability operations .

at the same time , rwanda has a history of unilateral military intervention in drc , and reportedly has periodically provided support to rebel groups in drc and burundi .

its reasons for doing so may reflect a mix of national security concerns ( eg , a desire to counter drc - based armed groups led by individuals implicated in the 1994 genocide ) , ethnic solidarity with the tutsi minority in burundi and persecuted communities of rwandan descent in drc , and economic motivations linked to resource smuggling in drc .

in 2012-2013 , rwanda faced acute international criticism and cuts to donor aid — including from the united states and european countries — for providing support to a drc - based insurgent group known as the m23 .

the m23 originated as a rebellion among members of a previous rwandan - backed armed group , and was the latest in a series of rwandan - backed rebellions originating among communities of rwandan descent in eastern drc since in the late 1990s .

in 2015 and 2016 , reports suggested rwandan involvement in the recruitment and training of burundian refugees for a rebellion against the government of burundi , again prompting donor criticism .

credible reports of direct rwandan involvement in regional conflicts have since diminished , although the country's relations with drc remain volatile .

tensions with burundi also have endured , with rwanda accusing burundian authorities of stoking ethnic tensions while burundi has accused rwanda of espionage and interference .

relations with sometimes - ally uganda also have soured in recent years .

rwandan officials , including president kagame , have openly accused uganda of backing rwandan armed dissidents ( apparently referring to the rnc ) as well as the fdlr , while ugandan officials have accused rwanda of espionage .

ongoing insecurity and illicit resource extraction in eastern drc remain flashpoints for regional tensions and spillover of conflicts .

in late 2018 , u.n. drc sanctions monitors reported that the rnc was mobilizing armed combatants in drc's south kivu province , with apparent burundian support .

some researchers posit that rwanda - uganda friction is rooted in competition over access to drc minerals ; u.n. drc sanctions investigators reported in 2018 that "gold sourced in high - risk and conflict areas [of drc] was exported illegally to uganda and rwanda. .

donor aid , political stability , low corruption , and pro - investor policies have enabled high economic growth rates ( 4-9% annually ) over the past decade .

rwanda remains one of the world's poorest countries , although it ranks higher than many other sub - saharan african countries on the 2018 u.n. human development index ( at 158 out of 189 countries assessed ) .

about 75% of rwandans are engaged in agriculture , many for subsistence ; the country is nonetheless reliant on food imports , in part due to having the highest population density in continental africa .

the government seeks to transform the economy into one that is services - oriented and middle - income , launching programs to expand internet access , improve education , and increase domestic energy production .

key growth sectors include tourism , coffee , tea , tin mining , construction , and an emerging financial services sector .

the government also aims to turn rwanda into a regional trade , logistics , and conference hub .

it has invested in the construction of new business class hotels and a convention center in kigali , a planned new airport , and an expansion of the national airline rwandair — which is pursuing u.s. federal approval for direct flights between kigali and the united states .

much investment has been concentrated in kigali , which has received international plaudits for its clean and safe streets .

rwanda was ranked 29 out of 190 on the world bank's 2019 doing business report , the only low - income country and one of only two african countries ( along with mauritius ) in the top 50 .

rwanda's continual improvements in the annual rankings reflect its efforts to reduce bureaucratic red - tape , protect property rights , improve access to credit , expand the supply of reliable electricity , and ensure contract enforcement .

the state department has nonetheless documented various challenges for foreign investors , including "payment delays with government contracts," inconsistent adherence to incentives offered by the rwanda development board , infringements on property rights , and "competition from state - owned and ruling party - aligned businesses. .

human development gains since the genocide have been dramatic in relative terms .

according to the world health organization ( who ) , from 1990 and 2016 , life expectancy increased from 48 to 66 years ; the child ( under five ) mortality rate fell from 152 to 42 deaths per 1,000 live births ; and the maternal mortality rate decreased from 1,300 to 290 deaths per 100,000 live births .

through a donor - backed national community - based health insurance system , rwanda provides near - universal health coverage for basic primary care , with the cost fully or partially subsidized based on income level .

as of 2015 , about 39% of rwandans reportedly lived below the poverty line , compared to 56% in 2006 and 78% in 1994 .

some researchers have questioned the reliability of rwanda's poverty statistics , noting that they are based on household - level survey data and may be subject to interference ; the world bank has rejected some of this criticism , asserting that rwanda's official statistical methodology "is technically sound. .

in 1998 , president bill clinton delivered a speech in kigali in which he expressed remorse for not having intervened more forcefully to end mass killings in 1994 , and pledged that the united states would do better in the future .

those remarks arguably set the tone for a relationship defined , in part , by a sense of guilt among u.s. policymakers about the genocide and admiration for the rpf's role in stopping it .

u.s. support for the rpf - led government has continued across successive administrations and across partisan lines , with the executive branch and congress working together to provide substantial aid to support rwanda's development efforts and peacekeeper deployments .

yet , over the past decade , executive branch officials and some members of congress increasingly have criticized rwanda's involvement in regional conflicts and expressed concern with its domestic political and human rights conditions .

after meeting with president kagame in davos in january 2018 , president trump praised the united states' "great relationships" with rwanda , including bilateral trade , and stated that "the job they've done is absolutely terrific. .

in september 2017 congressional testimony , then acting assistant secretary of state for africa yamamoto praised rwanda's "remarkable gains" in health and development and characterized the country as "a major contributor to regional peace and security," while asserting that "rwanda's record in the areas of human rights and democracy , while improved in some areas , remains a concern. .

he called on the government "to take steps toward a democratic transition of power. .

regarding rwanda's 2017 presidential election , the state department stated that "we are disturbed by irregularities observed during voting and reiterate long - standing concerns over the integrity of the vote - tabulation process. .

in response to member questions at the september 2017 hearing , ambassador yamamoto affirmed that "we are unable to assess this election as free and fair. .

at his senate confirmation hearing in late 2017 , the u.s. ambassador - designate to rwanda described his four top policy goals as the following: continuing the united states' "development partnership" with rwanda , promoting u.s. business and economic ties , supporting rwanda's continued peacekeeping role , and advancing "democratic ideals. .

president trump suspended duty - free treatment of rwandan apparel exports to the united states under agoa in 2018 , as noted above , citing rwandan protectionist policies .

the suspension came after the administration initiated an out - of - cycle review of rwanda's eligibility in 2017 .

in addition to concerns about trade barriers , ambassador yamamoto testified in 2017 that u.s. officials had also "raised concerns ... regarding harassment of political opposition leaders and [non - governmental organizations] as well as restrictions on media freedom with the context of agoa eligibility. .

the impact may be largely symbolic: in 2017 , u.s. imports from rwanda totaled $44 million , of which $5 million were under agoa .

u.s. exports to rwanda totaled $64 million that year .

u.s. bilateral aid to rwanda aims to promote economic growth , food security , health , and military professionalism .

the state department has drawn on additional regionally - and centrally - managed funds to provide military aid to build rwanda's peacekeeping capabilities , including under the african peacekeeping rapid response partnership ( aprrp ) initiative , launched under president obama in 2014 .

 ( the trump administration has not requested new appropriations in support of aprrp , but has continued to implement funds allocated in prior years. ) .

aprrp was conceived to complement the state department's global peace operations initiative ( gpoi ) , in which rwanda also participates .

the united states also provides humanitarian assistance for international organizations caring for congolese and burundian refugees in rwanda .

congress has shaped u.s. policy and assistance to rwanda through its authorization and appropriation of u.s. assistance , and through oversight and member engagement .

in 2012-2013 , and again in 2015-2016 , the application of legislative restrictions on u.s. security assistance — along with other donor criticism and aid suspensions — appeared to contribute to a decrease in rwandan support for the m23 in drc and may conceivably have dissuaded rwanda from intervening more heavily in burundi .

members may seek to derive lessons from this sequence of events as they consider pending appropriations bills and / or any future legislative proposals regarding u.s. aid to rwanda .

with regard to rwanda's domestic conditions , questions remain around how the united states can best support the country's continued stability and growth , including whether continued u.s. support for rwanda's development efforts can or should be premised on evidence of greater respect for political pluralism or individual liberties .

