article v of the u.s. constitution provides two alternatives for amending the nation's fundamental charter: proposal of amendments to the states by vote of two - thirds of the members of both houses of congress , and proposal by a convention called as a result of applications from two - thirds of the states , the "article v convention. .

from the 1960s to the 1980s , supporters of article v conventions mounted vigorous but ultimately unsuccessful campaigns to call conventions to consider such issues as school busing to achieve racial balance , restrictions on abortion , apportionment in state legislatures , and a balanced federal budget .

since approximately 2010 , after more than 20 years of comparative inaction , the article v convention alternative has drawn a new generation of supporters .

advocacy groups across a broad range of the political spectrum are pushing for conventions to consider various amendments .

this report provides information for members of congress and congressional staff on current developments in congress , the states , and the advocacy community on the article v convention alternative .

two companion reports provide more exposition and analysis of this issue: crs report r42592 , the article v convention for proposing constitutional amendments: historical perspectives for congress ; and crs report r42589 , the article v convention to propose constitutional amendments: contemporary issues for congress .

in recent years , measures proposing applications for one or more of the alternative article v convention proposals have been introduced in many states .

david f. guldenschuh , an attorney and scholar of the article v convention process who is associated with the heartland institute ( which supports the article v approach ) , reported that as of august 1 , 2017 , 175 applications had been introduced in the legislatures of 40 states during their 2017 sessions .

to date in 2017 , three states have submitted applications for a convention to consider a balanced budget as proposed by the balanced budget amendment ( bba ) task force .

four states have joined the convention of states project , and one has applied for the compact for america's compact for a balanced budget .

at the same time , guldenschuh identified four states that had passed resolutions rescinding one or more applications submitted at an earlier time .

the present status of the most prominent article v convention campaigns following state action through 2017 follows .

convention advocacy groups listed below are identified in greater detail later in this report .

balanced budget amendment task force ( balanced federal budget amendment ) claims 28 applications , including related "legacy" applications of the 1970s and 1980s .

convention of states project ( amendments restricting authority of u.s. government ) lists applications from 12 states .

wolf pac ( amendment repealing corporate personhood provisions of the supreme court's citizens united decision ) lists applications from five states .

compact for america ( balanced federal budget amendment via an interstate compact ) lists applications from five states for its compact for a balanced budget interstate compact and article v convention .

u.s .

term limits ( term limits for congress amendment ) lists one state application .

citizen initiatives — countermand amendment ( amendment providing state veto of federal laws , regulations , court decisions ) lists one state application .

single subject amendment pac ( amendment to require public laws to include only one subject ) lists one state application .

proposals for an article v convention are as old as the republic .

according to one estimate , more than 700 have been filed since 1789 , most of which have been proposed since 1900 .

they have included applications for a general convention and petitions for a convention to consider single - subject amendments in an estimated 47 issue areas .

in the second half of the 20 th century , two campaigns for article v conventions approached the constitutional threshold of applications from two - thirds of the states , 34 at present .

mounted largely between 1964 and 1983 , they concerned politically sensitive issues: apportionment in state legislatures , which gained 33 state applications between 1964 and 1969 , and an amendment requiring a balanced federal budget under most circumstances , which gained 32 applications between 1975 and 1983 .

after reaching these high water marks , the reapportionment proposal lost momentum following the death of its leading advocate , while the balanced budget amendment campaign stalled in the face of growing opposition .

the article v convention alternative returned to relative obscurity for more than 20 years .

between 1988 and 2010 , 17 state legislatures passed resolutions rescinding their earlier calls for a convention .

in some cases , these resolutions rescinded all previous article v applications , while others specifically cited a convention for a balanced budget amendment .

late in the first decade of the 21st century , interest in the article v convention revived among a range of advocacy groups .

originally linked to the tea party movement and organizations generally characterized as conservative and populist , the most widely advocated convention subjects included an amendment or amendments to require a balanced federal budget , restrict the federal debt , and set general limitations on the authority and activities of the federal government .

the article v convention's appeal spread , however , as self - identified progressive movements , such as occupy wall street , began to advocate a convention for such purposes as overturning parts of the supreme court's citizens united decision , changing the definition of corporate personhood , or banning allegedly restrictive state voter identification requirements .

the convention option is arguably attractive on several grounds: it springs unquestionably from the "original intent" of the founders , the need for state applications suggests widespread popular grass - roots origins , and the prospect of proposing amendments directly to the states offers an alternative to what some have characterized as a legislative and policy deadlock at the federal level .

the revival of the article v convention option is arguably reflected in the actions of state legislatures .

according to the balanced budget amendment task force , an article v convention advocacy group , since 2010 , 15 states have reversed earlier rescissions of convention applications .

conversely , since 2016 , five states have rescinded their earlier convention applications , suggesting the growth of "second thoughts" in some states .

the article v convention option is currently promoted by multiple advocacy organizations which embrace different approaches to the issue and propose conventions to consider amendments in various issue areas .

this section identifies selected organizations that promote an article v convention , lists them in alphabetical order , and provides brief analyses of their specific agendas .

the author of this report has been unable to identify at the time of this writing any public policy and issue organizations that focus specifically on opposition to the article v convention alternative .

a number of established policy advocacy groups , however , have criticized or issued position papers expressing their disapproval .

these include , but may not be limited to , the john birch society , the center on budget policy and priorities , eagle forum , and common cause .

activities and positions of these groups are examined later in this report at the heading "current activity in the policy and advocacy community. .

the article v convention issue continues to receive attention in the 115 th congress , including ( 1 ) the aforementioned establishment of house of representatives procedures for receipt and publication of state applications for a convention , ( 2 ) introduction of a proposed concurrent resolution to effectuate the compact for america's compact for a balanced budget , and ( 3 ) introduction of proposed legislation to authorize an official compilation by the national archives of all article v convention applications received from the states .

in recent years , measures proposing applications for one or more of the alternative article v convention proposals have been introduced in many states .

david f. guldenschuh , an attorney and scholar of the article v convention process associated with the heartland institute , reported that as of august 1 , 2017 , 175 applications had been introduced in the legislatures of 40 states during their 2017 sessions .

as noted earlier in this report , to date in 2017 , three states have submitted applications for a balanced budget amendment as proposed by the bba task force effort , four have joined the convention of states project , and one has applied for the compact for america's compact for a balanced budget .

guldenschuh also identified four states that had passed resolutions rescinding one or more applications submitted at an earlier time .

most recently , on november 7 , 2017 , the wisconsin legislature completed action on an article v application for a convention to consider the bba task force's proposed balanced budget amendment , thus raising that organization's asserted total to 28 .

organizations that both support and oppose an article v convention have mounted activities intended to build support for their preferred approach to the convention .

the article v convention alternative for amending the constitution has enjoyed a revival in interest over the past decade .

it has gained the support of activist organizations that embrace a broad range of the political spectrum , from the tea party to occupy wall street and places in between .

its partisans appear to be active and committed , and the progress of some of these organizations toward their goal continues .

it remains uncertain , however , whether any of them can attain the constitutional threshold of 34 convention applications .

several factors may contribute to this condition .

one observer , attorney david guldenschuh , suggests that the proliferation of advocacy groups may actually dilute support for the overall concept as they compete for the limited time and attention of state legislators .

the same observer notes that the more complex "multi - subject" strategies pursued by some groups may further vitiate the force of their arguments .

a single - issue approach , he suggests , might enjoy a greater chance of success .

for example , the balanced budget amendment task force , which advocates a convention that would consider only one issue — a balanced federal budget requirement — claims 28 applications , although 17 of these are "legacy" applications that filed more than 30 years ago and whose validity may be open to challenge .

by comparison , no other article v convention advocacy group can claim more than 12 applications at this time .

in addition , it is worth noting that the balanced federal budget amendment is arguably the best known and most widely supported of these proposals: survey research results show consistent public support for a federal balanced budget amendment since at least 1994 .

guldenschuh also cites what he claims is an apparent lack of coordination , noting that "different advocacy groups have somewhat supported each other in states where multiple resolutions have been introduced , [but] their overall failure to work together is causing confusion among legislators and hurting the effort's overall success rate. .

further , it is arguable that the article v convention remains largely an internet or social media phenomenon , where it enjoys multiple websites and frequent postings among diverse elements of the advocacy community , both pro and con .

by comparison , however , traditional media coverage is comparatively sparse , and , notwithstanding the aforementioned public support for a balanced federal budget amendment , the convention alternative does not appear to command widespread attention or support among the general public at this time .

the number of state applications for a convention has grown in the past two years .

while only the bba , with 28 applications , including its "legacy" states , is within striking distance of the constitutional threshold , the convention of states added four applications in 2017 , bringing its total to 12 states .

these gains , however , have arguably been balanced by four states that rescinded earlier applications in 2017 .

going forward , advocates may assert that applications by the state legislatures will continue at the same pace .

conversely , it could also be argued that the movement's progress could lead to the same sort of "second thoughts" that slowed , and then stalled , the bba campaign of the 1980s .

to this may be added constitutional questions concerning state applications that would likely be raised if or when a convention call seemed imminent .

for instance , are state applications submitted over 30 years ago still valid , and , what is the constitutional status of state actions to rescind their earlier applications ? .

ultimately , it may be argued that the constitutional process is working as the founders planned .

the article v convention device was intended to provide an alternative method of amendment , but it was also intended that a convention should enjoy a broad national consensus of support and meet similarly exacting standards as those that apply to amendments proposed in congress .

while the current campaign has generated considerable interest and advocacy among convention advocates , its awareness and support among the wider community appears to be limited .

in order to succeed , the convention alternative would arguably need to attain the breadth of public awareness and active support necessary to meet the constitution's demanding requirements .

