f ederal budget decisions express the priorities of congress and reinforce its influence on federal policies .

making budgetary decisions for the federal government is a complex process and requires the balance of competing goals .

the recent economic recession adversely affected federal budget outcomes through declines in revenue and increases in spending .

subsequent improvement of the economy and implementation of policies designed to lower spending have improved the short - term budget outlook .

in fy2015 , the federal budget recorded a deficit of 2.5% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , which represents the lowest deficit level since fy2007 .

over the next several years , projections of a continued decline in discretionary spending are more than offset by increases in mandatory spending and net interest payments , leading to a rise in federal deficits .

increases in the long - term cost of federal health care programs , federal debt levels , and the retirement of the baby boom generation all contribute to upward pressure on federal spending levels .

operating these programs in their current form may pass on substantial economic burdens to future generations .

congress and the president may consider proposals for deficit reduction if fiscal issues remain a key item on the legislative agenda .

this report summarizes issues surrounding the federal budget and discusses policy changes relevant to the budget framework for fy2017 .

it also discusses the major policy proposals included in the president's fy2017 budget and , when available , the house and senate budget resolutions .

finally , this report addresses major short - and long - term fiscal challenges facing the federal government .

each fiscal year , congress and the president engage in a number of practices that influence short - and long - run revenue and expenditure trends .

this section describes the budget cycle and explains how budget baselines are constructed .

budget baselines are used to measure how legislative changes affect the budget outlook and are integral to evaluating these policy choices .

during the 112 th and 113 th congresses , several legislative actions and events affected the fiscal outlook .

the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) , enacted in august 2011 , increased the debt limit and required deficit reduction ( ultimately implemented through across - the - board spending cuts ) and caps on discretionary budget authority .

subsequent legislation has revised the spending reductions established in the bca .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) was enacted in january 2013 to deal with numerous expiring tax provisions , the bca's across - the - board spending cuts ( i.e. , sequester ) , and other short - term considerations that were scheduled to take effect at the very end of 2012 or in early 2013 .

this combination was referred to by some as the "fiscal cliff. .

during october 2013 , certain activities of the federal government were required to shut down due to a lapse in appropriations .

several months after the shutdown , the second piece of legislation modifying the bca , the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba 2013 ; p.l .

113-67 ) , was enacted ( december 2014 ) .

it contained new discretionary spending levels for fy2014 and fy2015 , replacing the old levels prescribed by the bca .

actions taken in the 114 th congress further modified the short - and long - run budget outlook .

the balanced budget act of 2015 ( bba 2015 ; p.l .

114-74 ) suspended the debt limit until march 2017 , and raised the discretionary spending caps established by the bca for fy2016 and fy2017 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) enacted budget authority for fy2016 in accordance with the discretionary caps modified by bba 2015 .

finally , the protecting americans from tax hikes act of 2015 ( path act ; p.l .

114-113 ) extended a number of tax provisions that expired at the end of 2014 ( and which had been extended several times in recent years ) , and made some of the provisions permanent .

the actions are discussed in more detail below .

the obama administration submitted its fy2017 budget to congress on february 9 , 2016 .

the president's budget lays out for congress the administration's views on national priorities and policy initiatives .

congress has also begun its consideration of the fy2017 budget .

ongoing budgetary challenges remain , which may result in congressional action .

issues related to deficit reduction and the long - term budget outlook may continue to dominate the policy debate .

increased spending on entitlement programs , as currently structured , will likely contribute to rising deficits and debt , placing ever - increasing focus on how to achieve fiscal sustainability over the long term .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) provides data and analysis to congress throughout the budget and appropriations process .

each january , cbo issues a budget and economic outlook that contains current - law baseline estimates of outlays and revenues .

in march , cbo typically issues an analysis of the president's budget submission with revised baseline estimates and projections .

these documents can be delayed as a result of the legislative agenda or if the president's budget is off schedule .

in late summer , cbo issues an updated b u dget and economi c outlook with new baseline projections .

in these documents , cbo sets a current - law baseline as a benchmark to evaluate whether legislative proposals would increase or decrease outlays and revenue collection .

baseline estimates are not intended to predict likely future outcomes , but to show what spending and revenues would be if current law remained in effect .

cbo typically evaluates the budgetary consequences of legislative proposals and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) evaluates the consequences of revenue proposals .

cbo also releases other periodic publications focusing on the future fiscal health of the united states .

in their publication , the long - term budget outlook , cbo makes projections on the state of the federal budget over the next 75 years .

cbo discusses spending and revenue levels and the related issues that it expects will arise under different policy assumptions .

in its budget options volumes , cbo provides specific policy options and the impact they will have on spending and revenues over a 10-year budget window .

cbo also provides arguments for and against enacting each policy .

the president's budget contains five major volumes: ( 1 ) the budget , ( 2 ) historical tables , ( 3 ) analytical perspectives , ( 4 ) appendix , and ( 5 ) supplemental materials .

these documents lay out the administration's projections of the fiscal outlook for the country , along with spending levels proposed for each of the federal government's departments and programs .

the historical tables volume also provides significant amounts of budget data , much of which extends back to 1962 or earlier .

along with the administration's budget documents , the department of the treasury also releases its green book , which provides further detail on the revenue proposals that are contained in the budget .

