the landslide victory of aung san suu kyi's national league for democracy ( nld ) and the stunning defeat of president thein sein's union solidarity and development party ( usdp ) in burma's nationwide parliamentary elections held on november 8 , 2015 , may alter the path of the country's political development .

as a consequence , the obama administration and / or congress may seek to adjust u.s. policies and the current approach to u.s. relations with burma .

the nld won control over both chambers of burma's union parliament and thereby the ability to select the president and form an nld - led government .

however , burma's 2008 constitution grants the burmese military , or tatmadaw , 25% of the seats in each chamber of the union parliament , nearly complete autonomy from civilian control , the ability to appoint key ministers , and the power to block amendments to the constitution .

with these tools , the tatmadaw may restrict the ability of an nld - led government to enact and implement political and economic reforms .

the constitution also establishes a four - month period of transition , during which the outgoing union parliament will have the opportunity to pass new laws , president thein sein may implement new policies , and the tatmadaw may undertake new initiatives in the nation's six - decade - long civil war , that could restrict or complicate the plans of the nld - led government .

for congress and the obama administration , the election results and the length of the transition period ( nearly five months ) raise a number of questions regarding u.s. policy toward burma , including: to what extent does the election and formation of an nld - led government constitute the partial fulfilment of u.s. policy as stated in section 3 of the burmese freedom and democracy act ( p.l .

108-61 ) and section 5 of the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-286 ) ( see " implications for u.s. policy and congress " below ) ? .

under what conditions and when should the obama administration and / or congress consider relaxing or revoking remaining restrictions on relations with burma ? .

should the obama administration or congress undertake any new programs or activities in burma , and if so , at what stage in the transition process ? .

given aung san suu kyi's anticipated leadership role in the nld - led government , to what degree and at what stage should she be consulted in regard to u.s. policy toward burma and u.s. assistance to the country , and should any new initiatives be contingent upon her approval ? .

to what degree should the u.s. government provide support for initiatives undertaken by the thein sein government during the transition period , and should aung san suu kyi and other nld leaders be consulted or informed that it may be considering any such support ? .

should the u.s. government expand engagement with the burmese military given the military's continued presence in the union parliament , its nearly complete autonomy from civilian control , its ongoing assaults on various ethnic armed militias , its reportedly continued abuse of the human rights of non - combatants , and its possible opposition to further political reforms ? .

should any sanctions or restrictions on individuals or entities that were waived or suspended because of their official role in the thein sein government be reinstated following the formation of a nld - led government ? .

congress will have a number of opportunities to weigh in on u.s. policy toward burma in the weeks and months ahead .

one vehicle used by past congresses to set policy has been legislation imposing sanctions on burma , such as the burmese freedom and democracy act ( p.l .

108-61 ) and the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 ( jade act ; p.l .

110-286 ) .

another vehicle has been annual appropriations legislation .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) contains specific language pertaining to burma , continuing or adding restrictions on u.s. relations with the country , while requiring new forms of bilateral engagement ( see text box below ) .

at present , no stand - alone legislation on burma has been introduced in the 114 th congress .

in addition , congress could allow the obama administration to determine what adjustments , if any , are warranted in u.s. policies and activities in burma in light of the 2015 parliamentary elections , without legislative direction from congress .

in nationwide elections on november 8 , 2015 , burma ( myanmar ) elected the members of its bicameral union parliament and the country's 14 state and regional parliaments .

more than 90 political parties and more than 6,000 candidates contested 168 seats in the union parliament's national assembly , 323 seats in the union parliament's people's assembly , and 629 seats in the 14 state and regional parliaments .

according to burma's union election commission ( uec ) , more than 23 million people voted in the election , or about 69% of the registered voters .

this was a decline from the turnout for the 2010 parliamentary elections when 77% of registered voters submitted ballots .

when the uec announced the official results on november 20 , 2015 , it confirmed that aung san suu kyi's national league for democracy ( nld ) had won a landslide victory , winning nearly 80% of the elected seats in the people's assembly , more than 80% of the elected seats in the national assembly , and more than 75% of the elected seats in the state and regional parliaments ( see appendix ) .

by contrast , president thein sein's union solidarity and development party ( usdp ) , which had won the 2010 parliamentary elections in a similar landslide , secured 11 seats in the national assembly , 30 in the people's assembly , and 76 seats in the state and regional parliaments .

in addition , with the exceptions of the arakan national party ( anp ) , which focused its efforts in rakhine state , and the shan nationalities league for democracy ( snld ) , which campaigned primarily in shan state , few of the ethnic minority - based political parties won seats .

the sweeping nature of the nld victory is apparent in maps displaying the election results for the two chambers of the union parliament ( see figure 1 and figure 2 ) .

with the notable exceptions of northern rakhine state in the west , most of shan state in the east , and northern kachin state in the north , both maps show a nearly solid mass of red , the nld's traditional color .

the usdp's victories , shown in the party's traditional green color , are focused in eastern shan state with scattered seats in other parts of the nation .

the arakan national party won seats ( shown in gray ) in northern rakhine state and the shan nationalities league for democracy ( shown in dark blue ) won seats in western shan state , reflecting their foci on the states in which their ethnic groups are concentrated .

the districts shown in black in the lower house map are the seats left vacant by the uec reportedly because free and fair elections could not be held due to natural disasters or insufficient security in those areas .

burma's constitution and laws provide for a transition period of nearly five months .

while the parliamentary election was held on november 8 , 2015 , the new union parliament did not take office until early february 2016 , and selected candidates for new president and two vice presidents on march 10 and 11 , 2016 .

the president - elect , htin kyaw , is to take office on march 30 , 2016 ; he will also appoint new ministers and a new union election commission , subject to the approval of the union parliament .

until that point , thein sein remains president and his ministers remain in office .

assuming that a new government takes power this spring , it will be facing several major challenges .

among the most prominent will be finding a path to end the nation's decades - long , low - grade civil war .

a related challenge will be managing relations with the burmese military , who will continue to enjoy a high degree of autonomy under the 2008 constitution , and may play the role of opposition party in the union parliament .

another challenge will be managing ethnic and religious relations within the country , especially in rakhine state .

other challenges include resolving the political prisoner problem , addressing the needs of tens of thousands of internally displaced persons ( idps ) , and introducing economic reforms , especially for burma's rural and agricultural population .

for more than a decade , u.s. policy toward burma , as expressed in federal law , has been to promote the establishment of a democratically elected civilian government that respects the human rights of the burmese people .

the burmese freedom and democracy act ( bfda ; p.l .

108-61 ) imposed numerous political and economic sanctions on burma's militia junta , the state peace and development council ( spdc ) until such time that: the spdc has made measurable and substantial progress toward implementing a democratic government including — ( i ) releasing all political prisoners ; ( ii ) allowing freedom of speech and the press ; ( iii ) allowing freedom of association ; ( iv ) permitting the peaceful exercise of religion ; and ( v ) bringing to a conclusion an agreement between the spdc and the democratic forces led by the nld and burma's ethnic nationalities on the transfer of power to a civilian government accountable to the burmese people through democratic elections under the rule of law .

the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 ( jade act ; p.l .

110-286 ) imposed additional sanctions on burma's military junta until the president: determines and certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that the spdc has — ( 1 ) unconditionally released all political prisoners , including aung san suu kyi and other members of the national league for democracy ; ( 2 ) entered into a substantive dialogue with democratic forces led by the national league for democracy and the ethnic minorities of burma on transitioning to democratic government under the rule of law ; and ( 3 ) allowed humanitarian access to populations affected by armed conflict in all regions of burma .

burma's long post - election transition period and the uncertain status of the new nld - led government's relations with the burmese military present challenges for the administration as it formulates u.s. policy toward burma and for congress as it considers its role in shaping and conducting oversight of that policy .

perhaps as a reflection of these challenges and uncertainty , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) leaves in place many of the provisions in past appropriations legislation ( such as the prohibition on imet and fmf assistance to burma ) , while addressing some selected issues ( such as the treatment of the rohingya ) .

a number of factors are likely to influence what changes , if any , the obama administration and / or congress may make in current u.s. policy toward burma .

these include: whether legislation the outgoing union parliament enacted is consistent with u.s. policy objectives , and whether such legislation helps or hinders the ability of the nld - led government to implement political and economic reforms ; whether executive actions outgoing president thein sein may undertake before he leaves office bolster the authority of the nld - led government or of the burmese military ; what the relationship between aung san suu kyi and burma's new president , htin kyaw , will be ; how the burmese military conducts itself during the transition period and after the nld - led government takes power , including what military actions it may take against ethnic militias , as well as its position with respect to burma's peace process ; how aung san suu kyi and the nld - led government pursue the peace process , and whether their approach obtains the cooperation of all the ethnic organizations with militias , other political parties , civil society , and the burmese military ; what actions the nld - led government takes to address burma's ethnic and religious tensions , and in particular , the treatment of the rohingya in rakhine state ; and what economic reforms the nld - led government identifies as its priorities , and the role it would like to see the united states and other donor nations play in the economic reform process .

u.s. policy toward burma in the past often regarded u.s. interests as being aligned with certain key individuals .

past legislation on burma made reference to specific burmese nationals .

the jade act , for example , requires the unconditional release of all political prisoners , including aung san suu kyi and other nld members , as a necessary condition to terminate sanctions .

following the spdc's transfer of power to the thein sein government , the obama administration also appeared to align u.s. policy with specific individuals , such as president thein sein , aung san suu kyi , and "reformers both inside and outside of government. .

some critics , however , have taken issue with the notion of president thein sein as a "reformer. .

these critics point out that the political and economic reforms that took place in burma between 2011 and 2015 were consistent with the seven - step roadmap to a "disciplined , flourishing democracy" spelled out by general khin nyunt on august 30 , 2003 , and supported by the spdc .

according to these critics , the reforms undertaken by the thein sein government sought to maintain military control over the nation's government while providing limited civilian participation via largely democratic elections , in order to obtain the removal of u.s. sanctions placed on burma , as well as obtain u.s. assistance to reinforce and maintain the political and economic power of the military .

looking ahead to the rest of 2016 and beyond , the contours of u.s. policy in burma , and the actions congress may take to help shape that policy , may depend in part on whether members and administration officials continue to regard u.s. interests as aligned with certain key individuals , who may or may not always take positions on issues that the united states favors .

alternatively , congress may examine u.s. policy in terms of u.s. objectives and goals , including those expressed in past legislation , and determine by what means to effectively achieve those goals .

another factor that may influence u.s. policy toward burma in 2016 is time .

as discussed previously , the nld - led government is unlikely to assume power until the end of april , and it will take at least several weeks for the president to appoint and the union parliament to confirm ministers and government officials .

as such , a fully operational nld - led government and union parliament probably will not be in place until may or june of 2016 .

given that it is an election year in the united states and the current administration is in its final months , how much time and attention congress or the obama administration may devote to developing and implementing changes in u.s. policy toward burma remains unclear .

congress has only a limited number of days left this year to consider legislation , and the obama administration has only its remaining months in office to revisit u.s. policy on burma if it chooses to do so , and if necessary , to secure congressional support for any proposed changes .

this appendix provides a more detailed breakdown of the 2015 election results for each chamber of the union parliament , as well as each of the 14 regional and state parliaments .

