federal policymakers statutorily established the u.s. department of education ( ed ) as a cabinet - level agency in 1980 .

its mission is to "promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access. .

like most federal agencies , ed receives funds in support of its mission through various federal budget and appropriations processes .

these processes are complex .

for example , ed receives both mandatory and discretionary appropriations ; ed is annually provided forward funds and advance appropriations for some — but not all — discretionary programs ; ed awards both formula and competitive grants ; and a portion of ed's budget subsidizes student loan costs ( through both direct loans and loan guarantees ) .

because of this complexity , analyzing ed's budget requires an understanding of a broad range of federal budget and appropriations concepts .

this report provides an introduction to these concepts as they are used specifically in the context of the congressional appropriations process for ed .

it was designed for readers who are new or returning to the topic of ed budget and appropriations .

the first section of this report provides an introduction to key terms and concepts in the federal budget and appropriations process with special relevance for ed .

the second section answers frequently asked questions ( faqs ) about federal funding for the department , as well as closely related questions about education funding in general .

the third section includes a brief description of , and links to , reports and documents that provide more information about budget and appropriations concepts .

the scope of this report is generally ( but not exclusively ) limited to concepts associated with funding provided to ed through the annual appropriations process .

it does not address all possible sources of federal funding for education , training , or related activities .

for example , it does not seek to address education tax credits , student loans , or education and training programs at agencies other than ed .

where this report does address such topics , it does so in order to provide broad context for questions and key terms related to the appropriations process for ed .

this report also addresses some frequently asked questions about education funding in general .

the following section provides an introduction to selected key terms and concepts used in the congressional debate about federal funding for ed .

the following section includes frequently asked questions about the budget and appropriations process for ed ( and closely related topics ) .

readers seeking additional information on any of the key terms , concepts , and answers to the faqs included in this report are referred to the authors of this report and to crs reports on budget and appropriations in general and on education funding in particular .

such reports have been footnoted and linked in the relevant sections of this report .

additionally , readers may wish to consult glossary and budget concepts documents produced by ed , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , government accountability office ( gao ) , and office of management and budget ( omb ) .

these include the following: department of education , budget process in the u.s. department of education , last modified january 19 , 2017 , http: / / www2.ed.gov / about / overview / budget / process.html ; congressional budget office , glossary , updated july 2016 , https: / / www.cbo.gov / publication / 42904 ; u.s. government accountability office , a glossary of terms used in the federal budget progress , gao - 05-734sp , september 1 , 2005 , http: / / www.gao.gov / products / gao - 05-734sp ; and executive office of the president , office of management and budget , "budget concepts," fiscal year 2019 analytical perspectives of the u.s. government , https: / / www.govinfo.gov / content / pkg / budget - 2019-per / pdf / budget - 2019-per - 5-1.pdf .

