most of the funding for the activities of the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) comes from discretionary appropriations provided each year in the annual appropriations acts , typically as a part of the transportation , hud , and related agencies appropriations bill ( thud ) .

hud's programs are primarily designed to address housing problems faced by households with very low incomes or other special housing needs .

three rental assistance programs — public housing , section 8 tenant - based rental assistance ( which funds section 8 housing choice vouchers ) , and section 8 project - based rental assistance — account for the majority of the department's funding ( more than three - quarters of total hud appropriations in fy2016 ) .

two flexible block grant programs — home and the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program — help communities finance a variety of housing and community development activities designed to serve low - and moderate - income families .

in addition , in some years congress appropriates funds to cdbg to assist in disaster recovery .

other more specialized grant programs help communities meet the needs of homeless persons , including those living with hiv / aids .

hud's federal housing administration ( fha ) insures mortgages made by lenders to home buyers with low down payments and to developers of multifamily rental buildings containing relatively affordable units .

fha collects fees from insured borrowers , which are used to sustain the insurance fund .

surplus fha funds have been used to offset the cost of the hud budget .

a note about the housing trust fund .

the housing trust fund ( htf ) — a formula grant program administered by hud — is not funded through the appropriations process ; rather , it is funded through contributions from two government - sponsored enterprises , fannie mae and freddie mac .

the htf received its first annual funding in 2016 and is expected to receive funding again in 2017 .

since the program is funded outside of the annual appropriations process , it is not reflected in this report .

table 1 presents total net enacted appropriations for hud over the past five years , including emergency appropriations , rescissions , offsetting collections , and receipts .

 ( for more information , see crs report r42542 , department of housing and urban development ( hud ) : funding trends since fy2002 , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the fair housing act requires certain grantees , including communities receiving community planning and development ( cpd ) formula grants — cdbg , home , hopwa , and esg funding — as well as the phas who administer public housing and the section 8 housing choice voucher program , to affirmatively further fair housing .

while not defined in statute , affirmatively furthering fair housing has been found by courts to mean doing more than simply refraining from discrimination , and working to end discrimination and segregation .

 ( for more information about the obligation to affirmatively further fair housing , see crs report r44557 , the fair housing act: hud oversight , programs , and activities , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

in july 2015 , hud issued a final rule that changes the way in which cpd grantees and phas ( collectively referred to as "program participants" ) comply with the requirement to affirmatively further fair housing .

the rule has been controversial .

when the proposed rule was published , in june 2013 , hud received more than 1,000 comments .

commenters raised concerns that the requirements intrude on the authority of local jurisdictions and constitute social engineering ; raised concerns that compliance will be costly , especially for small jurisdictions and phas ; asked questions as to whether hud will continue to allow investment in low - income , segregated areas ; and expressed uncertainty about how hud will enforce the rule .

during the fy2016 appropriations process , the house adopted an amendment to the thud appropriations bill ( h.amdt .

399 to h.r .

2577 ) that would have prohibited funds in the bill from being used to enforce the affirmatively furthering fair housing rule .

the amendment was not included in the final appropriations act .

a similar amendment was proposed to the fy2017 appropriations bill in the senate .

s.amdt .

3897 would prevent funds from being used to carry out the final rule .

the amendment was tabled .

instead , the senate adopted an amendment , s.amdt .

3970 , that would prohibit funds in the appropriations bill from being used to "direct a grantee to undertake specific changes to existing zoning laws" in carrying out the affirmatively furthering fair housing rule ( §240 of the senate - passed appropriations bill ) .

the provision is included in the final appropriations law .

see §243 of p.l .

115-31 .

under existing federal law , persons convicted of committing certain crimes are either barred from receiving federal rental housing assistance or local program administrators are given authority to bar such persons from receiving assistance .

an amendment accepted during floor consideration of the senate - passed thud appropriations bill ( s.amdt .

3905 ) would have prohibited any funding in the bill from being used to provide housing assistance to persons convicted of a broader set of crimes than are currently subject to restrictions under federal law .

specifically , the amendment would have barred assistance funded under the bill for persons convicted of aggravated sexual abuse , murder , human trafficking , and child pornography ( §249 of the senate - passed bill ) .

this provision is not included in the final fy2017 appropriations law .

the federal flood risk management standard ( ffrms ) is the principal mechanism for accomplishing the flood risk management policies established by president obama in executive order ( e.o. ) .

13690 .

first published in january 2015 , the ffrms aims to improve the resilience of communities and federal assets against the impacts of flooding and the standard is applicable to certain federally funded projects .

section 236 of the house appropriations committee - reported fy2017 thud appropriations bill would have prohibited any funding appropriated under the bill from being used to implement , administer , carry out , or enforce e.o .

13690 until at least 90 days after the secretary of hud makes specified reports to the house and senate appropriations committees regarding the effects of the new ffrms .

this provision is not included in the final fy2017 appropriations law .

hud appropriations are included as a part of the transportation , hud , and related agencies appropriations bill ( thud ) each year .

that bill , like the other 11 annual appropriations bills , is crafted to comply with limits provided in the annual budget resolution , which is , in turn , influenced by the budget control act and its discretionary spending limits .

thus , it is useful to have a basic understanding of these policies and procedures as context when considering the formulation of hud appropriations levels .

the budget resolution the annual budget resolution provides a budgetary framework within which congress considers legislation affecting spending and revenue .

it sets forth spending and revenue levels , including spending allocations to house and senate committees .

these levels are enforceable by a point of order .

after the house and the senate appropriations committees receive their discretionary spending allocations from the budget resolution ( referred to as 302 ( a ) allocations ) , they divide their allocations among their 12 subcommittees ( referred to as the 302 ( b ) allocations ) .

each subcommittee is responsible for one of the 12 regular appropriations bills .

while a budget resolution and subcommittee allocations alone cannot be used to determine how much funding any individual account or program will receive , they do set the parameters within which decisions about funding for individual accounts and programs can be made .

the house and the senate did not adopt a budget resolution for fy2017 .

in its absence , the senate budget committee chair filed budgetary levels in the congressional record that are enforceable in the senate as if they had been included in a budget resolution for fy2017 .

based on these levels , the senate appropriations committee reported their initial 302 ( b ) suballocations on april 18 , 2016 .

they include $56.474 billion for the thud subcommittee , which is approximately $1 billion less than the comparable fy2016 level ( $57.301 billion ) .

in the absence of a budget resolution in the house , the house appropriations committee chose to adopt "interim 302 ( b ) suballocations" for the appropriations bills as they were marked up in full committee .

these interim suballocations are not procedurally enforceable .

a suballocation for the thud subcommittee of $58.190 billion was included in h.rept .

114-606 .

the budget control act and sequestration in 2011 , the budget control act ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) was enacted , which both increased the debt limit and contained provisions intended to reduce the budget deficit through spending limits and reductions .

in part , the bca was intended to accomplish deficit reduction by imposing statutory limits on discretionary spending each fiscal year from fy2012 through fy2021 .

the bca specifies separate limits for defense and nondefense spending ; hud discretionary programs are subject to the nondefense discretionary limits .

in addition to the initial spending limits set in the bca , the law tasked a joint select committee on deficit reduction to develop a federal deficit reduction plan for congress and the president to enact by january 15 , 2012 .

when a plan was not enacted , the bca required that a one - time sequestration of nonexempt discretionary spending occur in fy2013 .

 ( sequestration is a process of automatic , largely across - the - board spending reductions. ) .

in addition , the bca required that the discretionary spending limits be lowered further for fy2014 through fy2021 .

various amendments to the bca have been enacted that have altered the discretionary spending reductions that were otherwise scheduled to occur under that law .

most recently , the enactment of the bipartisan budget act of 2015 had the effect of lessening the bca reductions for fy2016 and fy2017 , by establishing higher levels for those fiscal years' limits than otherwise would have been the case .

under current law , those bca reductions are to resume for the fy2018 limits .

in each fiscal year , if discretionary funding is enacted that exceeds either of the limits ( defense or non - defense ) , then sequestration will be imposed to reduce spending in the applicable category .

in terms of mandatory funding , the bca provided for reductions of nonexempt programs through sequestration each year through fy2021 .

this has subsequently been amended to occur through fy2024 .

