u.s. greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emission levels , particularly from carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , remain a topic of interest among policymakers and stakeholders .

recent international negotiations and domestic policy developments have generated attention to current and projected u.s. ghg emission levels .

an understanding of ghg emission source data and the underlying factors that affect emission levels might help inform the discussion among policymakers regarding ghg emission mitigation .

in december 2015 , delegations from 195 nations , including the united states , adopted an agreement in paris that creates an international structure for nations to pledge to abate their ghg emissions , adapt to climate change , and cooperate to achieve these ends , including financial and other support .

pursuant to that agreement , the united states pledged ( in 2015 ) to reduce ghg emissions by 26% - 28% by 2025 compared to 2005 levels .

this pledge supplemented a previous obama administration commitment to reduce u.s. ghg emissions by 17% below 2005 levels by 2020 .

at the date of this report , u.s. involvement in the paris agreement remains uncertain .

however , some recent reports indicate that president trump is expected to withdraw from the agreement .

whether the united states ultimately achieves the 2020 and 2025 targets will likely depend , to some degree , on ghg emission levels , particularly co 2 emissions , from electric power plants — one of the largest sources of u.s. emissions .

during the obama administration , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) promulgated standards for co 2 emissions from existing fossil - fuel - fired electric power plants .

epa cited section 111 ( d ) of the clean air act ( caa ) as the authority to issue its final rule .

the rule , known as the clean power plan ( cpp ) , appeared in the federal register on october 23 , 2015 .

the fate of the cpp is uncertain .

first , the rule is the subject of ongoing litigation .

a number of states and other entities have challenged the rule , while other states and entities have intervened in support of the rule .

on february 9 , 2016 , the supreme court stayed the rule for the duration of the litigation .

the rule therefore currently lacks enforceability or legal effect , and if the rule is ultimately upheld , at least some of the deadlines would likely be delayed .

second , president trump issued an executive order on march 28 , 2017 , that directs epa to review the cpp ( and other rulemakings ) and "as soon as practicable , suspend , revise , or rescind the guidance , or publish for notice and comment proposed rules suspending , revising , or rescinding those rules. .

in april , epa began its review of the cpp and related power plant rules and may consider various options to revise or repeal the rules .

a question for policymakers is whether u.s. ghg emissions will remain at current levels , decrease to meet the 2020 and 2025 goals , or increase toward former ( or even higher ) levels .

multiple factors — including economics , technology , and climate policies — will likely play a role in future ghg emission levels .

this report examines recent trends in u.s. ghg emissions , particularly co 2 emissions from electricity generation , and the factors that impact emission levels in that sector .

in addition , this report examines the degree to which cpp implementation ( or lack thereof ) may impact co 2 emission levels from electric power plants .

the first section provides an overview of various sources of ghg emissions in the united states .

this includes an overview of co 2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion and a closer look at co 2 emissions from electricity generation , which account for the second - largest percentage of co 2 emission from fossil fuel combustion ( 1 percentage point behind the transportation sector ) .

the second section examines projections of co 2 emissions in the electric power sector , with a particular focus on the role of the cpp and other factors .

the final section highlights the challenges in making co 2 emission projections with a comparison of actual co 2 emissions with prior emission forecasts .

 figure 1 illustrates u.s. ghg between 1990 and 2015 .

as the figure indicates , u.s. ghg emissions increased during most of the years between 1990 and 2007 .

ghg emissions decreased substantially in 2008 and 2009 as a result of a variety of factors — some economic , some the effect of government policies at all levels .

over the last five years , emissions have fluctuated but have not surpassed 2009 levels .

emissions in 2015 were roughly equivalent to 1994 emission levels .

figure 1 compares recent u.s. ghg emission levels to the 2020 and 2025 emission goals .

based on 2015 ghg emission levels , the united states is more than halfway to reaching the administration's 2020 goal ( 17% below 2005 levels ) .

u.s. ghg levels in 2015 were 11% below 2005 levels .

accurately forecasting future emission levels is a complex and challenging endeavor .

consequently , analysts often provide a range of emissions based on different scenarios or assumptions .

the energy information administration ( eia ) provides annual forecasts of co 2 emissions in its annual energy outlook ( aeo ) publications .

regarding its various estimates , eia states the following: projections in the annual energy outlook 2017 ( aeo2017 ) are not predictions of what will happen , but rather modeled projections of what may happen given certain assumptions and methodologies... .

the reference case projection assumes trend improvement in known technologies , along with a view of economic and demographic trends reflecting the current central views of leading economic forecasters and demographers .

it generally assumes that current laws and regulations affecting the energy sector , including sunset dates for laws that have them , are unchanged throughout the projection period .

figure 2 compares actual co 2 emissions between 1990 and 2016 with selected eia emission projections made in past years .

in general , actual emissions have remained well below projections .

for example , the aeo from 2002 projected that co 2 emissions would be almost 6.9 billion metric tons in 2015 , about 33% higher than observed emissions .

by comparison , the more recent projections ( aeo 2014 and aeo 2017 ) indicated that co 2 emissions would remain relatively flat or experience modest declines over the next decade .

as previously discussed , co 2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion account for the vast majority ( 77% ) of total u.s. ghg emissions , and the electric power sector contributes a large percentage ( 35% ) of co 2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion .

therefore , policymakers and stakeholders are paying attention to both recent trends and future projections of co 2 emissions in the electricity generation sector .

multiple factors will likely impact co 2 emission levels from the electricity sector .

some of these factors , identified below in no particular order , are interrelated: economic impacts ( eg , level of gdp growth ) ; prices of fossil fuels — particularly natural gas — and renewable energy sources ; electricity generation portfolio ( eg , whether recent trends in coal , natural gas , and renewable energy use continue ) ; federal and / or state policy developments ( eg , cpp implementation , state renewable energy requirements ) ; and improvements in demand - side energy efficiency ( eg , commercial and residential electricity use ) .

most , if not all , of these factors are difficult to forecast with precision .

in particular , the fate of the cpp is unknown , which raises a question: what impact would the cpp have on co 2 emissions in the electricity sector ? .

although it has been widely reported that the rule would require a 32% reduction in co 2 emissions from the electricity sector by 2030 compared to 2005 levels , this percentage reduction comes from epa's modeling of the effects of the rule in conjunction with other factors .

the rule would establish uniform national co 2 emission performance rates — measured in pounds of co 2 per megawatt - hour of electricity generation — and state - specific co 2 emission rate and emission targets .

each state would determine which measure to use to be in compliance .

figure 9 compares epa's projections of co 2 emissions in the electricity sector resulting from the final rule with historical co 2 emissions ( 1990-2015 ) from the electricity sector and projected emissions under epa's baseline scenario .

this scenario does not include the 2015 renewable energy tax extensions , discussed below .

the figure indicates that the final rule would reduce co 2 emissions in the electricity sector by 32% in 2030 compared to 2005 levels .

under the baseline scenario ( i.e. , without the cpp ) , epa projects a 16% reduction by 2030 compared to 2005 levels .

in terms of metric tons , epa's cpp scenario would reduce an additional 377 million metric tons ( or 15 percentage points ) of co 2 , compared to epa's baseline scenario .

based on epa's regulatory impact analysis , several factors may explain the emission results in 2030 between the baseline and cpp scenarios: demand - side energy efficiency ( dsee ) improvements: states may employ dsee improvement activities as part of their plans to meet their targets .

in its analysis , epa assumed that dsee efforts would decrease total electricity generation by 8% in 2030 compared to its baseline projection .

coal generation decreases: epa projected coal generation to decrease by 22% - 23% in 2030 compared to its 2030 baseline projection .

natural gas generation increases: epa projected natural gas generation to increase by 5% - 18% in 2030 compared to its 2030 baseline projection .

renewable energy generation increases: epa projected non - hydro renewable energy generation is expected to increase by 8% - 9% in 2030 compared to its 2030 baseline projection .

other organizations used models to compare baseline scenarios with various cpp scenarios .

table 1 lists the co 2 emission projections from these groups and epa .

some of these groups produced multiple projections , employing different assumptions of future activities: cpp implementation options ( eg , whether states engaged in emissions trading ) and levels of energy efficiency improvements , among others .

all of the modeling scenarios below ( except for epa ) included the december 2015 renewable energy tax extensions .

on december 18 , 2015 , president obama signed into law the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

the act , among other provisions , extended and modified the production tax credit ( ptc ) and the investment tax credit ( itc ) for specific renewable energy technologies .

prior to the december 2015 development , the ptc had expired and the itc was scheduled to expire at the end of 2016 .

the ptc will not be available to projects starting construction after december 31 , 2019 .

however , ptc tax expenditures will continue after that date , because the ptc is available for the first 10 years of renewable electricity production .

the itc for solar is scheduled to decline from 30% to 26% in 2020 , and 22% in 2021 , before returning to the permanent rate of 10% after 2021 .

in general , the modeling results in table 1 indicate that the cpp would have a substantial impact on future co 2 emission levels from electricity generation compared to scenarios that do not include the cpp .

recent international negotiations and domestic policy developments have increased interest in current and projected u.s. ghg emission levels .

in the context of international climate change negotiations , president obama announced , on separate occasions , u.s. ghg emission reduction goals for both 2020 and 2025 .

whether the united states ultimately achieves its goals would likely depend , to some degree , on co 2 emissions from power plants .

historically , co 2 emissions from electricity generation have followed an upward course similar to electricity generation levels .

however , in 2010 , their courses diverged .

while electricity generation remained flat after 2010 , co 2 emissions continued a trend of reduction .

thus in 2016 , electricity generation was essentially equivalent to generation in 2005 , while co 2 emissions were 25% below 2005 levels .

multiple factors generally impact co 2 emission levels from the electric power sector .

recent changes in the u.s. electricity generation portfolio between 2005 and 2016 played a key role: coal's contribution to total electricity generation decreased from 50% to 30% ; natural gas's contribution to total electricity generation increased from 19% to 34% , surpassing coal in percentage of total generation in 2016 ; and renewable energy's contribution to total electricity generation increased from 2% to 8% .

if these recent trends in the electric power sector continue , co 2 emissions in that sector may continue to decrease .

assuming this were to occur , some might question the importance of the cpp in terms of meeting u.s. ghg emission goals ( eg , 26% - 28% below 2005 levels by 2025 ) .

however , modeling results cited above indicate that the cpp would have a substantial impact on future co 2 emission levels from the electric power sector .

