the unexpected death of supreme court justice antonin scalia on february 13 , 2016 — in the middle of the supreme court's october 2015 term — has prompted questions about the process for filling the vacancy and how the court will proceed in hearing cases and issuing opinions .

these questions pertain to the constitutional role of the president and senate in filling supreme court vacancies , whether and when the president and the senate must act , and how the supreme court may proceed in hearing cases and issuing opinions with a vacant seat .

this report provides answers to frequently asked legal questions about filling supreme court vacancies .

additionally , other crs products address other procedural and historical issues surrounding supreme court vacancies .

see crs report r44400 , the death of justice scalia: procedural issues arising on an eight - member supreme court , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r44235 , supreme court appointment process: president's selection of a nominee , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r44236 , supreme court appointment process: consideration by the senate judiciary committee , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r44234 , supreme court appointment process: senate debate and confirmation vote , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r44083 , appointment and confirmation of executive branch leadership: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rl31980 , senate consideration of presidential nominations: committee and floor procedure , by [author name scrubbed] .

the unexpected death of supreme court justice antonin scalia on february 13 , 2016 — in the middle of the supreme court's october 2015 term — has prompted questions about the process for filling the vacancy and how the court may proceed in hearing cases and issuing opinions .

in particular , these questions pertain to the constitutional role of the president and senate in filling supreme court vacancies , when the p resident and the senate must act , and how the supreme court may continue hearing cases and issuing opinions with a vacant seat .

this report provides answers to frequently asked legal questions about filling supreme court vacancies .

the supreme court is not required to have nine justices .

the constitution is silent on the number .

historically , by statute congress has set the number of justices for the court .

currently , that number is nine: one chief justice plus eight associate justices .

but only six justices are needed for a quorum .

in the event that the court is scheduled to hold a session but there is not a quorum , the justices ( or the clerk or deputy clerk ) may announce that the court will not meet until a quorum is restored .

the nature of the president's prerogatives under the appointments clause is unclear .

the obama administration has taken the position that the president has a constitutional obligation to nominate and appoint a supreme court justice when there is a vacancy .

the constitution's appointments clause states that the president " shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ... judges of the supreme court. .

courts have generally construed the word "shall," in the constitution and federal statutes , to impose a mandatory obligation .

for instance , when interpreting the word "shall" in article iii of the constitution , the supreme court stated that "[t]he word shall , is a sign of the future tense , and implies an imperative mandate , obligatory upon those to whom it is addressed. .

however , the court has not clarified when in the future the president needs to act .

supreme court precedent regarding vacancies in other positions subject to presidential appointment suggests that the president has significant discretion as to when a vacancy "shall" be filled .

the senate's prerogatives under the appointments clause are even less clear .

the appointments clause states that the president "shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ... judges of the supreme court. .

unlike the duties spelled out for the president , the appointments clause does not provide that the senate "shall" give its advice and consent , nor does it expound on what the senate must do to give its advice and consent — two distinct tasks .

additionally , the supreme court has not fully interpreted the specific terms "advice" and "consent" as they are used in the appointments clause , so it is not entirely clear what actions the senate must take , assuming any action were seen to be required .

for instance , during a 1975 symposium on "advice and consent on supreme court nominations," then - senator james abourezk noted that , "[w]hile the 'consent' aspect of the senate's constitutional role is thus readily discernable , the same cannot be so easily said of the senate's duty to give its 'advice' on a supreme court appointment" or "to state precisely just how that duty is to be exercised institutionally. .

in the past , the senate has provided its advice and consent by various means , ranging from committee hearings to a vote on the senate floor .

accordingly , there is disagreement in the legal community about the senate's role in presidential appointments .

although there is no doubt that the senate has a constitutional role in the appointments process , much of the disagreement surrounds how robust that role is , especially concerning advice .

some view the senate's role to give advice as an active one , in which failing to consider a nominee at all would violate its constitutional obligations .

for example , one former senator has stated that "[a]mong all the responsibilities of a united states senator , none is more important than the duty to participate in the process of selecting judges and justices to serve on the federal courts. .

the obama administration similarly contends that the senate has a constitutional obligation to act — a position previously taken by the george w. bush administration .

conversely , others assert that the senate has no constitutional obligation to act once the president nominates a new justice , contending , for example , that the lack of "shall" in the advice - and - consent text in article ii creates only a prerequisite for the president's nominee to be confirmed by the senate .

additionally , at least one senator has reportedly taken the view that "[i]t's up to the senate to decide how we do our job with regard to" advice and consent , suggesting that interpreting the senate's role in the appointments clause could be seen as a political question for the legislative branch to decide .

however , absent a definitive resolution by the judicial branch — which would be unlikely — settlement of occasional disputes between the president and senate regarding their respective roles in the supreme court nomination process seem likely to be resolved though interbranch negotiation and accommodation .

the constitution's recess appointments clause states that "[t]he president shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the senate , by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next session. .

the supreme court has not addressed whether the constitution permits the president to appoint an article iii judge ( including supreme court justices ) using a recess appointment , and thus the issue remains unsettled .

the appointments clause , though , which precedes the recess appointments clause , authorizes the president to appoint "judges of the supreme court. .

accordingly , some courts have concluded that the recess appointments clause encompasses filling article iii judicial vacancies .

for example , the eleventh circuit opined in evans v. stephens that president george w. bush lawfully appointed a judge to the u.s. court of appeals during an 11-day senate recess .

despite reaching this conclusion , the court noted tension between article iii — which provides for tenure during "good behaviour" — and appointing article iii judges under the recess appointments clause , for whom the appointment would expire at the end of the congressional session in which the recess appointment was made .

additionally , when the supreme court declined to review evans , then - supreme court justice stevens wrote to emphasize that the denial of certiorari was not a ruling on the merits that confirms the eleventh circuit's decision , perhaps suggesting that he had doubts about the veracity of the ruling .

assuming , however , that the president could use the recess appointments clause to appoint a new temporary supreme court justice , the senate typically must be in recess for at least 10 days for the recess appointment to be valid .

presidential nominations under the appointments clause expire at the end of the congressional term during which they are made .

but nothing in the constitution or in any federal law prohibits the president from re - nominating a supreme court nominee who was rejected or never voted on during the senate's term .

for example , president eisenhower first nominated john marshall harlan ii to be a supreme court justice on november 9 , 1954 , but the senate did not vote on the nomination .

president eisenhower re - nominated harlan on january 10 , 1955 , and the newly constituted senate confirmed the nomination .

in general , cases may be reheard in one of two ways .

first , parties may petition the supreme court for rehearing after the court issues an adverse ruling on the merits or denies granting review for a case ( sought through a petition for a writ of certiorari or extraordinary writ ) .

for cases already decided on the merits , a majority of the court must grant the petition for rehearing , which would be considered only at the request of one of the justices who concurred in the court's judgment on the merits .

second , the court typically will order cases to be reheard if the justices conclude that they cannot resolve the case before the court's summer recess .

for example , the court , on its own initiative , decided to rehear three cases that had been argued after chief justice rehnquist's death but before the vacancy had been filled .

