the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) is a proposed free trade agreement ( fta ) among the united states and 11 asia - pacific countries .

the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) has described it as a "comprehensive and high standard" agreement , designed to eliminate and reduce trade barriers and to establish and extend the rules and disciplines of the trading system among the parties to the agreement ( see figure 1 ) .

if implemented , it would be the largest plurilateral fta by value of trade , encompassing roughly 40% of world gdp , and could serve further to integrate the united states in the dynamic asia - pacific region .

as a "living agreement," it has the potential to negotiate new rules and expand its membership .

it could also mark a shift to the negotiation of "mega - regional" trade liberalization agreements in lieu of bilateral ftas and broader multilateral trade liberalization in the world trade organization ( wto ) .

the 12 countries concluded the tpp negotiations and released the text of the agreement in late 2015 .

trade ministers from the tpp countries signed the final agreement text on february 4 , 2016 , and several countries are seeking to ratify the agreement this year .

tpp draws congressional interest on a number of fronts , and congress must approve implementing legislation for u.s. commitments under the agreement to enter into force .

the tpp would be eligible to receive expedited legislative consideration under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , p.l .

114-26 , unless congress determines the administration has failed to advance tpa negotiating objectives , or has not met various notification and consultation requirements .

furthermore , the tpp may affect a range of sectors and regions of the u.s. economy and could influence the shape and path of u.s. trade policy for the foreseeable future .

it may also serve strategic goals of the united states by strengthening regional alliances and extending u.s. influence in the asia - pacific region .

this report examines the key provisions of the proposed tpp , related policy and economic contexts , and issues of potential interest to congress .

the precursor to the tpp was the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership ( p - 4 ) .

it was conceived in 2003 by singapore , new zealand , and chile as a path to trade liberalization in the asia - pacific region — brunei joined in 2005 — and the p - 4 agreement was concluded in 2006 .

u.s. trade policymakers took notice of the p - 4's relative ambition as a possible template for a wider asia - pacific free trade agreement .

president bush notified congress of his intention to negotiate with the existing p - 4 members on september 22 , 2008 , along with australia , peru , and vietnam , on december 30 , 2008 , as required under past and current tpa .

president obama recommitted to the tpp negotiations in november 2009 and renotified congress of the administration's intention to negotiate the renamed trans - pacific partnership .

in october 2010 , the tpp participants agreed by consensus to the inclusion of malaysia as a negotiating partner .

the negotiating partners announced a framework for the agreement at the sidelines of the asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) ministerial in honolulu , hi , november 8-13 , 2011 .

thereafter , canada , mexico , and japan consulted with the existing tpp partners on joining the negotiations .

the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) partners — canada and mexico – acceded to the negotiations in december 2012 , followed by japan in july 2013 .

during the course of the negotiations , others countries , such as south korea , taiwan , and the philippines expressed varying degrees of interest in joining , but the parties decided to conclude the agreement before contemplating new members .

the agreement must be ratified by all parties to enter into force in the first two years from its 2016 signing .

thereafter , it requires at least six countries representing 85% of the bloc's 2013 gross domestic product ( gdp ) to accede to the agreement for it to take effect , thus requiring ratification by the united states and japan for entry into force to occur .

the text of the tpp agreement spans 30 chapters .

the main goal as stated by the negotiating countries is "to establish a comprehensive , next - generation regional agreement that liberalizes trade and investment and addresses new and traditional trade issues and 21 st - century challenges. .

fta provisions are often discussed in two different categories: ( 1 ) the market access component addressing tariff and nontariff barriers to trade in goods , services , and agriculture , and government procurement ; and ( 2 ) the rules component covering the procedures , standards , and regulatory considerations that relate to international trade , including such issues as investment and intellectual property rights .

market access can be affected by the process by which trade is conducted , and , hence , the distinction between these two categories is not always clear .

while tariff negotiations are perhaps the most well - known component of trade agreements and the easiest to measure and verify , u.s. firms are often most competitive in the international trade of services and products involving high levels of research and development .

these industries face mostly nontariff , behind - the - border barriers , making rules commitments such as transparent regulatory procedures or ipr protection particularly important for u.s. access to and ability to compete in overseas markets .

u.s. ftas also attempt to ensure that u.s. fta partners meet certain requirements .

in particular , internationally - recognized and other core principles for the protection of worker rights and the environment have become a significant aspect of u.s. trade agreement negotiations .

in addition , the tpp includes an entirely new chapter that seeks to establish disciplines on how state - owned enterprises engage in international trade , with a goal of limiting potential negative impacts on private actors from nonmarket practices .

the 12 tpp countries have varying competitive advantages , sensitivities , and levels of economic development .

as a result of these differences and the "give and take" of trade negotiations , achieving common tpp rules and disciplines also involves certain exceptions in different forms , and phase - in periods of varying lengths .

when examining the specific commitments of the agreement it is important to examine these exceptions , as they may impact the agreement's practical application .

this section examines the major issues addressed in the tpp negotiations , beginning with the treatment of trade in merchandise goods .

for each issue the report provides background information , a discussion of the provisions in the text , particularly as they relate to previous trade agreements , and a summary of the debate on the topic , including , where relevant , u.s. trade negotiating objectives .

stakeholders' views on the tpp agreement vary .

some groups generally oppose or support trade liberalization ; others' positions hinge on specific provisions in the tpp text .

most business groups generally support the agreement , while most labor unions and certain nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) are generally opposed .

the discussion that follows focuses on specific commitments in the agreement and debate over those measures .

the tpp contains provisions related to dispute settlement and governance of the agreement .

given that the tpp is viewed as a "living agreement," it contains procedures for the accession of new members , the negotiation of new provisions , and the creation of a free trade commission to oversee the agreement .

congress has taken a strong interest in the tpp since the negotiations were launched in 2008 .

hearings have been held , and many members have expressed views on the negotiations through letters and consultations with the administration and with stakeholder groups .

congress may consider the agreement from several perspectives if it considers implementing legislation .

the potential trans - pacific partnership agreement has both economic and broader strategic policy implications for the united states .

the tpp is ambitious in at least four ways: ( 1 ) its size — it would be the largest u.s. fta by trade flows and could expand in a region that represents over half of all u.s. trade ; ( 2 ) the scope and scale of its liberalization — the parties , while not always at the desired level of ambition , have agreed to reduce barriers to goods , services , and agricultural trade and to establish rules and disciplines on a wide range of topics , including new policy issues that neither the wto nor existing ftas yet cover ; ( 3 ) its potential evolution as a "living agreement" — it may continue to be expanded in terms of its membership and its rules and disciplines , and a number of countries officially have expressed an interest in joining tpp if it goes into effect ; and ( 4 ) its geo - political significance — it has become , for some observers in the united states and asia , a symbol of u.s. commitment to and influence in the asia - pacific , a region of growing economic and military importance where u.s. leadership increasingly is being challenged .

as congress debates potential implementing legislation , it has a wide and complex set of issues to consider .

