congress appropriates approximately $23 million annually to maintain the selective service agency .

the united states has not used conscription to fill manpower requirements for over four decades ; however , the selective service system and the requirement for young men to register for the draft remain today .

men who fail to register are subject to penalties in the form of lost benefits and criminal action .

some have questioned the need to maintain this agency and the registration requirements .

others have questioned whether the current requirements for registration are fair and equitable .

this report is intended to provide congress with information about how the military selective service act ( mssa ) , the selective service system ( sss ) , and associated requirements for registration have evolved over time .

it explains why the united states developed the sss , what the system looks like today , how constituents are affected by the mssa requirements , and what the options and considerations may be for the future of the selective service .

the first section of the report provides background and history on the military selective service act , the selective service system , and the implementation of the draft in the united states .

the second section discusses statutory registration requirements , processes for registering , and penalties for failing to register .

the third section discusses the current organization , roles , and resourcing of the selective service system .

the final section discusses policy options and consideration for congress for the future of the mssa and the selective service system .

this report does not discuss the state of the all - volunteer force or whether it is adequate to meet our nation's current or future manpower needs .

in addition , it will not provide an analysis of other options for military manpower resourcing such as universal military service or universal military training .

it also does not discuss the history of the draft and draft planning for health service workers .

finally , this report does not evaluate whether the sss , as currently structured , is adequately resourced and organized to perform its statutory mission .

these questions and others will be reviewed by the national commission on military , national , and public service established by the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2017 ( p.l .

114-328 ) .

the united states has used federal conscription at various times since the civil war era , primarily in times of war , but also during peacetime in the aftermath of world war ii .

when first adopted in 1863 , national conscription was a marked departure from the traditional military policy of the united states , which from the founding era had relied on a small standing force that could be augmented by state militias in times of conflict .

conscription into the armed forces of the united states was used just prior to , during , and immediately after world war ii ( wwii ) .

reinstated on june 24 , 1948 , it remained in force until june 30 , 1973 .

following the adoption of the all - volunteer force ( avf ) in 1973 , authority to induct new draftees under the military selective service act ceased .

nevertheless , a standby draft mechanism still exists to furnish manpower above and beyond that provided by the active and reserve components of the armed forces in the case of a major military contingency .

if the federal government were to reinstate the draft , draftees would likely be required to fill all authorized positions to include casualty replacements , billets in understrength units , and new military units activated to expand the wartime force .

today , nearly all males residing in the united states — u.s .

citizens and documented or undocumented immigrant men — are required to register with the selective service if they are at least 18 years old and are not yet 26 years old .

those who are required to register must do so within 30 days of their 18 th birthday unless exemptions apply as listed in table 2 .

men born from march 29 , 1957 , to december 31 , 1959 , were never required to register because the registration program was not in effect at the time they turned 18 .

individuals are not allowed to register beyond their 26 th birthday .

women are currently not required to register for the selective service .

federal regulations state , " no person who is not required by selective service law or the proclamation of the president to register shall be registered. .

all of those required to register would be considered "available for service" in the case of an emergency mobilization unless they were reclassified by the sss .

the selective service system is an independent federal agency within the executive branch with headquarters located in arlington , va .

the agency is currently maintained as an active standby organization .

the statutory missions of the sss are to maintain a complete registration and classification structure capable of immediate operation in the event of a national emergency ( including a structure for registration and classification of persons qualified for practice or employment in a health care occupation essential to the maintenance of the armed forces ) , and personnel adequate to reinstitute immediately the full operation of the system , including military reservists who are trained to operate such system and who can be ordered to active duty for such purpose in the event of a national emergency .

if the sss were activated with the authority to induct individuals , the agency would be responsible for ( 1 ) holding a national draft lottery , ( 2 ) contacting registrants who are selected via the lottery , ( 3 ) arranging transportation for selectees to military entrance processing stations ( meps ) for testing and evaluation of fitness to serve , and ( 4 ) activating a classification structure that would include area offices , local offices , and appeal boards .

local boards would also evaluate claims for exemption , postponement , or deferments .

those classified as conscientious objectors would be required to serve in a noncombatant or nonmilitary capacity .

for those permitted to serve in a nonmilitary capacity , the sss would be responsible for placing these "alternative service workers" with alternate employers and tracking completion of 24 months of their required service .

although congress has amended the mssa a number of times , some of its main tenets — the preservation of a peacetime selective service agency and a registration requirement — have remained much the same since the mid - 20 th century .

the future of the selective service system is a concern for many in congress .

the registration requirements and associated penalties affect young men in every congressional district .

at the same time , some see the preservation of the sss as an important component of national security and emergency preparedness .

others have suggested that the mssa is no longer necessary and should be repealed .

still others have suggested amendments to the mssa to address issues of equity , efficiency , and cost .

