the federal information technology acquisition reform act ( fitara ) was enacted on december 19 , 2014 .

the law outlines seven areas of reform that affect how federal agencies purchase and manage their information technology ( it ) assets , including — enhancing the authority of agency chief information officers ( cios ) ; improving transparency and risk management of it investments ; setting forth a process for agency it portfolio review ; refocusing the federal data center consolidation initiative ( fdcci ) from only consolidation to optimization ; expanding the training and use of "it cadres," as initially outlined in the "25 point implementation plan to reform federal information management technology" ; maximizing the benefits of the federal strategic sourcing initiative ( fssi ) ; and creating a govemment - wide software purchasing program , in conjunction with the general services administration .

on june 10 , 2015 , omb published guidance to implement the requirements of fitara and harmonize existing policy and guidance with the new law .

among other goals , the requirements are intended to — assist agencies in establishing management practices that align it resources with agency missions , goals , programmatic priorities , and statutory requirements ; establish government - wide it management controls that will meet fitara requirements while providing agencies with the flexibility to adapt to agency processes and unique mission requirements ; establish universal roles , responsibilities , and authorities of the agency cio and other senior agency officials ; strengthen the agency cio's accountability for the agency's it costs , schedules , performance , and security ; strengthen the relationship between agency and bureau cios ; establish consistent government - wide interpretation of fitara terms and requirements ; and provide appropriate visibility and involvement of the agency cio in the management and oversight of it resources to support the implementation of effective cybersecurity policies .

in addition to implementing fitara , omb memorandum m - 15-14 , "management and oversight of federal information technology," also harmonizes the requirements of fitara with existing law , primarily the clinger - cohen act of 1996 and the e - government act of 2002 .

those laws require omb to issue management guidance for information technology and electronic government activities across the government , respectively .

fitara also contains provisions that required omb interpretation before implementation .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has reported that the federal government budgets more than $80 billion each year for it investment .

in fy2017 , that investment will be more than $89 billion .

unfortunately , these investments often incur "multi - million dollar cost overruns and years - long schedule delays," may contribute little to mission - related outcomes , and in some cases fail altogether .

for example — the department of defense ( dod ) canceled its expeditionary combat support system in december 2012 after it had spent more than a billion dollars , but had not deployed the system within five years of initially obligating funds ; the department of homeland security's secure border initiative network program was canceled in january 2011 after it had spent more than $1 billion because the program did not meet cost - effectiveness and viability standards ; the department of veterans affairs' ( va's ) financial and logistics integrated technology enterprise program , which was intended to be delivered by 2014 at a total estimated cost of $609 million , was terminated in october 2011 due to challenges in managing the program ; the farm service agency's modernize and innovate the delivery of agricultural systems program , which was to replace aging hardware and software applications that process benefits to farmers , was canceled after 10 years at a cost of at least $423 million , while delivering only about 20% of the functionality that was originally planned ; and the office of personnel management's retirement system modernization program was canceled in february 2011 after the agency had spent approximately $231 million on its third attempt to automate the processing of federal employee retirement claims .

these undesirable results , according to gao , "can be traced to a lack of disciplined and effective management and inadequate executive - level oversight. .

fitara was enacted to reduce the likelihood of such results .

generally , agencies identified in the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 , as well as their subordinate divisions and offices , are subject to the requirements of fitara ( table 1 ) .

the dod , the intelligence community , and portions of other agencies that operate systems related to national security are subject to only certain portions of fitara .

additionally , executive branch agencies not named in the cfo act are encouraged , but not required , to follow fitara guidelines .

the omb develops and promulgates guidance based on the codified requirements of fitara and monitors agency implementation of that guidance .

additionally , congress monitors the progress of fitara implementation through audits conducted by gao and hearings by relevant house and senate committees .

between fy2010 and fy2015 , gao has made approximately 800 recommendations to omb and agencies to improve acquisition and operations of it .

as of october 2015 , gao reported that about a third of its recommendations had been implemented .

that percentage remained the same in may 2016 .

since fitara was signed into law in december 2014 , the senate has held two hearings and the house has held four hearings on fitara implementation: risky business: examining gao 's 2015 list of high risk government programs senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs ( full committee ) february 11 , 2015 reducing unnecessary duplication in federal programs: billions more could be saved senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs ( full committee ) april 14 , 2015 the role of fitara in reducing it acquisition risk joint hearing: house committee on oversight and government reform ( subcommittees on information technology and government operations ) june 10 , 2015 the role of fitara in reducing it acquisition risk , part ii — measuring agencies' fitara implementation joint hearing: house committee on oversight and government reform ( subcommittees on information technology and government operations ) november 4 , 2015 the federal information technology reform act scorecard 2.0 joint hearing: house committee on oversight and government reform ( subcommittees on information technology and government operations ) may 18 , 2016 federal agencies' reliance on outdated and unsupported information technology house committee on oversight and government reform may 25 , 201 .

the house committee on oversight and government reform released a "fitara scorecard" in conjunction with its november 4 , 2015 , hearing on the status of fitara implementation ( see table 1 ) .

in explaining the scorecard , representative gerry connolly , ranking member of the subcommittee on government operations and co - author of fitara , stated: this scorecard is not intended to be a juridical , prescriptive exercise .

it is an initial assessment , a point in time snapshot , much like a quarterly report card one might get in a university or school .

the intent isn't to punish or stigmatize .

it is , in fact , to exhort and urge agencies to seize this opportunity , and use the scorecard as a management tool to better guide decision making and investments within the agency .

while the grades themselves are illustrative of overall performance , it is the multiple elements that make up the grades on which agencies and our committee will focus to ensure we deliver on the transformative promise of fitara .

the committee scored agencies across four of the seven requirement areas of fitara to develop a final score: data center consolidation plans , planned it portfolio review savings , transparency of it project risk assessment , and incremental development for it projects .

across the four metrics and the final score , agencies earned a total of 14 "a" ratings out of 120 total grades .

the only agencies to get a passing grade in each of the four categories were the department of commerce and the general services administration , which both received overall b ratings .

gao has stated that legislative oversight of agencies and their progress in implementing fitara will continue and perhaps increase during 2016 , as plans and expectations become more concrete .

another issue to be resolved is that omb approved 22 out of 24 agencies' original self - assessments and fitara implementation plans , but gao found that not all of the self - assessments were accurate .

omb imposed an april 30 , 2016 , deadline for agencies to submit updated fitara common baseline self - assessments and gao has reported that as of may 2016 , 22 of the 24 cfo act agencies had made their plans publicly available .

