electromagnetic spectrum refers to electromagnetic waves that , with applied technology , can transmit signals to deliver voice , text , video , and other wireless communications .

electromagnetic spectrum is the entire range of wavelengths or frequencies of electromagnetic radiation extending from gamma rays to the longest radio waves .

as new technologies become perfected and demand for access to spectrum increases , the use of all parts of the electromagnetic range is expanding as well .

common terms used in discussing electromagnetic spectrum include radio frequency spectrum , wireless spectrum , and airwaves .

net proceeds from auctions of spectrum licenses as specified in the spectrum act are directed to the public safety trust fund , created by the act .

some revenue in the public safety trust fund is designated for specific purposes , primarily public safety .

of the initial projected revenue of nearly $28 billion , $20.4 billion was directed for deficit reduction .

additional auction revenues in excess of the projected amount are to be applied to deficit reduction .

proceeds from the sale of licenses of repurposed federal spectrum identified in the spectrum act are to be directed first to the spectrum relocation fund , to cover costs of moving federal users , with the balance going to the public safety trust fund .

proceeds from the sale of advanced wireless service licenses in the other spectrum bands identified by the act are to go directly to the public safety trust fund .

proceeds from the auction of new licenses created by the release of television broadcasting spectrum are to go to cover costs specified in the act , with the balance to the public safety trust fund .

balances remaining in any fund created by the act are to revert to the treasury in 2022 to be used "for the sole purpose of deficit reduction. .

in scoring the spectrum act , cbo had originally projected that net revenue from all three auctions required by the spectrum act would be approximately $30 billion for three auctions .

in order to score a bill that includes the auctioning or reassigning of spectrum licenses the cbo must establish a value for licenses .

three key estimates of value considered by the cbo are quantity of spectrum auctioned ; market value of spectrum ; and net proceeds .

it also considers the historical values of earlier auctions .

spectrum license auctions that were considered in scoring the spectrum act were held during the period fy2001-fy2010 .

they yielded an average mhz - pop of $0.80 , within a range of $0.55 to $1.10 .

weighing these and other factors , the cbo initially projected that spectrum licenses auctioned during the fy2013-fy2021 period would have an average market value of $0.70 per megahertz per person .

the score was subsequently revised slightly upwards to cover the period fy2013-fy2022 .

the results for completed auctions required by the spectrum act , in mhz - pop , are h block , concluded february 2014 ; $0.50 mhz - pop , by a single winning bidder .

aws - 3 , concluded january 2015 ; average $2.21 mhz - pop .

as noted in the section on auction revenue , the cbo later provided a new estimate for the remaining required auction , the broadcast incentive auction .

the expected value for this auction of $25 billion in net proceeds is based on a number of assumptions .

at the time of the estimate , the quantity of spectrum to be auctioned was unknown as was the total amount broadcasters might be paid for relinquishing spectrum .

the cbo reported that it assumed that the mhz - pop value would be similar to the $2.21 average of the aws - 3 .

an estimate in a february 2015 report commissioned by the fcc projected the mhz - pop would average $1.50 .

the spectrum act requires the fcc and the ntia to identify specific bands for auction from spectrum designated for commercial advanced wireless services and for federal use , and in most cases to commence the auction process within three years .

the act mandates spectrum license auctions for frequencies at 1915-1920 mhz ; 1995-2000 mhz ; 2155-2180 mhz ; an additional 15 mhz to be identified by the fcc ; and 15 mhz of spectrum between 1675 and 1710 mhz , subject to conditions in the act .

the secretary of commerce was required to submit a report to the president identifying 15 mhz of spectrum between 1675 and 1710 mhz for reallocation from federal to nonfederal use .

the ntia reaffirmed an initial recommendation to reassign 1695-1710 mhz and submitted a report , as required by the act , recommending that the fcc reallocate the band for commercial use .

the fcc scheduled the first designated auction for january 2014 .

frequencies at 1915-1920 mhz and 1995-2000 mhz , known as the h block , were offered in auction 96 .

the reserve price was set at $1.56 billion , that is , the combined final bids for all licenses offered had to total at least $1.56 billion .

the licenses cover 176 economic areas .

auction 96 was completed on february 27 , 2014 , with a total winning bid of $1.564 billion from dish ( rebranded from dish network ) for all licenses .

on january 30 , 2015 , the fcc completed a second auction ( auction 97 ) , for advanced wireless service ( aws ) spectrum licenses , providing an additional 65 mhz of frequencies to fulfill the congressional mandate for certain auctions by 2015 .

the frequencies cover 1695-1710 mhz ; and paired licenses at 1755-1780 mhz ; and 2155-2180 mhz .

the auction , referred to as aws - 3 , grossed almost $44.9 billion , of which $5.1 billion is to be applied to the costs of relocation or sharing of frequencies now used by the federal government .

there were 31 winning bidders for a total of 1,611 licenses .

at&t reportedly acquired 251 licenses for approximately $10.4 billion ; verizon acquired 181 licenses for approximately $10.4 billion ; and t - mobile received 151 licenses for nearly $1.8 billion .

sprint , the fourth national carrier , did not bid .

dish acquired 702 licenses with a value of $13.3 billion through two joint ventures that had registered as designated entities — snr wireless licenseco. , llc ( 357 licenses ) and northstar wireless , llc ( 345 licenses ) — thereby receiving a discount of over $3 billion .

the fcc subsequently reversed the designated entity status , requiring the companies to pay the full auction price .

the dish affiliates consequently returned roughly 200 licenses , valued at approximately $3.5 billion , and paid penalties for defaulting .

the spectrum act permits the fcc to conduct incentive auctions , that is , to establish a mechanism whereby spectrum capacity may be relinquished for auction by some license - holders , who would then share in the proceeds .

many commercial wireless licenses can be resold directly by their license - holders for comparable uses ; the purpose of incentive auctions is to reward license - holders , such as television broadcasters , for repurposing their spectrum for a different use .

although incentive auctions might be used for other types of license - holders , the act specifically addresses spectrum assignments for over - the - air television broadcasters .

the act establishes procedures and guidelines for the fcc to follow in reallocating television broadcasting spectrum licenses for commercial auction .

through a reverse auction process , the broadcasters are to establish the amount of compensation they are willing to accept for the spectrum they voluntarily release for auction .

additionally , broadcasters that do not voluntarily relinquish spectrum rights , but are required to relocate or incur certain other costs , may be compensated .

in lieu of cash payments as compensation for relocation , broadcasters may choose to accept regulatory relief that would allow new uses for their spectrum .

spectrum voluntarily released by tv broadcasters is to be repurposed for commercial broadband communications , with licenses sold through what the law refers to as a forward auction .

at least one successful reverse auction is required to set minimum prices for a forward auction .

the outcome of the forward auction for spectrum licenses depends on the results of the reverse auction in which the broadcasters agree to the price at which they will release spectrum .

for the results of a forward auction to be valid , auction proceeds must at a minimum cover ( 1 ) payments to broadcasters that relinquished spectrum for auction , ( 2 ) the costs to the fcc of conducting the auctions , and ( 3 ) the estimated costs for relocation of other broadcasters , which are not to exceed $1,750 million , deposited in a tv broadcaster relocation fund for relocation costs .

if auction revenues do not cover costs as specified in the act , the fcc may not assign new licenses , and planned reassignments and reallocations may not occur .

if the reverse auction and forward auction conditions are met , the fcc may "make such reassignments of televisions channels" ( repacking ) as appropriate in its consideration , subject to certain conditions .

examples of conditions include a general prohibition against reassigning licenses to frequencies from one band to a band below an existing assignment , and obligations to determine that a reassigned channel is not adversely affected by cross - border channel assignment agreements with canada and mexico .

the auction and channel reassignment process may only occur once .

the public notice establishing incentive auction bidding procedures was released on august 11 , 2015 .

auction 1000 , as it is called , consists of two parts , as required by the spectrum act: auction 1001 ( reverse ) and auction 1002 ( forward ) .

the notice also describes the process for setting the initial target of spectrum to be cleared in the repurposed 600 mhz band .

among other actions , the fcc also issued an order on reconsideration , reaffirming an earlier report and order that created a "market - based spectrum reserve of up to 30 mhz" to enhance competitive bidding .

based on the amount of spectrum released by the broadcasters , a block of spectrum will be set aside in each market with competitive bidding open to any wireless company deemed not to have national network coverage .

the spectrum pipeline act of 2015 passed as part of the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 , title x ) .

the act requires the ntia to make available 30 mhz of spectrum currently used by federal agencies for licensing on an exclusive or shared basis to nonfederal users .

the frequencies must be located below 3 ghz on the spectrum chart ; must be available in bandwidths of at least 10 mhz ; and may not be within the 1675-1695 mhz range ( primarily used for weather forecasting ) .

not later than january 2022 , the ntia must identify suitable spectrum and begin the process of reallocation .

the fcc must commence the auction proceedings for released federal spectrum by july 2024 .

two additional tranches of spectrum , of 50 mhz each , must be identified by the fcc for nonfederal use , either licensed or unlicensed , in frequencies below 6 ghz .

the fcc is to provide corresponding reports to congressional committees by january 1 , 2022 , and january 1 , 2025 .

the reports are to include an assessment of federal use of these frequencies , where applicable ; a timeline for competitive bidding ; and a proposed plan for balancing licensed and unlicensed use .

the act extends the fcc's auction authority to the end of fy2025 exclusively for the purpose of conducting auctions required by the act .

as regards the federal spectrum relocation fund , the act provides new criteria for the administration of the fund and for eligible uses of the fund .

in particular , the act expands the availability of funding for research and development , engineering studies , economic analysis , and other planning activities that facilitate the efficiency and availability of federal spectrum , among other purposes .

other provisions require reports to congress from the fcc analyzing ( 1 ) the impact of rules changes governing radio frequencies at 3550-3650 mhz and ( 2 ) "proposals to promote and identify additional spectrum bands that can be shared between incumbent uses and new licensed , and unlicensed services under such rules and identification of at least 1 gigahertz between 6 gigahertz and 57 ghz for such use. .

the spectrum act and the spectrum pipeline act address how spectrum resources might be repurposed from federal to commercial use through auction or sharing , and how the cost of such reassignment would be defined and compensated , among other provisions .

to facilitate the transfer of spectrum rights to commercial purchasers from the agencies relinquishing spectrum , the commercial spectrum enhancement act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-494 , title ii ) was amended by the spectrum act , and further amended by the spectrum pipeline act .

in general the amendments deal with describing reimbursable costs and providing guidelines to the office of management and budget , which approves transfers .

the spectrum pipeline act expands the types of reimbursable plans to include agency expenditures not previously considered eligible for reimbursement .

the commercial spectrum enhancement act of 2004 put in place statutory rules for covering the costs to federal agencies of relocating wireless communications facilities to new spectrum assignments .

the act created the spectrum relocation fund to provide a means for federal agencies to recover relocation costs directly from auction proceeds when they are required to vacate spectrum slated for auction .

in effect , successful commercial bidders cover the costs of relocation .

among key provisions of the act were requirements that the auctions must recoup at least 110% of the costs projected by the ntia , and that unused funds would revert to the treasury after eight years .

these provisions remain in effect .

specific frequencies were designated for immediate auction by the commercial spectrum enhancement act but the law was written to apply to any federally used frequencies scheduled for reallocation and possible auction .

the spectrum act required the establishment of a technical panel within the ntia to review transition plans that each federal agency must prepare in accordance with provisions in the act .

the technical panel is required to have three members qualified as a radio engineer or technical expert .

the director of the office of management and budget , the assistant secretary of commerce for communications and information administrator of the ntia , and the chairman of the fcc have been required to appoint one member each .

a full discussion and interpretation of provisions of the act as regards the technical panel and related procedural requirements such as dispute resolution have been published by the ntia as part of the rulemaking process .

the spectrum pipeline act added specific criteria for the technical panel to consider in approving plans , including whether a plan will "increase the net expected auction proceeds in an amount not less than the time value of the amount of the payment.... .

unlicensed spectrum is not sold to the highest bidder and used for the services provided by the license - holder but is instead accessible to anyone using wireless equipment certified by the fcc for those frequencies .

both commercial and noncommercial entities use unlicensed spectrum to meet a wide variety of monitoring and communications needs .

suppliers of wireless devices must meet requirements for certification to operate on frequency bands designated for unlicensed use .

examples of unlicensed use include garage door openers and wi - fi communications .

wi - fi provides wireless internet access for personal computers and handheld devices and is also used by businesses to link computer - based communications within a local area .

links are connected to a high - speed landline either at a business location or through hotspots .

hotspots are typically located in homes or convenient public locations .

implementation of the spectrum act and the spectrum pipeline act raises a number of policy issues such as allocation of spectrum between licensed and unlicensed use and how to structure competitive bidding systems to maximize both competition and innovation .

actions taken by the fcc that are intended to improve competitive access to spectrum include modifying fcc auction rules to provide licenses with smaller area coverage ; encouraging participation by designated entities ; and establishing limitations on the number of licenses available to verizon or at&t .

spectrum caps might limit the amount of spectrum available through auction to the top two carriers in key auctions such as those for repurposed television spectrum .

the spectrum act and the spectrum pipeline act focus on three key policy tools for increasing the availability of radio frequency spectrum for wireless broadband: allocating additional spectrum through competitive auctions ; reassigning federal spectrum for commercial use ; and opening up spectrum for unlicensed use .

the introduction of 5g is expected to develop from current trials to rapid commercial expansion in the period 2020-2025 .

trials for early 5g technologies are scheduled to begin in late 2016 .

initial standards for transitioning existing lte and lte advanced technologies to 5g may be ready as early as 2018 .

expansion plans of the major wireless carriers in general appear to assume an orderly progression in existing technologies for mobile broadband .

however , a number of new spectrum - dependent industries are emerging that include much of the internet of things ( iot ) , such as advanced robotics , autonomous vehicles , cloud computing , and machine - to - machine communications .

many industry experts expect that new — possibly disruptive — technologies will emerge as 5g develops .

many of these technologies are expected to be based on new concepts for network organization and communications and not on existing cellular technology .

in other words , 5g is seen by many as including iot solutions outside mobile broadband .

a recent study estimated that projected worldwide demand for iot in 2020 can be largely met by wi - fi ( 67% ) and by the current development plans for long term evolution ( lte ) and related technologies ( 13% ) , but that 19% cannot be met by current or projected network development plans .

to address this gap between demand and supply , the study concludes that network operators must accelerate the existing trend to 5g as defined by their plans for investment in lte .

an alternative interpretation , using the above projections , is that 19% of the near - term ( 2020 ) market for iot network technologies , therefore , is open for entrepreneurial solutions that may produce an entirely new business model for competition in communications technologies .

it is conceivable that this approximately 20% slice may in the future provide the platform for exponential growth .

this leads to a possibility for a surge in innovation and technological change similar to what experts often attribute to the introduction , development , and commercialization of internet technologies .

assuming that the mobile now or digit acts are enacted , there would still remain a number of gaps in national planning and preparation for the communications technologies of the future .

the digit act , for example , would create a temporary working group that would be required to examine specific policy questions related to the internet of things: spectrum needs ; regulatory environment ; consumer protection ; privacy and security ; and preparedness of federal agencies to adapt future technologies .

the mobile now act would provide mechanisms for the fcc and the ntia to work with federal agencies in identifying federal spectrum that can be licensed or otherwise made available to the commercial sector for mobile broadband .

neither bill provides the framework for public - private collaboration on important factors that might influence the continued success of the united states and its current leadership in technology .

these factors include investment in iot infrastructure ; international negotiations ; programs for technology transfer ; processes to identify , support , and coordinate basic research in 5g for emerging technologies ; consideration of how current fcc rules for auctions might be changed to allow access for new entrants ; protection of intellectual property ; and many other aspects important to competition and innovation .

