in its second session , the 114 th congress has considered whether and how to provide funds to control the spread of the zika virus throughout the americas .

zika infection , primarily spread by aedes mosquitoes and sexual contact , has been linked to severe birth defects and other health concerns .

local transmission of the zika virus has occurred in american samoa , puerto rico , the u.s. virgin islands , and south florida .

travel - associated cases of zika infection have been reported in nearly every state , with the largest numbers of cases reported in california , florida , new york , and texas .

federal efforts to address the outbreak include research on the infection and its effects , mosquito control measures , efforts to develop a vaccine , and public service messaging about preventing infection .

the public health focus , both domestically and elsewhere in the americas , is to protect pregnant women from infection and , thereby , to prevent potentially severe birth defects .

administration officials and some in congress are concerned about the resources needed to prevent the spread of zika infections as the number of imported cases in the united states grows .

this report discusses the administration's actions on zika response funding , including its request for fy2016 supplemental appropriations for the zika response , and reprogramming of existing funds to pay for response activities .

it also discusses the supplemental appropriations measures for zika response that were considered by congress , and the funding ultimately enacted .

a detailed summary of the administration's supplemental request is provided in appendix a .

information about unobligated ebola supplemental funds is presented in appendix b .

appendix c provides a glossary of acronyms used in tables in this report .

this report incorporates all information from crs report r44549 , supplemental appropriations for zika response: the fy2016 conference agreement in brief , with no substantive changes .

that crs report is no longer available .

between may and september 2016 , supplemental funding for zika response received floor consideration in both the house and the senate .

congress resolved its consideration of zika funding on september 28 , 2016 , when the senate and house passed h.r .

5325 , the "continuing appropriations and military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations act , 2017 , and zika response and preparedness act.' .

this vehicle incorporated appropriations for military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies ( division a ) ; $1.1 billion in fy2016 zika supplemental funding ( division b ) ; a short - term continuing resolution ( cr ) for fy2017 that would fund remaining government operations through december 9 , 2016 ( division c ) ; and a number of rescissions ( division d ) .

the president signed the bill on september 29 , 2016 .

congress considered and advanced several zika supplemental funding proposals before passing h.r .

5325 .

this section presents the key legislative proposals , including the following: h.r .

5243 , the zika response appropriations act , 2016 , as passed in the house on may 18 , 2016 ; h.r .

2577 , division b , the zika response appropriations act , 2016 as passed in the senate on may 19 , 2016 ; h.rept .

114-640 , the conference report filed on june 22 , 2016 , which was adopted in the house but not the senate , and which included the zika response and preparedness appropriations act , 2016 ( division b ) and associated proposed rescissions ( division d ) .

 ( division a , military construction and veterans affairs and related agencies appropriations for fy2017 , is not discussed in this crs report .

also , division c , the environmental protection agency's regulation of water pollution and pesticides , is not discussed this crs report .

 ) ; and h.r .

5325 , as passed by both chambers on september 28 , 2016 , specifically zika funding in division b , and certain rescissions in division d. this crs report does not discuss military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations for fy2017 ( division a ) or the short - term cr for fy2017 ( division c ) .

this crs report does not track proposals for zika response spending in fy2017 regular appropriations bills , which may still receive congressional consideration .

table 1 , below , compares amounts for response to the zika outbreak proposed in the administration's supplemental request , and in each of the four legislative vehicles listed above .

table 2 compares selected provisions in these measures that affect the timing , purpose , and use of the funds , or provide other related authorities .

these tables incorporate tables 1 and 2 from crs report r44549 , supplemental appropriations for zika response: the fy2016 conference agreement in brief , with no substantive changes .

for more information about the zika virus outbreak , see crs report r44595 , zika virus in the western hemisphere: crs products .

see also the following web pages on the zika outbreak: centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , https: / / www.cdc.gov / zika / ; world health organization ( who ) , http: / / www.who.int / topics / zika / en / ; and pan american health organization ( paho ) , http: / / www.paho.org / hq / index.php ? option=com_content&view=article&id=11585&itemid=41688&lang=en .

appendix a .

summary of the emergency supplemental appropriations request for zika response efforts the following describes the administration's february 2016 zika emergency supplemental request components by agency .

it was reported on april 18 that the administration submitted a revised zika supplemental request to congress , which would maintain departmental request totals , while redirecting some of the hhs funds requested for contingency use to vaccine research and development at the national institutes of health ( nih ) .

detailed information about this is not publicly available , and the following narrative does not reflect this revision .

health and human services the administration's emergency supplemental appropriations request to respond to the zika outbreak seeks for hhs a total of $1.509 billion .

each hhs agency request includes the statement that funds would be "to prevent , prepare for , and respond to zika virus , other vector - borne diseases , or other infectious diseases and related health outcomes , domestically and internationally...." most of the requested funds would support research , surveillance , vaccine and test development , and various domestic preparedness activities .

a portion would support international response activities .

the request proposes that all supplemental appropriations to hhs be designated as emergency spending , and remain available until expended .

centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) a total of $828 million of the february 2016 request is for the cdc - wide activities and program support account .

proposed request language would , among other things , authorize the cdc director to transfer funds between cdc accounts , and authorize funds to be used for real property acquisition and improvements to non - federal facilities .

funds would be used as follows: grants and technical assistance to puerto rico and u.s .

territories — $225 million to , among other purposes , monitor pregnant women and establish a registry of women infected while pregnant ; expand mosquito control activities ; and enhance laboratory testing capacity .

domestic response — $453 million to provide grants to southern and other u.s. states with aedes mosquitoes for surveillance , improved test methods and testing capacity , public education and outreach , mosquito control measures in areas at risk , and additional federal and state response activities .

international response activities — $150 million to expand the public health workforce , and enhance infectious disease surveillance and emergency response activities , in zika - affected countries ; and to support the laboratory network of the pan american health organization ( paho ) , the regional arm of the world health organization ( who ) for the americas .

public health and social services emergency fund ( phssef ) the phssef is a fund used by appropriators to provide the hhs secretary with ongoing or one - time emergency funding , such as for the response to disease epidemics .

the emergency supplemental request seeks $295 million for the phssef for the following: several maternal and child health and home visitation programs for low - income pregnant women at risk of zika infection , and families that have children born with birth defects related to zika infection ; several health care workforce assistance programs for puerto rico and other territories ; and compensation for persons harmed by the use of tests or vaccines used under emergency authority .

the requested phssef funds could , in consultation with omb , be transferred to other agencies within hhs or across the federal government .

the request stated that this transfer authority is to provide flexibility in response to changing needs .

no congressional notification requirement is included .

national institutes of health ( nih ) the emergency supplemental request seeks $130 million for the nih national institute of allergy and infectious diseases ( niaid ) to expand research efforts to characterize the progression and effects of zika infection and other vector - borne diseases , and to develop vaccines against them .

proposed request language would authorize the nih director to transfer funds between nih accounts .

no congressional notification requirement is included .

food and drug administration ( fda ) the emergency supplemental request seeks $10 million for fda's role in reviewing the safety and effectiveness of medical countermeasures ( such as test methods , vaccines , and treatments ) , and post - market monitoring of such countermeasures if and when they become available .

medicaid funding for territories the emergency supplemental request would temporarily increase the federal matching rate for medicaid in the territories .

the territories operate medicaid programs under different rules from those that apply to the 50 states and the district of columbia .

federal medicaid funding to the states and the district of columbia is open - ended , but the territories receive capped annual allotments ( i.e. , the maximum amount of federal funds available in a year ) .

in addition , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) provides the territories with additional federal medicaid funding to use by september 30 , 2019 .

the territories have a federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) rate ( i.e. , federal matching rate ) for medicaid of 55% .

the supplemental request includes a provision that would increase the fmap rate for the territories to 65% for one year beginning with the first day of the fiscal quarter following enactment .

this increased fmap rate would be available for all medicaid expenditures , not limited to those provided to treat zika infection .

the federal funding for the increased fmap rate would not count against the territories' annual federal spending caps or additional aca funding .

the administration estimates this fmap rate increase would cause federal medicaid expenditures to grow by $246 million .

there is some question about how this provision would affect puerto rico if it were to exhaust its additional aca funding prior to fy2019 .

depending on the timing of enactment , puerto rico might not have access to its full annual medicaid allotments or additional aca funding for a portion of the time the provision would be in effect .

retroactive reimbursement the request proposes language that would allow funds provided in the act to be used to reimburse hhs accounts for zika response expenses incurred prior to enactment .

transfer authority the request proposes language that would allow funds appropriated to hhs in the act to be transferred to other federal accounts , including the department of defense , the environmental protection agency , and the department of agriculture , "to prevent , prepare for , and respond to zika virus , other vector - borne diseases , or other infectious diseases and related health outcomes , domestically and internationally....," following consultation with omb .

no congressional notification requirement is included .

expanded definition of "security countermeasure" the request proposes language that would allow the government to support the advanced development and procurement of medical countermeasures against zika virus through project bioshield .

currently , project bioshield supports only countermeasures against specific chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear terrorist threats .

the proposed expansion is not limited to countermeasures against the zika virus or vector - borne diseases , but rather is stated broadly as a "countermeasure to diagnose , mitigate , prevent , or treat harm from any infectious disease that may pose a threat to the public health. .

international assistance programs the administration's february 2016 emergency supplemental appropriations request to respond to the zika outbreak seeks for the department of state and usaid a total of $376.1 million .

this includes funds for control of the disease , prevention , surveillance , evacuating u.s. employees and american citizens , vaccine development , and diagnostic research , among other things .

specifically within the international assistance section of the request is a request for transfer authority ( without a requirement for congressional notification ) with certain limitations , reimbursement authority , and hiring of personal services contractors , as well as authorization to use unobligated ebola balances to combat zika and other infectious diseases .

also worth noting is that , unlike hhs , funds for international assistance programs have varying periods of availability , as specified below .

department of state a total of $41.1 million is requested for the department of state operations , multilateral assistance within international organizations and programs ( io&p ) , and international security assistance ( nuclear research and techniques ) as follows: diplomatic and consular programs account ( d&cp ) — $14.6 million to remain available until september 30 , 2017 .

of this amount $8.4 million is to support the office of medical services for medical support and possible evacuation under the chief of mission authority of at - risk u.s. employees in zika - affected countries ; and $6.2 million is to support regional coordination efforts and public diplomacy outreach , among other activities .

emergencies in the diplomatic and consular service — $4 million to remain available until expended to support response efforts , including potential evacuation of u.s. citizens .

repatriation loans program — $1 million to remain available until expended to finance repatriation loans to u.s. citizens who may seek to leave zika - affected areas or who have been exposed to or have contracted zika .

nonproliferation , anti - terrorism , demining and related programs ( nadr ) — $8 million to remain available until september 30 , 2017 , for additional voluntary u.s. contributions to the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) , an autonomous intergovernmental organization related to the united nations that promotes the safe , secure , and peaceful use of nuclear technologies .

funds would support zika research to develop and deploy nuclear techniques to help accelerate diagnosis , provide related specialized training , and to implement sterile insect projects to suppress mosquito populations .

international organizations and programs ( io&p ) — $13.5 million to remain available until september 30 , 2017 , to support zika response actions taken by unicef , the food and agriculture organization , the who , and paho .

usaid for the u.s. agency for international development , the administration is requesting $335 million to cover usaid's health programs and implementation expenses: usaid operating expenses ( oe ) — $10 million to remain available until september 30 , 2017 , to support zika response efforts .

global health programs ( ghp ) — $325 million to remain available until expended to prevent , treat , or respond to the zika virus and related health concerns , other vector - borne diseases , or other infectious diseases .

multi - year funding commitments are requested to provide incentives for the development of global technologies such as vaccines , diagnostics equipment , and vector control innovations .

anticipated allocations include $100 million to implement vector management and control activities in zika - affected countries ; $100 million to stimulate private sector research and development of vaccines , diagnostics , and vector control innovations through public - private partnerships ; $50 million for maternal and child health support in affected and at - risk countries , including training of health care workers ; ensuring access to family planning information , services , and methods ; providing support for children with microcephaly ; and helping pregnant women and their partners have access to personal protection , including condoms and repellant to protect against mosquitoes ; $25 million for public health communication and behavior change campaigns for affected communities and countries to take actions to protect themselves from zika and other vector - borne diseases ; and $50 million to issue global health security grand challenges that would call for groundbreaking innovations in diagnostics , vector control , personal protection , community engagement and surveillance , and other tools to address zika and other infectious diseases , as well as to develop public - private partnerships to accelerate development of innovative tools and practices .

use of ebola balances for other infectious diseases within the department of state and other international programs general provisions ( in addition to the general provisions for the entire request ) , the supplemental request would authorize the use of unobligated ebola funds ( title ix , div .

j , p.l .

113-235 ) , stating: "[unobligated ebola funds] shall also be available to respond to the zika virus and related health outcomes , other vector - borne diseases , or other infectious diseases. .

as of january 1 , 2016 , the department of state / usaid's unobligated ebola funds totaled nearly $1.3 billion .

of that total , about $600 million is available until september 30 , 2016 , and about $694 million is available until expended .

 ( see the subsequent section , " hhs , state / usaid , and dod unobligated ebola response funds ." ) .

transfer authority the department of state and other international programs general provisions in the supplemental request would allow transfer of state department - related funds in the request only among state department - related accounts within the request and transfer of usaid - related funds in the request only among usaid - related accounts .

no congressional notification requirement is included .

notwithstanding authority the supplemental's request for notwithstanding authority could allow funds from this or prior acts supporting the u.s. zika virus response to be expended despite any previously enacted restrictions and conditions on u.s. foreign aid .

for example , if enacted , this authority could allow foreign aid to be provided to states that are otherwise restricted by law: those designated as sponsors of terrorism , those with debt arrearage , human rights violators , or states that practice coercive family planning .

the department of state has indicated in the global health program ( ghp ) section , however , that funds will provide support for "ensuring access to voluntary family planning information , services , and methods. .

direct hiring authority / personal services contractors the general provisions title in the request , and also the general provisions title for the department of state and other international programs , allows for expedited hiring authority to directly hire staff during critical public health threats , such as zika , and to enter into contracts with individuals who are experts in zika - related fields .

this measure does not limit direct hiring or personal services contractors only for zika - related purposes .

this authority for direct hiring and personal services contractors could be used in a broader set of public health circumstances than the zika virus .

appendix b. hhs , state / usaid , and dod unobligated ebola response funds in december 2014 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l .

113-235 ) , provided $5.4 billion in emergency supplemental appropriations to hhs , the departments of state and defense , and usaid to address the ebola outbreak that began in west africa in january 2014 .

because these funds were designated as emergency appropriations , they are effectively exempt from spending limits in the budget control act of 2011 ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) .

on april 6 , 2016 , the obama administration announced its plan to reprogram $510 million of unobligated fy2015 ebola funding to respond to the zika virus .

hhs ebola funds may be reprogrammable without additional congressional action ( subject to existing restrictions on reprogramming , including notification ) .

this is because the relevant appropriations measures stated the funds are available for ebola and other infectious diseases .

some have debated whether congressional action is necessary to provide the department of state and usaid with the authority to reprogram the unobligated ebola funds , as much of the funding was appropriated with specific language to be used to "prevent , prepare for , or respond to the ebola disease outbreak. .

table b - 1 provides , by account , the original appropriated ebola funds , remaining ( unobligated ) amounts , the period of funding availability , and purpose of the funds , based on quarterly reports to congress as required by the law .

as of january 1 , 2016 , unobligated ebola funds totaled $2.77 billion: $1.46 billion for hhs , $1.29 billion for state / usaid , and $17.3 million for defense .

a portion of the total , $652.9 million — most of which is usaid funding — expires september 30 , 2016 .

nearly all of the remaining unobligated funds expire september 30 , 2019 , or are available until expended .

table b - 1 does not incorporate the administration's announced plans to reprogram $510 million of unobligated ebola funds .

appendix c. glossar .

