telehealth is "the use of electronic information and telecommunications technologies to support long - distance clinical health care , patient and professional health - related education , public health and health administration. .

videoconferencing , store - and - forward imaging , and remote monitoring are some examples of telehealth applications .

th ough "telehealth" may refer to non - clinical services that are provided remotely , such as training , administrative meetings , and continuing education , some individuals may use the term "telemedicine" to describe the use of telecommunications technologies in clinical situations that include patient diagnosis , prescriptions , and treatment at a distance .

the 114 th congress has witnessed the introduction of a number of telehealth - related pieces of legislation that address a wide range of issues that have the potential to impact access to , along with the cost and quality of care under various federal programs , including medicare .

in recent years , the federal government has embarked on various initiatives to increase access to telehealth services ( as well as to improve the underlying technological infrastructure that supports telehealth ) at more than 20 federal agencies .

examples of this agency activity include: the department of veterans affairs ( va ) supported more than 2.1 million telehealth visits to veterans in fy2015 .

the department of defense ( dod ) reported more than 34,000 telehealth visits and store - and - forward consultations at military installations in more than 30 countries and territories in fy2013 .

the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) ( of the department of health human services ( hhs ) ) reported a total of $17.6 million in medicare ( part b ) payments to providers for 192,692 telehealth visits in cy2015 .

trends in telehealth access , utilization , and innovation indicate that sustained interest is likely among health insurance plans , institutions , and major decisionmakers .

for example , market analysts predict that: private insurers are likely to increase the number of plans that include telehealth services for their enrollees .

institution - to - institution contracts could lead to greater willingness by patients to pay out - of - pocket for telehealth services they perceive to be convenient and valuable .

examples of these contracts are an arrangement between a large hospital and a rural hospital to provide neurologist services via telemedicine , or an arrangement between a clinical consulting group for a second opinion and an academic medical center or hospital wherein the members of consulting groups provide subspecialty consulting to the physicians at the hospital .

alternative payment models for reimbursement and coverage are likely to expand during 2016 .

though providers are using telehealth to overcome barriers to health care access created by geography and time , the evidence - base for its use , including issues related to cost and quality , are strong in some areas and weak in others .

for example , the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) reports that there is evidence that telehealth is effective for certain types of chronic conditions ( such as diabetes , heart disease and conditions such as behavioral health ) .

also , ahrq describes how telehealth applications may lead to improvements in health outcomes , and reductions in health care costs , such as fewer hospitalizations and fewer emergency room visits , but these findings have not been tested for all telehealth settings .

on the other hand , more robust evidence is not yet available in relation to telehealth and various medical specialties according to ahrq and the institute of medicine ( iom ) .

among the questions that are in need of more evidence: what is the patient telehealth experience regarding safety , effectiveness , timeliness , and overall access to health care ? .

which cost and quality measures support telehealth applications in primary care and urgent care populations , and which are cost drivers for public health insurance programs , such as medicare and medicaid ? .

this report describes telehealth activities at selected federal agencies , and the evidence available to assess telehealth through the lenses of health care access , cost , and quality .

in this report , a ccess refers to telehealth tools and systems that address behavioral , social and , environmental determinants of health and deliver high quality care ; cost is associated with telehealth interventions that impact the cost of health care for individuals , families , employers , and government ; and quality is associated with telehealth initiatives that improve the overall quality of care by resulting in health care that is more patient - centered , reliable , accessible and safe .

telecommunications systems along with federal and state licensure policies also impact access , cost and quality , but their discussion is beyond the scope of this report ( telecommunications issues are briefly discussed in appendix d ) .

current laws , policies , and guidance present a range of descriptions for telehealth and the related term telemedicine , reflecting a need for clarity and distinction .

for example , the office of the national coordinator for health information technology ( onc ) distinguishes between telemedicine and telehealth , with telemedicine being a function of interactions that involve clinical decisionmaking .

the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) makes a distinction among technologies that support telehealth , noting that the technologies are not treatments in and of themselves but are the means for delivering health care in different formats , such as remote patient monitoring , videoconferencing , internet applications , and devices .

within the va , the veterans health administration ( vha ) notes that telehealth technologies may include single or combined uses of: videoconferencing , mobile technologies , store - and forward technology ( or asynchronous communication ) .

cms , under the medicare program , acknowledges that some health plans under its medicare advantage ( ma ) program conduct health services by telephone , over the internet , or via telemonitoring for selected medicare beneficiaries .

under the medicaid program , states use the terms "telemedicine" or "telehealth" interchangeably .

some state laws explicitly define the terms , and place restrictions within the definition , such as the exclusion of email , phone , or fax from the definition .

other states may use "telehealth" to reflect a broader definition , and use "telemedicine" to define the delivery of clinical services .

these and other distinctions are important not merely for semantic reasons but because they have implications for federal policies that impact access , cost and / or quality .

for example , the medicare statute delineates boundaries for "telehealth" reimbursement , and the regulation specifies the conditions under which medicare makes a payment to a provider for services delivered via telehealth technologies .

an acknowledgment of these differences , which may or may not result in uniformity , may be significant for policy decisions that involve telehealth and telemedicine .

fedtel , a workgroup supported by the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , consists of 26 federal agencies that invest in , or maintain an interest in , various telehealth activities .

this section describes telehealth at three federal agencies that are directly involved with telehealth and patient care , and one agency that oversees the nation's largest program for health insurance financing .

as noted earlier , issues such as the telecommunications infrastructure that supports the delivery of telehealth services ( see appendix d ) or legal matters such as state licensure portability for providers of telehealth services , while important , are beyond the scope of this report which is focused solely on health policy , financing , and service delivery related matters .

there is growing use of and payment for telehealth - related services among a number of federally funded health programs – at the va , dod , the ihs , and by the medicare program to name a few .

all have been adopters ( or payers ) of various technologies and services to aid in the delivery of care to their respective patient populations .

however , despite the level of interest and evidence that telehealth is a viable vehicle for delivering certain services to some populations , there remain a number of issues where evidence is insufficient to address key issues related to access , quality and cost of care .

the issues are often inter - related since how much a program or service may cost is related to how accessible a program or service is to the target population .

if a service significantly increases the utilization of certain services , the question arises as to what is the downstream impact on the costs of care within a particular program .

some may argue that earlier interventions and diagnoses using telehealth could help to avoid major expenses in the future by better managing chronic conditions .

conversely , others may argue that increasing access will only add more spending and not less to an already expensive health care system by making such services more readily available to beneficiaries and consumers .

more research is needed in different programs and settings to better inform questions of the impact of increasing access to care via telehealth on cost effectiveness and cost savings when telehealth services are employed .

similarly , the quality of telehealth services needs additional study for a variety of services , programs , and populations .

is the quality of care and the outcomes associated with that care of greater , lesser or equal value when compared to traditional , brick - and - mortar care ? .

there will be no single , one - size fits all answer to issues of quality .

but additional research is needed to answer questions about the impact of these programs on key measures of quality , particularly at a time when there are increased calls to expand the use of telehealth across a number of federal programs as well as efforts to more directly tie reimbursement to quality / performance outcomes .

finally , issues of uniformity in terminology could be the subject of further exploration .

specifically how the terms "telehealth" and "telemedicine" are used across federally funded health programs and if any differences in definitions result in problems associated with data collection , evaluation , and payment .

appendix a. definitions of related terms appendix b. fedtel membership fedtel consists of representatives of federal agencies , or departments and programs within those agencies , with an interest or activity in telemedicine .

the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , coordinates fedtel .

the following is a list of current members .

agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) department of agriculture ( usda ) department of labor ( dol ) department of the army ( telemedicine & advanced technology research center [tatrc] ) department of the army ( army medical department ( amedd ) ) department of the navy national center for telehealth & technology ( t2 ) department of transportation ( dot ) department of veterans affairs ( va ) federal bureau of prisons ( bop ) federal communications commission ( fcc ) food and drug administration ( fda ) health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) indian health service ( ihs ) international trade administration ( ita ) national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) national institutes of health ( nih ) national institute of justice ( nij ) national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) national science foundation ( nsf ) office of the assistant secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) office of the national coordinator for health information technology ( onc ) substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) appendix c. aca and telehealth the aca created several incentives for telehealth advancement , mainly through medicare and medicaid pilots and programs .

although some of these aca provisions do not explicitly mention telehealth , they provide support for using telehealth - related technologies .

some of the provisions have received funding .

although several provisions could include a role for telehealth , that information is not yet available .

aca sections 3021 , 3022 , 3024 , 6407 , and 10328 explicitly allow telehealth technologies to be incorporated in and assessed through the grant making process .

for example , grants under sections 3021 and 3024 encourage the design and implementation of health care delivery models to support cost - reductions , quality and efficiency in the medicare , medicaid and schip programs .

sec .

3021 .

center for medicare and medicaid innovation ( cmmi ) .

this funding initiative supports testing for innovative health care payment and service delivery models that have the potential to reduce spending for medicare , medicaid , and chip while maintaining or improving the quality of care for program beneficiaries .

sec .

3022 medicare shared savings program .

under the shared savings program , administered by cmmi , eligible accountable care organizations ( acos ) qualify for an annual incentive bonus if they achieve a threshold savings amount established for the three - year agreement period .

the program seeks to facilitate coordination and cooperation among providers to improve the quality of care for medicare fee - for - service beneficiaries and reduce unnecessary costs .

while telehealth systems are explicitly permitted as a tool that aco groups may use to define processes that promote evidence - based medicine , it is uncertain if any funded projects are incorporating them .

sec .

3024 .

independence at home demonstration program .

this provision of the aca authorizes demonstration projects on the coordination of care , expenditures , access to care , and quality of care .

this demonstration tests the use of teams that use telehealth to provide home - based care to chronically - ill patients through telehealth systems .

sec .

6407 .

face - to - face encounter with patient required before physicians may certify eligibility for home health services or durable medical equipment under medicare .

physicians must have a face - to - face encounter ( including through telehealth ) with the patient before issuing a certification or re - certification for home health services or durable medical equipment .

sec .

10328 .

improvement in part d medication therapy management programs ( mtm ) .

part d sponsors will be required to include in their mtm programs an annual comprehensive medication review , furnished in person or using telehealth technologies , and provide follow - up interventions as warranted .

appendix d. telehealth and telecommunications telehealth systems and networks rely on broadband , as well as specialized health equipment and advanced telecommunications .

fcc officials state that [b]roadband is essential to 21 st century health care , saving lives , improving the quality of care , and reducing costs by providing instant remote access over high - speed networks to medical specialists , health care records and training .

telemedicine applications provided over robust broadband networks can facilitate immediate diagnoses and care needed to prevent lasting damage to stroke victims , prevent premature births and deliver psychiatric treatment for patients in rural areas , to name a few examples .

this appendix describes support for telehealth through broadband and telecommunications programs within the following four agencies / departments: ( 1 ) federal communications commission ; ( 2 ) department of commerce ; ( 3 ) united states department of agriculture ; and ( 4 ) department of health and human services .

federal communications commission ( fcc ) the fcc is the primary authority in the united states for communications law , regulation , and technological innovation .

it regulates interstate and international communications activities connected with broadband programs , as well as television , cable and other communications media , and supports telehealth activities through various initiatives , including program funding and interagency coordination .

the telecommunications act of 1996 authorized the rural health care program .

with funding capped at $400 million annually ( from the universal service fund ) , the rural health care program continues to seek improvements in health care quality for patients in rural communities by ensuring that eligible health providers have access to telecommunications and broadband services .

the rural health care program is made up of three programs: the healthcare connect fund , the telecommunications program , and the rural health care pilot program .

the healthcare connect fund , established in 2012 , aims to increase access to broadband for health care providers , especially those serving rural areas ; foster development and deployment of broadband health care networks ; and maximize cost - effectiveness of the fcc's universal service health care program .

the rhc telecommunications program , established in 1997 , ensures that rural health care providers pay no more than their urban counterparts for telecommunications services .

the rural health care pilot program , established in 2006 , has funded up to 85% of the costs associated with deploying broadband health care networks .

as of 2015 , it supported nearly 50 active pilot projects , but this ongoing program is closed to new applicants .

in 2010 , the fcc recommended that hhs make arrangements with private insurers that contract with medicare to receive tax credits for providing telehealth services to medicare beneficiaries , but this recommendation has not yet been implemented .

in 2014 , the fcc created a new connect2health task force , seeking to support ongoing health telecommunications activities within the agency , and to provide an umbrella for all fcc health - oriented activities , including broadband adoption and health it promotion .

since march 2014 the task force has led various activities at the local and national / federal level , such as roundtables in a "beyond the beltway" series of meetings , and has collaborated in a series of health technology related events with the food and drug administration .

the fcc and the onc plan to increase broadband access in support of health care through 2020 .

united states department of commerce the department of commerce supports telehealth primarily through grants to institutions for projects , and secondarily through collaborations with other federal agencies .

although its statutory mission is silent on an explicit telehealth role , the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) oversees the broadband technology opportunities program ( btop ) , which was established by arra .

arra appropriated $4.7 billion for ntia to establish btop to increase broadband access and adoption , provide broadband access , training and support to health care providers as well as to schools , libraries , and other organizations .

ntia reports that telehealth project grants were awarded under competitive grants through btop , some amounting to $250 million or more for innovative programs that encourage sustainable broadband service .

btop reports ongoing progress as well as impediments .

for example , during 2014 , btop reported 224 active awards .

however , btop also reported that impediments such as lack of award acceptance , voluntary project termination and material noncompliance with grant terms and conditions are among the reasons for award cancellations or terminations .

united states department of agriculture the united states department of agriculture ( usda ) administers telecommunications telehealth grants through two major programs: the distance learning and telemedicine ( dlt ) program and the community connect program .

the dlt program funds institutions to support advanced telecommunications in health care and education in rural communities , and is designed specifically to assist rural communities that would otherwise be without access to learning and medical services over the internet .

it provides: direct loans and project grants to corporations or partnerships , indian tribes or tribal organizations , state or local units of government , consortia , and private for - profit or not - for profit corporations and other eligible entities .

awards grants to eligible institutions for acquiring new instructional programming that is a capital asset for acquiring telehealth equipment , as well as for facilities and services that advance telehealth ; and awards grants for providing technical assistance and develop instructional material related to project implementation .

the community connect program , whose primary objective is to expand broadband services to rural communities , provides financial assistance to state and local governments , federally - recognized tribes , non - profit organizations and for - profit corporations in rural areas that lack a minimum broadband speed connection .

funds may be used to construct , acquire , or lease facilities that deploy broadband service ; improve , expand , construct , or acquire a community center and provide computer access points ; and finance bandwidth cost for service at critical community facilities ( such as public medical clinics , public hospitals and public colleges and public universities ) for two years .

department of health and human services the hhs's portfolio of telehealth activities spans several agencies .

for example , the onc coordinates some telehealth - related activities throughout hhs .

hrsa and the office of the assistant secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) each develop policy for emergency preparedness , including telehealth capabilities that enable responders to communicate with authorities during a public emergency .

additional agencies such as the national institutes of health , ahrq , cdc and the food and drug administration ( fda ) are applying telehealth functions within the scope of their agency missions .

of note , the office for the advancement of telehealth ( oat ) manages the following five types of telehealth grant programs that support telehealth coordination and telehealth networks: telehealth network grant program ( tngp ) includes funding projects that demonstrate the use of telehealth networks to increase access to health services for medically underserved populations .

telehealth resource center grant program ( trc ) helps with coordinating telehealth organizations that serve rural and underserved communities throughout the country by providing technical assistance to those organizations .

licensure portability grant program ( lpgp ) helps institutions and states improve clinical licensure coordination across state lines .

grants through lpgp have supported recent licensure portability studies for groups of physicians and nurses .

evidence - based tele - emergency network grant program eb - tngp grants aim to expand access to care in remote emergency departments for rural patients and providers and to determine the effectiveness of that care .

for example , a grant in fy2014 supported implementation and evaluation of broad telehealth networks to deliver emergency department consultation services via telehealth to rural and community providers without emergency care specialists .

rural child poverty telehealth network grant program rcp - tngp is a three - year pilot program to support established telehealth networks to develop innovative ways to address the unique health care challenges faced by children living in impoverished rural areas .

appendix e. list of acronym .

