the united states has gradually shifted its formal drug policy from a punishment - focused model toward a more comprehensive approach — it is now one that focuses on prevention , treatment , and enforcement .

the obama administration stated that it coordinated "an unprecedented government - wide public health and public safety approach to reduce drug use and its consequences. .

in its fy2018 budget request , the trump administration requested funds for both public health and public safety efforts to combat the opioid epidemic .

the proliferation of drug courts in american criminal justice fits this new comprehensive model .

broadly , these specialized court programs are designed to divert some individuals away from traditional criminal justice sanctions such as incarceration .

many drug courts offer a treatment and social service alternative for those who otherwise may have faced traditional criminal sanctions for their offenses .

in some drug courts , individuals that have been arrested are diverted from local courts into special judge - involved programs ; these courts are often viewed as "second chance" courts .

other drug court programs offer reentry assistance after an offender has served his or her sentence .

according to some research , these courts help save on overall criminal justice costs , provide treatment for defendants / offenders with substance abuse issues , and help offenders avoid rearrest .

this report will explain ( 1 ) the concept of a "drug court," ( 2 ) how the term and programs have expanded to include wider meanings and serve additional subgroups , ( 3 ) how the federal government supports drug courts , and ( 4 ) research on the impact of drug courts on offenders and court systems .

in addition , it briefly discusses how drug courts might provide an avenue for addressing the opioid epidemic and other emerging drug issues that congress may consider .

the term "drug courts" refers to specialized court programs that present an alternative to the traditional court process for certain criminal defendants and offenders .

traditionally , these individuals are first - time , nonviolent offenders who are known to abuse drugs and / or alcohol .

while there are additional specialized goals for different types of drug courts ( eg , veterans drug courts , tribal drug courts , and family drug courts ) , the overall goals of adult and juvenile drug courts are to reduce recidivism and substance abuse .

drug court programs may exist at various points in the justice system , but they are often employed postarrest as an alternative to traditional criminal justice processing .

figure 1 illustrates a deferred prosecution , pretrial drug court model where defendants are diverted into drug court prior to pleading to a criminal charge .

in many drug court programs , participants have the option to participate in the program .

figure 2 illustrates a postadjudication model where defendants must plead guilty to charges ( as part of a plea deal ) in order to participate in the drug court program .

upon completion of this type of program , their sentences may be amended or waived , and in some jurisdictions , their offenses may be expunged .

these diagrams illustrate two common models of drug courts , but other models ( or variations on the above ) have been developed around the country .

for example , some drug court referrals may come as a condition of probation .

many drug courts , including some federal drug court programs , are actually reentry programs that assist a drug - addicted prisoner with reentering the community while receiving treatment for substance abuse .

while drug courts vary in composition and target population , they generally have a comprehensive model involving offender screening and assessment of risks and needs , judicial interaction , monitoring ( eg , drug and alcohol testing ) and supervision , graduated sanctions and incentives , and treatment and rehabilitation services .

drug courts are usually managed by a team of individuals from ( 1 ) criminal justice , ( 2 ) social work , and ( 3 ) treatment service .

drug courts typically utilize a multiphase treatment approach including a stabilization phase , an intensive treatment phase , and a transition phase .

the stabilization phase may include a period of detoxification , initial treatment assessment , and education , as well as additional screening for other needs .

the intensive treatment phase typically involves counseling and other therapy .

finally , the transition phase could emphasize a variety of reintegration components including social integration , employment , education , and housing .

the federal government has demonstrated growing support for the drug court model primarily through financial support of drug court programs , research , and various drug court initiatives .

jurisdictions have sought to utilize drug courts to treat individuals' drug addictions , lower recidivism rates for drug - involved offenders , and lower costs associated with processing these defendants and offenders .

since the inception of drug courts , a great deal of research has been done to evaluate their effectiveness and their impact on offenders , the criminal justice system , and the community .

much of the research yields positive outcomes .

over the last decade , the national institute of justice , through its crimesolutions.gov evaluation program , has evaluated 21 drug court programs and found that 19 of them had either "effective" or "promising" ratings while two had ratings of "no effects. .

most reported positive results for recidivism outcomes .

for cost evaluations , only some programs had these data and these evaluations showed mixed results .

some programs showed significant cost savings while others had insignificant findings for cost impacts .

several studies have demonstrated that drug courts may lower recidivism rates and / or lower costs for processing defendants and offenders compared to traditional criminal justice processing .

for example , one group of researchers examined the impact of a drug court over 10 years and concluded that treatment and other costs associated with the drug court ( investment costs ) per offender were $1,392 less than investment costs of traditional criminal justice processing .

in addition , savings due to reduced recidivism ( outcome costs ) for drug court participants were more than $79 million over the 10-year period .

a collaboration of researchers conducted a five - year longitudinal study of 23 drug courts from several regions of the united states and reported that drug court participants were significantly less likely than nonparticipants to relapse into drug use and participants committed fewer criminal acts than nonparticipants after completing the drug court program .

still , some are skeptical of the impact of drug courts .

the drug policy alliance has claimed that drug courts help only offenders who are expected to do well and do not truly reduce costs .

this organization also has criticized drug courts for punishing addiction because drug courts dismiss those who are not able to abstain from substance use .

congress has long been concerned over illicit drug use and abuse in the united states .

recently , congress has given attention to opioid abuse , and especially overdose deaths involving prescription and illicit opioids .

in 2015 , there were 52,404 drug overdose deaths in the united states , including 33,091 ( 63.1% ) that involved an opioid .

also , in 2016 samhsa estimated that 329,000 americans age 12 and older were current users of heroin and approximately 3.8 million americans were current "misusers" of prescription pain relievers .

policymakers may debate whether drug courts are an effective tool in the package of federal efforts to address the opioid epidemic .

policy options include , but are not limited to , increasing federal funding for drug courts , expanding federal drug court programs , and amending the drug courts program to possibly include a broader group of offenders , among other potential changes .

as discussed , grant recipients of the federal drug courts program , with the exception of veterans treatment courts , must exclude violent offenders ; however , some argue that drug courts should include violent offenders .

one group of researchers compared the outcomes for violent and nonviolent offenders and concluded that courts should consider the current charge rather than the offender's history of violence , and the type and seriousness of the offender's substance abuse problem when selecting individuals for drug court programs .

they found that while it appeared that individuals with a history of violence ( defined as at least one violent charge before entering drug court ) were more likely to fail the program than those who never had been charged with a violent crime , the relationship between history of violence and drug court success disappeared when controlling for total criminal history .

more serious offenders are less likely than low - level or first - time offenders to abstain from crime , and some argue that drug courts may be the best option for these individuals .

substance abuse and crime have long been linked , and diversion and treatment may assist some individuals in avoiding criminal behavior .

congress may wish to maintain the exclusion of violent offenders from the drug courts program , or it may consider broadening the pool of eligible offenders that may participate in bja - funded drug court programs to include certain violent offenders .

