when it comes to global supply and demand for natural gas , china is the main wildcard .

china is the sixth largest natural gas producer in the world , with its production almost tripling over the course of 2005-2014 ( see figure 1 ) .

its natural gas resource base is large , and its shale gas endowment is estimated to be nearly double that of the united states .

china's production is currently less than 20% of u.s. natural gas production .

this is partly due to its geology , regulatory regime , and a lack of technical skills , all of which make it difficult to bring natural gas to market , among other issues ( see " domestic industry concerns " ) .

natural gas is dwarfed by coal as a primary source of energy in china ( see figure 2 ) .

china is the largest producer and consumer of coal in the world , producing three times and consuming four times as much as the united states , the next country in both respects .

the interests of the coal industry play a significant role in chinese energy policy at the national , provincial , and local levels of government .

in 2014 , china ranked third in global liquefied natural gas ( lng ) imports behind japan and south korea , which are both relatively established markets compared to china .

china ranked sixth for pipeline imports .

central asia , especially turkmenistan , is china's main source of pipeline imports of natural gas .

china has built a large amount of lng import capacity to add to its import pipelines .

with major lng export projects in australia and the united states coming online by the end of the decade , china should be in a good position to take advantage of a potential supply glut .

if china can ramp up its natural gas production , especially its unconventional resources , foreign export projects targeting china's natural gas market may face a dilemma similar to that faced by those constructed to supply the u.s. market prior to the advent of shale gas — displacement by domestic supplies .

on the consumption side , china is the third largest consumer of natural gas behind the united states and russia , which are also the two largest natural gas producers , respectively .

china has added more new demand over the last ten years than any other country .

yet , natural gas made up only 6% of china's primary energy consumption in 2014 ( see figure 2 ) , while natural gas accounted for 30% of the u.s. fuel mix .

china's natural gas plans have implications for a number of issues in which congress has expressed a strong interest .

those issues include the following: the prospects for u.s. energy exports , including exports of natural gas and coal ; prospects for u.s. energy companies' investments in china ; chinese investment in the u.s. energy sector ; manufacturing competitiveness between the united states and china ; china's ability to meet its global commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in order to combat climate change ; china's ability to reduce the severe air pollution that hangs over parts of the country , and thus reduce the airborne pollutants that have been shown to travel from china to the west coast of the united states ; china's political and economic relationships with such regions as central asia , a major supplier of natural gas to china via pipelines , and the middle east , currently a major supplier of oil and lng to china ; china's plans for disputed waters in the south china sea , which may contain significant hydrocarbon resources ; and china's management of its energy - rich but troubled xinjiang region , which has a large ethnic turkic population and has been the subject of human rights concerns from governments and groups outside china , and of chinese government concerns about separatism , terrorism , and religious extremism .

in addition , congress has oversight and appropriations roles related to u.s. dialogues and other cooperation with china on natural gas issues .

agencies involved in those efforts include the u.s. department of energy , the u.s. department of state , and the u.s. trade and development agency .

in the 114 th congress , members have expressed interest in chinese policy related to natural gas in hearings , such as the senate committee on energy and natural resources' january 2015 hearing on s. 33 , the lng permitting certainty and transparency act , and the same committee's february 2015 hearing on the fiscal year 2016 budget request for the u.s. department of energy .

china has struggled to manage serious environmental problems caused , in part , by its longtime reliance on coal for electric power .

to address air pollution and to meet recent global commitments it has made to reduce its greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions , china has prioritized expanding consumption of cleaner energy sources , including natural gas .

under china's energy development strategy action plan for 2014-2020 , natural gas is targeted to make up at least 10% of energy consumption by 2020 , with coal's percentage dropping from 66% ( 2014 ) to 62% .

the previous energy plan set 2015 targets under which natural gas was to make up 7.5% of energy consumption and coal was to drop to 65% .

these targets were not achieved .

by 2025 , energy firm bp projects that natural gas consumption in china will reach almost 400 billion cubic meters ( bcm ) , more than double china's estimated 2015 natural gas consumption of 191 bcm .

if consumption does grow at those rates , in addition to increasing natural gas production , china will need to invest in the requisite infrastructure to transport and consume greater natural gas volumes , including shipping terminals , pipelines , and natural gas power plants .

figure 3 shows where china stood compared to the united states regarding proved reserves , supply sources , and usage in 2014 .

china has made significant strides in diversifying its natural gas supplies .

domestic production has risen 164% in the last ten years , to 135 bcm in 2014 .

natural gas imports , which did not begin until 2006 , have grown from one bcm to over 58 bcm in 2014 .

in 2014 , imports were split 46% from lng and 54% from pipelines , with turkmenistan being the single largest supplier ( 44% of imports ) .

figure 4 highlights the dispersion of china's natural gas resources and the country's infrastructure constraints .

in some cases , natural gas deposits do not have pipelines in place to bring that gas to market .

this is the situation in china's northeastern provinces of jilin and heilongjiang .

growth in china's demand for natural gas has slowed in recent years .

state media reported that annual consumption in 2015 was 191 bcm , up 3.7% from 2014 .

this represented the lowest rate of annual growth in a decade ( see figure 8 ) .

china's government expects its overall energy consumption to grow in 2016 , with natural gas rising to 6.2% of primary energy needs .

 ( see figure 9 . ) .

part of the slowdown in consumption growth is attributed to the sluggish economy .

in november 2015 , china cut natural gas prices to spur demand .

predictions of future growth in gas consumption vary .

the deputy head of cnpc's economic and technology research institute projected 7.3 % growth for 2016 , while the deputy head of cnooc's economic and technology institute projected between 4.5% and 5% growth .

the large differences in projections by the two companies reflect the difficulty in obtaining good data on chinese natural gas consumption .

a 2014 study used a regression model to estimate residential gas price and income elasticities in chinese urban centers .

the study found that the price elasticity of natural gas was much more negative in northern china than in southern china — in other words , a rise in gas prices would be expected to cause much larger consumption declines in northern cities than in southern ones .

the authors suggested that this was due to the widespread availability of coal in the north , which can be easily substituted for gas in most cases .

natural gas vehicles ( ngvs ) have been one of the major factors behind the fast growth in gas usage in china , chiefly because of their cost competitiveness , although ngv users have encountered severe problems at filling stations during winter's chronic gas shortages .

by the end of 2013 , china already had some 3,000 lng and compressed natural gas ( cng ) refilling stations , supporting some 80,000 lng vehicles , with about 40% located in the north and 20% in the northwest of the country .

based on the government plan for china's automobile industry , the number of natural gas - fueled vehicles is expected to reach 1.2 million by 2020 .

to accommodate such development , china would need to increase the number of natural gas filling stations to 12,000 by 2015 , including 10,000 cng outlets and 2,000 lng stations , the plan says .

according to the china automotive technology and research center ( catarc ) , china had approximately 3,800 cng filling stations and 3,100 lng filling stations in 2015 .

in 2013 , the electric power sector used 26 bcm , or 16% of total gas demand .

china surpassed the united states as the world's highest greenhouse gas emitter roughly in 2006 .

carbon dioxide emissions from natural gas are a minor contributor to china's total , accounting for about 3% of emissions from fuel consumption in 2013 , according to a report by the international energy agency .

coal emissions were approximately 84% .

chinese policymakers face pressure to clean up the coal industry , not only for reasons related to greenhouse gas emissions but also due to public health concerns from conventional pollutants .

a 2014 study at beijing's tsinghua university suggested that coal and other sources of small - particulate emissions were responsible for 670,000 premature deaths per year throughout the country .

the future of natural gas depends greatly on the degree to which chinese policymakers address these problems .

"whether or not china will further increase the share of natural gas in its energy mix depends on how fast the government wants to solve air pollution," according to lin boqiang , director of the china center for energy economics research at china's xiamen university .

some analysts believe that increasing domestic production and imports of natural gas to china could have benefits for global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

in this view , chinese natural gas imports could help reduce carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions by , for instance , limiting the use of coal in china's electric power sector .

many of china's coal - fired power facilities are older than 20 years and lack the pollution controls of more modern plants .

cnpc argues that the 55 bcm of natural gas that china now imports through the central asia - china gas pipelines allows china to substitute natural gas use for 73 million tons of standard coal use annually , "cutting carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide emissions by 78 million tons and 1.21 million tons each year , respectively. .

