o n october 23 , 2015 , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) published its final clean power plan rule ( cpp or rule ) to regulate emissions of greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) , specifically carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , from existing fossil fuel - fired power plants .

the goal of the rule , according to epa , is to help protect human health and the environment from the impacts of climate change .

the cpp has been one of the more singularly controversial environmental regulations ever promulgated , and the controversy is reflected in the enormous multi - party litigation over the rule in the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) .

numerous petitions challenging the rule have been consolidated under the caption west virginia v. epa .

while the litigation is still ongoing at the circuit court level , an interlocutory — that is , mid - litigation — application to the supreme court resulted in a stay , or pause , of the rule .

this report provides legal background on the rule , its clean air act ( caa ) framework under section 111 , and some of the main climate - related lawsuits that have preceded the present litigation over the cpp .

it then gives an overview of the participants in the litigation , including members of congress , who have offered briefs in support of both sides .

this report explains the major events in the litigation as of the date of publication , including the supreme court stay and the d.c .

circuit oral argument , and the expected schedule of events in the near term .

it then presents condensed summaries of some of the main arguments on the merits .

this report concludes with a brief look at parallel litigation in the d.c .

circuit that is challenging a related epa regulation , which limits ghg emissions from new , modified , and reconstructed power plants .

challenges to the cpp began well before the final rule was published in the federal register .

for example , when the rule was proposed in 2014 , murray energy corporation ( a coal company ) and the states of west virginia , alabama , indiana , kansas , kentucky , louisiana , nebraska , ohio , oklahoma , south carolina , south dakota , and wyoming filed petitions for review in the d.c .

circuit .

they made several arguments in the alternative: that the court had authority to , and should , issue an extraordinary writ under the all writs act ; that epa's public statements about its legal authority to regulate co 2 emissions constituted final agency action subject to judicial review ; and that the court should strike down the 2011 settlement agreement that epa reached with several other states and environmental groups setting a timeline for deciding on section 111 rules for power plants .

a panel of the d.c .

circuit rejected these arguments and denied the petitions , saying the following: petitioners are champing at the bit to challenge epa's anticipated rule restricting carbon dioxide emissions from existing power plants .

but epa has not yet issued a final rule .

it has issued only a proposed rule .

petitioners nonetheless ask the court to jump into the fray now .

they want us to do something that they candidly acknowledge we have never done before: review the legality of a proposed rule.... we do not have authority to review proposed agency rules .

oklahoma also sued to challenge the proposal in federal district court in oklahoma and did not prevail ; the 10 th circuit denied oklahoma's motion for an injunction pending appeal .

states and energy companies also filed emergency petitions for an extraordinary writ in the d.c .

circuit in august 2015 , after epa had released , but not published , the final cpp .

a circuit panel again denied these petitions on september 9 , 2015 .

petitions for panel reconsideration and for rehearing en banc to essentially revive the earlier lawsuits challenging the proposed rule were denied as well , on september 29 , 2015 .

in addition to the direct legal challenge to the cpp rule for co 2 from existing power plants under caa section 111 ( d ) , 25 states — led by north dakota and west virginia — have filed petitions in the d.c .

circuit challenging epa's final nsps rule for co 2 from new , modified , and reconstructed power plants under caa section 111 ( b ) , which it calls the "carbon pollution standards. .

the states have been joined by other petitioners including a labor union , a rural electric cooperatives association , several other fossil - fuel - related companies and utilities , and several industry and trade groups ; most of the petitioners overlap with those who also filed challenges to the cpp , although there are somewhat fewer petitioners challenging the nsps .

the petitions have been consolidated under the case caption north dakota v. epa .

most of the states and a number of the nonprofit organizations that intervened in support of epa in the cpp case also intervened in the nsps challenge in support of epa .

in the section 111 ( b ) litigation , one of the primary issues is epa's establishment of standards of performance based on technologies including carbon capture and sequestration / storage ( ccs ) .

natural gas plants and modified coal plants can reach the final nspss with efficient generation technology , but new coal plants would need to implement partial ccs .

critics of the nspss for power plants say , for example , that ccs technology is not yet commercially available nor fully technically feasible , and therefore that it is not "adequately demonstrated" or the "best system" under section 111 ( b ) .

they also argue that epa improperly relied on separate demonstrations of individual components of the technology , and that the nspss are otherwise arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion , contrary to law , or unconstitutional .

epa , in the section 111 ( b ) final rule's preamble , argued that its carbon pollution standards were reasonable and lawful .

epa provided rationales for basing the standard for new coal plants on partial ccs: it explained technical configurations and operational flexibilities that may be available ; worked through its analyses of feasibility , cost , and other criteria ; and discussed "alternative compliance options that new source project developers can elect to use , instead of … partial ccs , to meet the final standard of performance. .

in addition to the d.c .

circuit litigation , petitions were filed before epa seeking administrative reconsideration of the nsps rule ; epa denied the petitions in may 2016 .

the d.c .

circuit suspended the briefing schedule in the north dakota v. epa case in june 2016 to allow the court to consolidate new lawsuits filed challenging epa's denial of the petitions .

on august 30 , 2016 , the court issued a revised briefing schedule to begin on october 13 , 2016 , with opening briefs and conclude by february 6 , 2017 .

the court has scheduled oral arguments for april 17 , 2017 .

as noted above , the finalization of nspss for new air pollutant sources under section 111 ( b ) of the caa is a prerequisite for the use of authority under section 111 ( d ) to regulate existing sources , so this litigation could threaten epa's basis for the cpp .

thus , regardless of the outcome of west virginia v. epa , the litigation in north dakota v. epa potentially could impact the cpp as well .

