each congress , hundreds of measures are introduced to recognize , support , honor , or acknowledge individuals , groups , and events with a national day , week , or month of recognition .

as scholars lawrence dodd and scot schraufnagel observed , "this type of legislation generally has universal appeal with patriotism , altruism , and other worthy concerns ... [as] the motivation behind the legislation. .

these measures serve as one way that members of congress can fulfill their representational responsibilities and connect with their constituents .

this type of legislation can be divided into three categories: federal holidays ; patriotic and national observances ; and recognition of a specific day , week , or month to commemorate a specific individual , group , or event .

federal holidays , which are often referred to as "national holidays," are created by law and are legally only applicable to the federal government and the district of columbia .

most federal government offices are closed for the day — many states also acknowledge and participate in the celebration .

statutory observances , by contrast , which are often called patriotic or national observances , are found codified at 36 u.s.c .

§§101-144 , and do not provide specific time off for federal employees or the district of columbia .

currently there are 44 patriotic or national observances .

these include days for individuals ( eg , wright brothers , leif erikson , and stephen foster ) ; groups ( eg , mother's day , and peace officers ) ; events ( eg , patriot day [9 / 11] , korean war veterans armistice day , and signing the constitution ) ; and other recognitions ( eg , flag day , poison prevention , and heart month ) .

new statutory observances can only be created by enacting a law .

the other type of commemorative period recognizes a special day , week , or month .

most often these are introduced as a simple resolution ( h.res .

or s.res. ) .

or as a concurrent resolution ( h.con.res .

or s .con.res. ) .

this report provides information on commemorative legislation that recognizes a specific time period , and then it discusses options for congress .

first , the report summarizes the different types of commemorative time periods — federal holidays ; patriotic and national observances ; and commemorative days , weeks , and months .

second , it discusses the current rules in the house and senate that govern this type of legislation .

finally , the report discusses options for congress , including introducing legislation in the house and senate , and asking the president to issue a proclamation .

permanent commemorative time periods are authorized by law to commemorate groups , individuals , and events .

broadly , these permanent commemorations can be divided into two categories: federal holidays and patriotic and national observances .

nonpermanent recognitions of commemorative days , weeks , and months can be authorized through the use of simple or concurrent resolutions .

for the house , rules ban the introduction and consideration of date - specific commemorative legislation .

in the senate , no specific chamber rules exist on either the introduction or consideration of commemorative measures .

while the house prohibits the introduction and consideration of date - specific commemorative legislation , house resolutions to achieve a similar purpose continue to be introduced .

these resolutions do not include a specific time period after the resolution's resolving clause .

consequently , the introduction of such a measure does not appear to violate house rule xii , clause 5 .

data on all measures used to propose recognition of a commemorative period were collected for the 113 th and the 114 th congresses .

a total of 915 commemorative measures were identified , 437 in the 113 th congress and 478 in the 114 th congress .

figure 1 shows the types of legislation used to introduce commemorative recognitions in the house , and also in the senate ( where no rules regarding the introduction of commemorative resolutions exist ) , during the 113 th and 114 th congresses .

as figure 1 shows , the majority of commemorative measures were introduced as simple resolutions ( 95% ) over the two congresses .

a small number are measures that would need both house and senate approval .

these include concurrent resolutions ( 4% ) — which do not require presidential action — or bills and joint resolutions ( less than 1% ) .

by using a simple resolution to designate a commemorative day , week , or month , only one chamber — either the house or senate — can agree to the measure .

a simple resolution , however , does not carry the force of law and can only be used by one chamber to recognize , support , honor , or acknowledge a specific day , week , or month .

of the commemorative legislation introduced in the 113 th and 114 th congresses , approximately 40% of all measures would recognize a commemorative day .

this compares with approximately 25% for a commemorative week , and approximately 30% for a commemorative month .

additionally , a small percentage of legislation ( 3% ) would designate two time periods .

for example , h.res .

407 ( 113 th congress ) would "support the goals and ideals of national adoption day and national adoption month. .

a measure that would designate two time periods is counted twice in the data .

figure 2 shows the percentage of measures introduced that recognize a day , week , or month .

in the 113 th and 114 th congresses , a total of 915 commemorative measures were introduced , 433 in the house and 482 in the senate .

of these measures , 401 of 474 ( 85% ) senate simple resolutions ( s.res. ) .

were agreed to , with another two reported by senate committees .

additionally , one senate concurrent resolution ( s.con.res. ) .

and one bill ( s. ) were agreed to by the senate .

in the house , one measure ( h.res .

842 [114 th congress] ) was agreed to .

all other house measures ( 397 simple resolutions [h.res .

] , 30 concurrent resolutions [h.con.res .

] , 3 joint resolution [h.j.res .

] , and 2 bills [h.r.] ) .

that were introduced were referred to committee , but none were agreed to .

table 1 shows the final disposition within the chamber of introduced commemorative measures in the 113 th and 114 th congresses .

table 1 indicates that 83.6% of the senate's measures and none of the house's measures were agreed to by the chamber of origin in the 113 th congress , and 85% of the senate's measures and one of the house's measures were agreed to in the 114 th congress .

as discussed above under " congressional rules on commemorative legislation ," house and senate rules for the consideration of date - specific commemorative legislation differ considerably .

while the senate allows such measures to be introduced and considered , the house has a rule that prohibits both the introduction and consideration of date - specific commemorative measures .

consequently , while no prohibition exists in the senate , measures with date - specific provisions cannot be introduced in the house , but measures without date - specific provisions apparently can .

whether or not non - date - specific measures are considered in the future will likely be determined by scheduling practices of the house majority leader , which are guided by party conference rules and legislative protocols , as discussed earlier .

when members of congress engage in the legislative process , they do so for a variety of purposes .

in some cases , just the introduction of legislation achieves the member's purpose , while in other cases the member's purpose can only be achieved by the approval of a measure they have introduced .

for example , the introduction of legislation may indicate that a member would like to be involved in future public policy discussions in a particular area , or that he or she is attempting to frame the debate on a particular policy issue .

in general , there are three stages where a member might achieve his or her goal: the introduction of legislation , the consideration of a measure in the house or senate , or passage of a measure by the house , senate , or both .

should congress want to commemorate a day , week , or month , several options might be available that might allow a member to meet his or her goal within the confines of house or senate rules .

these include the introduction of a house measure or the introduction ( and possible consideration ) of a senate measure .

legislation that recognizes , supports , honors , or acknowledges certain days , weeks , and months continues to be introduced each congress .

in the 113 th congress ( 2013-2014 ) , a total of 437 measures were introduced , 204 measures in the house and 233 in the senate .

the house did not consider any of these measures , while the senate agreed to 193 of 233 ( 83% ) .

in the 114 th congress , a total of 478 measures were introduced , 229 measures in the house and 249 in the senate .

based on the quantity of measures offered in both chambers , members of congress clearly see value in introducing commemorative legislation .

while these measures generally may not be considered in the house , members clearly desire ways to recognize commemorative days , weeks , and months to establish connections with their district and state .

the desire to recognize commemoration days , weeks , and months may explain why house members draft their resolutions to allow for introduction , even though it seems that the intent of the prohibition ( reinforced by the republican conference rules ) will likely preclude any further action on such resolutions .

