t he consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) program was established under the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) .

the purpose of the program is to foster the creation of co - ops — nonprofit , member - run health insurance issuers that sell health plans in states in which they are licensed .

the co - op program is intended to increase competition and improve choice in private health insurance markets .

it does so by creating new nonprofit issuers that are required to reinvest their profits to reduce premiums , enhance benefits , or improve the health care delivered to co - op members .

in addition , co - ops are intended to be "one vehicle for providing higher quality care that is affordable and uses innovative care models in the exchanges starting in 2014. .

the aca appropriated $6.0 billion of federal funds for the co - op program .

subsequent legislation rescinded funds from the program , leaving it with about $1.1 billion of the original appropriation .

the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) used the appropriated funds to finance low - interest loans to eligible organizations .

co - ops could apply for two types of loans: ( 1 ) start - up loans to hire staff , secure a state license , and carry out other functions and ( 2 ) solvency loans to help meet state requirements that they maintain a certain amount of capital in order sell insurance .

the loans must be repaid with interest .

the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , which administers the co - op program , has awarded loans to 24 co - ops since 2012 .

one of the 24 was unable to secure a state license to operate and was dropped from the program prior to offering coverage .

cms awarded about $2.4 billion to the remaining 23 co - ops .

seven of the 23 co - ops are operational as of the date of this report .

the other 16 either have ceased operations or are in various stages of winding down operations .

the fact that more than half of the co - ops have failed has prompted questions about the program's design , administration , and funding and about the operations of the co - ops .

through a series of questions and answers , this report describes the co - op program , outlines program requirements , and explains the terms of the loans .

in addition , the report provides information about the loan amounts awarded and the current operating status of the co - ops .

the information in this report is taken from section 1322 of the aca , its implementing regulations , guidance , and loan documents .

the aca requires the hhs secretary to establish the co - op program according to the parameters outlined in section 1322 of the aca .

final regulations on the co - op program were issued in december 2011 , and cms began awarding start - up and solvency loans in 2012 .

all loans were to be awarded by july 1 , 2013 .

the co - op program provides start - up and solvency loans to qualified nonprofit issuers ( co - ops ) .

the terms of the loans are described in statute , regulations , the foa , and the terms of the loan agreements between co - ops and cms ( the administrator of the loans ) .

in general , co - ops that received loans are expected to repay the loans with interest according to the terms of the loan agreement .

cms has awarded loans to 24 co - ops .

one of the 24 , the vermont health co - op , was denied state licensure to sell health insurance plans in 2013 and was dropped from the co - op program .

the loans awarded to the other 23 co - ops total about $2.4 billion .

these 23 co - ops and the amounts they were awarded are shown in table 2 .

as of the date of this report , seven co - op issuers are operational .

for purposes of this report , a co - op issuer is considered operational if it currently offers health plans and there are no indications that the co - op issuer will stop renewing or offering health plans in the future .

the seven operational co - op issuers offer health plans in nine states for the 2016 plan year ( see figure 1 ) .

the other 16 co - ops ( of the 23 that ever offered health plans ) are considered non - operational , which means either they are not offering health plans in 2016 or there is an indication that they will not renew or offer health plans in the future .

state insurance commissioners are the primary regulators of the business of insurance .

as state - licensed health insurance issuers , co - ops must adhere to all applicable requirements in the state ( s ) in which they are licensed .

one of the oversight responsibilities of state insurance commissioners is to monitor the financial health of issuers .

if a state insurance commissioner determines that an issuer is , or is at risk of becoming , undercapitalized or insolvent , the state insurance commissioner may conduct additional reviews of the issuer's financial situation and operations ; subject the issuer to a rehabilitation plan ; or declare the issuer insolvent and subject it to a state - administered insolvency proceeding .

the 16 non - operational co - ops are in various stages of these procedures due to their troubled financial conditions .

although each of the 16 non - operational co - op issuers has its own unique reasons for its troubled financial conditions , some factors that could have played a role include the challenges associated with being a new entrant in health insurance markets ; the co - op program's statutory and regulatory requirements ; decisions made by federal policymakers during implementation of the program ; and poor or misfortunate business decisions .

as noted , of the 23 co - ops that ever enrolled individuals in health plans , 16 are in various stages of winding down their operations .

these failures have led to a variety of questions , particularly regarding what happens to coverage for individuals enrolled in health plans offered by failed co - ops , what happens to the health care providers to whom failed co - ops owe payments ; and what happens to the federal money lent to failed co - ops .

answers to these questions vary based on a number of factors .

one factor is the laws and regulations of the state ( s ) in which the co - op is licensed .

health insurance issuers are primarily regulated at the state level ; therefore , what happens when a health insurance issuer fails ( including a co - op ) is largely a matter of state law .

answers to these questions also are affected by section 1322 of aca and its implementing regulations , the terms of the co - op's loan agreement with cms , and the co - op's financial condition .

when a health insurance issuer , including a co - op , is declared insolvent , the relevant state insurance commissioner typically will be appointed as a receiver to liquidate the issuer in an orderly fashion .

the individual health insurance policies of the failed issuer generally will either be transferred to and assumed by a different ( and solvent ) issuer or transferred to a state guaranty association ( ga ) .

gas , which have been established in all 50 states and the district of columbia , protect customer insurance policies issued by insolvent insurance companies , subject to certain benefit limits and various exclusions specified by state law .

a ga could either maintain the insolvent issuer's policies or issue new policies to supplant the failed issuer's policies .

health insurance gas protect policyholders and health care providers who may be owed payments , but gas do not provide financial protection to issuers .

while all states have health gas , not all types of health issuers or health insurance plans are covered .

the aforementioned gas also may protect health care providers by covering the cost of certain medical services provided to policyholders of the failed co - ops .

as with individuals , the protection offered to health care providers by a ga is dependent on how the ga is designed and its application to a failed co - op .

additionally , health care providers , similar to other creditors , may file claims against the estate of a failed co - op .

how much , if any , providers would recover for valid claims against the estate would depend on the financial condition of the co - op , the liquidation value of the co - op's assets , and the liquidation payment priority scheme established by relevant state law .

all co - ops are contractually obligated to adhere to the repayment schedule detailed in their loan agreements and other supporting documents , regardless of a co - op's operational status or whether its loan agreement with cms is terminated .

cms may use any remedies available under the law to collect monies owed .

however , cms's ability to collect from failed co - ops will be complicated by the fact that each co - op is subject to the state insurance receivership proceedings that are discussed above .

in testimony given february 25 , 2016 , a cms official indicated that "it was too early to tell how much money may be recovered [from the 12 co - ops that had failed by the date of the testimony]. .

