civil society organizations ( csos ) , which are often viewed as an important component of sustainable democracy , are confronting growing limitations on their ability to operate around the world .

this phenomenon is referred to by researchers and advocates as "closing space" for civil society work .

many experts assess that the closing space trend is likely to continue , which could also impact broader u.s. engagement on democracy promotion or the freedoms of assembly , association , and expression and , in some cases , even conflict with u.s. efforts to promote , development , and security .

congress has taken action to support civil society through a range of activities , including legislation , and may choose to further consider legislation , oversight activities — such as reporting , hearings , or direct engagement — and u.s. funding to respond to growing limitations on civil society around the world .

from restrictions on the types of funding they are allowed to receive to draconian registration requirements , the measures targeting nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) and civil society groups are putting ever greater pressure on the entire civil society sector .

the restrictions are most commonly imposed by governments seeking to limit the influence of nongovernmental actors .

while the problem may be most acute and visible under the repressive regimes in russia and china , restrictions are also being imposed by a broad range of governments , to include democratic allies such as india and major u.s. foreign assistance recipients such as egypt .

the united states has long supported civil society abroad , though the implications of this support sometimes vary in practice .

it is the largest financial supporter of civil society in the world , according to a recent white house fact sheet , with more than $3.2 billion invested to strengthen civil society since 2010 through training , technical assistance , and direct funding for programs .

civil society groups are also in many cases the implementers of u.s. foreign assistance programs managed by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and groups such as the national endowment for democracy , among others .

in the face of the rapid geographic and substantive expansion of measures designed to close civil society space , the obama administration launched the stand with civil society initiative in 2013 to bolster u.s. support for civil society abroad .

the effort saw presidential attention through speeches and a presidential memorandum .

while advocates generally praise the administration for raising the profile of the closing space issue , there is less consensus on whether the administration's actions have fully matched its rhetoric , or on whether the policies and structures put into place under the initiative are sustainable .

this report provides an overview of the "closing space" challenge , including its origins and current manifestations ; outlines current administration programs and initiatives aimed at addressing the problem ; and discusses some areas of potential engagement that congress may choose to further consider .

support for democratic governance abroad has long featured as an element of u.s. foreign policy and has often received significant backing in congress , although its prominence has varied over time and in specific circumstances .

advocates within and outside of government have argued that the role of civil society is fundamental in a democratic system ; according to one expert , a vigorous civil society helps to ensure that governments serve their people .

joining together in civic groups amplifies isolated voices and leverages their ability to influence governments — to ensure that they build schools , secure access to health care , protect the environment , and take countless other steps to pursue a popular vision of the common good .

moreover , civil society can also play an important role in global economic growth and development .

according to the united nations special rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association , civil society space often reflects a positive business environment: the special rapporteur has found that the presence of a robust , vocal and critical civil society sector guarantees , almost without exception , that a state also possesses a good business environment ( the converse does not hold: a good business environment does not guarantee a good civil society environment ) .

the rule of law is stronger , transparency is greater and markets are less tainted by corruption .

indeed , the presence of a critical civil society can be viewed as a barometer of a state's confidence and stability — important factors for businesses looking to invest their money .

congress at times has treated the promotion of vibrant civil societies abroad as a key element of u.s. foreign policy .

a december 2006 senate foreign relations committee staff report declared that "support for democratic , grassroots organizations has become a centerpiece of america's international outreach. .

restrictions on civil society not only impact the health of democracies abroad ( and u.s. efforts to support them ) ; they also resonate because of their potentially direct impacts on more immediate u.s. interests in crisis situations , as spelled out in an april 2015 report by the center for strategic and international studies: if liberia or guinea had adopted laws that made it difficult or impossible for ngos to function or receive funding from foreign sources , how would these countries have coped with the ebola virus ? .

if kenya adopts such laws , how will the country respond to another famine , and what will the next national election cycle there look like if the hundreds of organizations that helped create citizen demand for a nonviolent election in 2013 no longer exist ? .

crackdowns on civil society groups abroad may also directly impact u.s. government - funded organizations ( as in the july 2015 russia ban on national endowment for democracy operations within its borders ) .

in some cases , they can ensnare u.s. citizens who are affiliated with those organizations ( for instance , when the egyptian government cracked down on ngos in 2011-2012 , causing several u.s. citizens working with the national democratic institute and international republican institute to take shelter at the u.s. embassy in cairo ; 16 americans were among 43 workers later convicted in absentia of receiving foreign funding ) .

a senior amnesty international official lamented the increasing restrictions on civil society work globally in a 2015 news article: there are new pieces of legislation almost every week — on foreign funding , restrictions in registration or association , anti - protest laws , gagging laws .

and , unquestionably , this is going to intensify in the coming two to three years .

you can visibly watch the space shrinking .

groups tracking the increasingly restrictive environment for nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) have catalogued the problem using a number of different metrics: civicus , an international association of civil society groups , counted "significant attacks on the fundamental civil society rights of free association , free assembly and free expression in 96 countries" in 2014 .

freedom house , an ngo focused on expanding democracy and freedom , noted the decline in space for civil society in its 2015 freedom in the world report , saying , " ... whereas the most successful authoritarian regimes previously tolerated a modest opposition press , some civil society activity , and a comparatively vibrant internet environment , they are now reducing or closing these remaining spaces for dissent and debate. .

the international center for not - for - profit law ( icnl ) has pointed out that between january 2012 and august 2014 , some 50 countries introduced or enacted laws designed to restrict the activity of civil society organizations or curtail funding for their work .

icnl also asserts that more than 120 laws constraining the freedoms of association or assembly have been proposed or enacted in 60 countries since 2012 .

of these measures , those designed to restrict foreign funding to support the work of civil society groups have seen the fastest growth .

such restrictions may include requirements for prior government approval for the use of government - controlled bank accounts , laws demanding "foreign agent" disclosures , or caps on allowable foreign funding .

the u.s. agency for international development produces a civil society sustainability index ( csosi ) for several regions of the world , tracking developments in this space on an annual basis .

for example , the agency's 2014 report on africa found that " ... in many countries in the region , csos — particularly those focused on advocacy and human rights — are facing increasing restrictions or threats of restrictions on their work. .

in many cases , the restrictions have targeted u.s. - funded organizations ; for example , in july 2015 , russia banned the national endowment for democracy ( ned ) from operating within its borders .

the ned thus became the first group to be subjected to a may 2015 law against "undesirable" ngos .

the law , which increased russian authorities' ability to shutter such groups without a court order , followed russian president vladimir putin's assertion to security officials in march that western intelligence agencies use ngos to "discredit the authorities and destabilize the internal situation in russia. .

the impact goes beyond u.s. interests ; other international donors , including governments , charities , churches , and private philanthropic groups and foundations also are affected .

nor is russia alone in taking such actions ; the hungarian government , for example , has targeted ngos that distributed funding from the norwegian government , accusing them of serving foreign powers seeking to influence hungarian internal politics .

measures targeting foreign funding are potentially especially damaging , experts at the carnegie endowment suggest: although such support is rarely , if ever , a determinative factor in the political life of recipient countries , it often does have tangible effects on the institutions and processes that it reaches .

this is especially true in the civil society domain , where external funding can be a lifeline for groups working on sensitive topics for which domestic funding is scarce , such as human rights advocacy , anticorruption work , or election monitoring .

limiting these organizations' access to external support weakens their capacity for action and often threatens their very existence .

in addition , while crackdowns in authoritarian countries such as russia or china appear to garner the lion's share of western media attention , experts suggest that repressive measures are being taken against civil society around the world in a variety of political systems and across cultural and economic lines .

restrictions can target not only groups doing what some would call 'political' or rights - focused work ( such as human rights defenders and democracy advocates ) , but also humanitarian actors , civic coalitions , watchdog groups , economic cooperatives , or service providers , as well as other organizations that may receive foreign funding .

repressive regimes often apply different standards to ngos based on their activities .

for example , organizations working on human or political rights may face more restrictions or penalties than organizations providing humanitarian services .

experts assert that these differences are intended to create divisions that prevent civil society groups from responding collectively , though , in some cases , deep divisions already exist within civil society due to local political and social dynamics .

the geographic breadth of the problem is demonstrated by the following , nonexhaustive list of examples .

india has increased restrictions on foreign - funded organizations , including the ford foundation , mercy corps , and especially greenpeace india ; its government also revoked more than 10,000 ngo licenses in the first half of 2015 from civil society groups due to failures to detail foreign funding .

ethiopia adopted a law in 2009 restricting ngos that receive more than 10% of their funding from foreign sources from engaging in human rights or advocacy activities .

angola 's president issued a decree that took effect in march 2015 that limits foreign funding of ngos and imposes strict registration requirements .

bangladesh enacted a law in december 2014 that strictly limits foreign financing of ngos , and the government is considering a cyber security law that could stifle free expression online .

cambodia has placed strict new registration and "neutrality" requirements on ngos since august 2015 , despite an international campaign against the restrictions .

the egyptian government in 2014 mandated that all civil society groups must register with the ministry of social solidarity ; the penal code also was amended in the context of counterterrorism to mandate life imprisonment for anyone who receives funds from foreign entities .

in 2011 , the egyptian government also brought legal cases against local and international ngos for allegedly receiving illegal funding from abroad , resulting in the conviction and sentencing of 43 foreign and egyptian ngo employees to prison terms in 2013 .

hungary imposed measures against norwegian - funded ngos ( including transparency international hungary ) beginning in the spring of 2015 .

uganda adopted a law in january 2016 that more strictly controls ngo registration and activity that is against "the interests of uganda" or the "dignity of ugandans" ; in addition to limitations on political or human rights work , there is particular concern that the new law could target organizations working on lesbian , gay , bisexual , transgender and intersex ( lgbti ) issues .

pakistan expelled save the children in june 2015 , as part of a broader crackdown on foreign - funded civil society groups , and announced a laborious regulatory policy requiring governmental approval to access foreign funds in october 2015 .

in ecuador , a june 2013 decree placed time - consuming new regulations on ngos , as part of broader restrictions leading to the 2014 cessation of usaid operations in the country .

sudan expelled 13 international ngos and banned 3 sudanese relief organizations in 2009 on allegations of collaborating with the international criminal court and unnamed "foreign powers" after the icc issued an arrest warrant for the country's president .

other ngo expulsions occurred in 2012 and 2014 .

south sudan adopted a law in february 2016 that mandates ngo registration and government monitoring and criminalizes noncompliance with the law ; humanitarian actors have voiced concern that the law will impede aid provision .

other countries considering legislation restricting ngo activities include ( but are not limited to ) israel , jordan , kazakhstan , kenya , kyrgyzstan , laos , mexico , nigeria , pakistan , sierra leone , tajikistan , and vietnam .

a geographic categorization of repressive measures as tracked by icnl is provided as figure 1 .

many experts assess that the closing space trend is likely to continue as authoritarian actors seek to grow their influence both at home and globally .

some experts and advocates warn that , even in already restrictive environments , civil society actors could face new or additional repressive action , particularly when civil society engages in politically charged or sensitive issues .

such actions could include intimidation , arrest and detention , criminal penalties under new ngo laws , physical attacks , extrajudicial killings , and harassment online .

civil society groups in burundi , for instance , were harassed and jailed for opposing the president's efforts to extend his mandate in 2015 , which has led to ongoing unrest and violence in the country .

impunity for acts of violence and repression , either by governmental or nongovernmental actors , may also cause civil society actors to self - censor or leave the country due fears of retaliation .

for example , more than 101 environmental activists were killed in honduras between 2010 and 2014 , and some members of civil society engaged on land rights and environment have fled honduras due concerns for their personal safety .

these security concerns may affect the ability of donors — including the united states government , private donors , foundations , and international allies — to s afely work with csos abroad .

this , in turn , could further impact the united states' ability to engage directly with local organizations and populations on the freedoms of assembly , association , and expression as well as u.s. efforts to work with local actors on security and development .

while the origins of the closing space phenomenon are complex and in many cases country - specific , scholars suggest that several drivers have accelerated the problem .

a 2014 publication by the carnegie endowment , closing space: democracy and human rights support under fire , explores the causes of the phenomenon and the context of democracy promotion writ large , and makes the following observations: as the cold war ended , western governments shifted away from providing humanitarian assistance largely through foreign governments towards funding nongovernmental organizations directly , including those working in more explicitly political areas .

a number of events caused semi - authoritarian regimes to view the civil society sector increasingly warily: highly coordinated western support to anti - milosevic nongovernmental forces in serbia ; the color revolutions in georgia , ukraine , and kyrgyzstan ; the "arab spring" movements ; and others .

russia and china have openly challenged the idea of the universality of liberal democratic political values , offering an alternative conception of the rights and responsibilities of citizens and models of governance .

the phenomenon's acceleration has been facilitated by the fact that governments seeking to inhibit civil society groups have learned from each other , for example by copying and implementing nearly identical restrictive legislative measures , analysts suggest .

russia and china maintain a driving role , not only in demonstrating restrictive behavior but also in publicly defending their actions as legitimate .

their example , along with that of india ( notably the world's most populous democracy ) and ethiopia , has provided a lead for other countries to follow .

finally , many observers suggest that another development has contributed to the closing of space for civil society: a post 9 / 11 focus on counterterrorism .

many experts recognize the legitimate threat terrorism poses to states and multilateral actors , and some point to civil society as partners in efforts combat terrorism , noting that the "importance of involving civil society in a comprehensive and multidimensional response to the threat of terrorism has been stressed by various international documents. .

nonetheless , according to the carnegie report , "governments in africa , asia , the middle east and elsewhere have used the war on terror as an excuse to impose restrictions on freedoms of movement , association , and expression. .

some observers point especially to the unique role of the financial action task force ( fatf ) , an inter - governmental organization created in 1989 to combat money laundering and terrorist financing .

while fatf combats illicit funding flows , some experts suggest that its recommendations have been disproportionally hard - hitting on legitimate csos and philanthropic organizations .

the organization's focus on counter - terrorism , critics argue , led to an uncompromising stance in which some governments that have eliminated civic space altogether are rated highly for preventing illicit funding flows .

notably , more than 120 nonprofit organizations have called on fatf to amend its approach to ensure that civil society doesn't face "over - regulation of the sector," a recommendation supported by a united nations special rapporteur .

while the united states government has had programs to engage with and promote civil society abroad for decades , the obama administration has taken additional actions to address the closing space challenge's recent acceleration .

administration officials point to a broad scope of mutually reinforcing policies , diplomacy , and assistance that seek to advance freedom for all , including civil society , particularly through enhanced collaboration among state , usaid , justice , labor , defense , and other departments .

according to many experts , the u.s. record in supporting civil society is mixed .

the obama administration is credited by many experts with having recognized the accelerated closing of civil society space and the need to respond .

practitioners and u.s. officials point to stand with civil society and the presidential memorandum as important steps that formalized the administration's commitments to civil society .

they commend the administration's leadership on rapid response assistance such as lifeline , which was founded in 2011 to provide emergency assistance to csos in partnership with other governments and foundations .

for example , an expert on civil society space has called lifeline an "important increase" to quick - action financial assistance .

experts also recognized a need to balance resources between longer term capacity building , addressing the enabling environment ( i.e .

legal and regulatory frameworks ) , and emergency response needs .

nonetheless , given the increase in restrictions on csos in recent years , many noted that reaching csos under threat with relatively small amounts of funding — sometimes as little as $5,000 to $10,000 — could have a significant impact .

a comprehensive accounting of u.s. responses is complicated by the fact that some u.s. assistance ( either diplomatic or financial ) , while valuable , may be less publicly visible or even unwanted .

in conversations with crs , administration officials and practitioners privately underline that the public record of u.s. government support to civil society is necessarily incomplete due to concerns over retaliation and safety .

some interventions in support of persecuted civil society actors are best done quietly , they suggest .

in other cases , non - u.s. actors may be the preferred interlocutor , as some csos are unwilling to accept u.s. aid — be it financial or diplomatic — due to concerns that it could undermine their credibility at home .

while experts generally agree that the united states has demonstrated leadership in understanding and framing the problem of closing space , the policy response has been complicated by a number of factors , including various competing interests in the policy process , such as balancing support for civil society with u.s. willingness to confront important bilateral partners , possible impacts on other programs or objectives , and the availability of suitable tools or sufficient leverage .

in conversations with crs , former and current officials have privately voiced concern that civil society issues do not often rise to high - level decision - making , particularly when contrasted with decision points around traditional national security interests ( e.g .

foreign military sales or counterterrorism efforts ) and / or development goals ( e.g .

health ) .

critics suggest that recent reductions in u.s. funding to promote democratic space and good governance — coupled with increases in u.s. support to other sectors such as security — may send a mixed message to host countries about u.s. priorities .

some also point to the decline in u.s. funding for democracy and governance ( dg ) since fy2012 , particularly in countries like egypt , ethiopia or sudan that have placed restrictions on ngo activity , as being perceived as rewarding bad behavior and abandoning civil society .

more could be done to institutionalize the administration's efforts to bolster civil society in u.s. foreign policy in the face of competing policy priorities , some experts suggest .

for example , the sacsed position established by then - secretary of state hillary clinton created a direct line to the secretary and highlighted u.s. engagement with civil society as a key component of u.s. foreign policy and diplomacy .

however , in discussions with crs , many policymakers cautioned against using special envoys alone for this issue .

the trade - offs inherent in policy decisions within the interagency process on civil society issues can make it more difficult for a special envoy to engage effectively in policymaking in multiple regions , especially when security threats are also a concern .

advocates suggest that enhanced institutional capacity related to this issue throughout the interagency , particularly through resourcing and staffing , might have a more sustainable impact .

advocates also recommend that all u.s. officials should elevate the focus on civil society , and that officials and programs should be evaluated , in part , on the basis of their engagement with civil society issues ; some experts have also suggested the issuance of a presidential directive to this effect .

some have also underlined the utility of legislation such as the brownback amendment ( see " legislative action " below ) , in protecting u.s. support for civil society , both within the interagency when faced with competing interests , and in ensuring that foreign governments ( including key security partners ) cannot undercut u.s. support for civil society in repressive environments .

the multilateral tools that the administration has sought to bolster , including the cd and ogp , present new partnerships and opportunities that some experts hope will lead to concrete outcomes ; however , some suggest that multilateral efforts may struggle because they also seek to include countries with mixed or restrictive records on civil society .

others question if these organizations can create good response mechanisms when members repress or restrict civil society .

a test case is ongoing in the ogp with member state azerbaijan , which is under review after international csos filed a complaint in march 2015 .

ogp reviewed and assessed the csos complaints to be credible .

in an upcoming ministerial meeting in may 2016 , ogp will review corrective actions by azerbaijan and the status of its membership in the organization .

observers suggest this could be an opportunity to assess ogp's effectiveness in helping governments and civil society work cooperatively for transparent governance .

observers have also questioned the effectiveness of the administration's presentation of u.s. regulation of ngos as an example for other governments .

for example , some suggest that the united states has sent mixed signals about its support to csos when it comes to efforts to counter terrorism financing .

while the financial action task force ( fatf ) , of which the united states is a leading member , was created to combat illicit funding flows , activists suggest that its recommendations have had a disproportionate impact on legitimate csos and philanthropic organizations , especially when compared to regulation of the private sector .

the organization's focus on counter - terrorism , critics argue , has led to an uncompromising stance in which despotic regimes that have eliminated civic space altogether are rated highly for preventing illicit funding flows .

they suggest that u.s. policy and models , as well as institutions like the treasury department , should address fears that ngos could be used as fronts for corruption or terrorist financing activities while also working to support civil society space and operations .

experts further caution that , though the united states has raised international attention to the issue , restrictions on civil society also impact other governments and donors — both public and private .

some are calling for civil society and ngos to develop membership models and / or a culture of philanthropy within their countries as possible alternatives to foreign funding .

experts also assess that the underlying issues , namely free expression , assembly , and association , are not merely a concern for civil society , ngos , or human rights activists .

rather , they suggest that repressive actors could potentially benefit from separating concern over civil society space from broader attention on fundamental freedoms .

congress has demonstrated a strong and sustained interest in the promotion of vibrant civil society abroad as part of u.s. efforts to promote democracy , development , and security .

while many such provisions are country - or issue - specific , others are global in scope .

a nonexhaustive list of recent key examples follows .

congress will likely continue to provide oversight of democracy assistance programs and , given the recent history of congressional action described above , it appears likely that at least some in congress may to seek to continue to promote and protect the role of civil society abroad in particular .

among the actions that congress may consider on this issue , several potential avenues emerge , any of which could potentially be addressed through legislation .

the repression of civil society in many countries around the world may represent a "new normal," many experts fear , a dynamic which poses significant challenges to the promotion of democratic governance abroad .

in the face of what some have called a democratic roll - back , u.s. policymakers , and congress in particular , may consider options to include how best to support civil society abroad , in particular when weighing such support against the desired cooperation of a foreign government on other issues of critical interest to the united states .

u.s. leadership on this issue , including in the context of multilateral organizations , may be received quite differently depending on the specific circumstance , requiring sophisticated understanding of local conditions as well as effective coordination with other actors ranging from private foundations to international partners .

advocates of support to civil society abroad are concerned that the administration's elevation of the issue , manifested in the stand with civil society initiative , while laudable in principle , may not have sufficiently mobilized resources in support of the enabling environment for civil society abroad to date .

some also express concern that despite its shortcomings , the priority given to the issue under president obama may not be sustainable once he leaves office .

given these trends , it appears all but certain that congress will continue to examine civil society developments and may seek ways in which to support civil society abroad , even as it grapples with the difficult choices inherent in overseeing foreign relations and assistance .

