this report presents a side - by - side comparison of h.r .

2576 , the tsca modernization act of 2015 , as passed by the house on june 23 , 2015 , and s.amdt .

2932 , the frank r. lautenberg chemical safety for the 21 st century act , as passed by the senate on december 17 , 2015 , as a substitute amendment to h.r .

2576 .

 ( hereafter in this report , the house - passed bill h.r .

2576 will be referred to as the "house bill," while the senate amendment to h.r .

2576 will be referred to as the "senate amendment." ) .

both the house bill and the senate amendment would amend title i of the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) .

the senate amendment , but not the house bill , would also amend the mercury export ban act of 2008 and add a provision to the public health service act regarding potential cancer clusters .

the first section of this report provides a brief background on title i of tsca .

for a summary of tsca provisions and history , see crs report rl31905 , the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) : a summary of the act and its major requirements , by [author name scrubbed] .

the second section describes differences between the house bill and the senate amendment and also presents background on selected issues that the legislation addresses .

the final section includes table 1 , which presents a side - by - side comparison of the provisions of existing law , the house bill , and the senate amendment .

in 1976 , president ford signed into law the toxic substances control act , which authorizes the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to identify and regulate chemicals in u.s. commerce that present an "unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. .

since 1976 , congress has added five other titles to tsca and has amended the original law , referred to as title i , to address specific chemical concerns .

none of these additions and amendments has altered the core program under title i of tsca .

neither the house bill nor the senate amendment would amend the other titles ( i.e. , titles ii through vi ) of tsca .

among other things , title i of tsca requires epa to compile and maintain a list of chemical substances manufactured or processed in the united states .

this list is referred to as the tsca chemical substance inventory ( or tsca inventory ) .

epa's initial compilation of the tsca inventory included over 62,000 chemical substances .

tsca distinguishes between chemical substances that are on the inventory and those that are not .

any chemical substance listed on the inventory is considered by the agency as an "existing" chemical substance .

the statute defines any chemical substance not on the inventory as a "new chemical substance. .

since epa's publication of the initial tsca inventory , the agency has added over 23,000 new chemical substances to the inventory .

once a chemical substance is added to the tsca inventory , it becomes an existing chemical substance for purposes of the statute .

in order to determine which chemicals warrant regulation under tsca , epa is authorized to evaluate risks that may arise from the entire commercial life - cycle of chemicals , including their manufacture , processing , distribution , use , and disposal .

pursuant to tsca section 6 , epa has authority to pursue a range of regulatory options to address unreasonable risks from chemicals .

these options vary in severity from a complete ban to a requirement that manufacturers notify distributors of unreasonable risks .

since the enactment of tsca , epa has regulated few chemicals under tsca section 6 , including: chlorofluorocarbons used in aerosol propellants ; nitrosamines used in metalworking fluids ( 40 c.f.r .

part 747 ) ; hexavalent chromium used for certain water cooling towers ( 40 c.f.r .

part 749 ) ; new uses of asbestos ( 40 c.f.r .

part 763 , subpart i ) ; dioxin - contaminated wastes ; and polychlorinated biphenyls ( 40 c.f.r .

part 761 ) .

the agency has taken actions pursuant to other authorities in the statute .

for example , epa has: collected information on the risks , uses , and volumes in commerce of various chemicals to inform its evaluation of chemical risks ( pursuant to tsca sections 4 , 5 , and 8 ) ; evaluated various chemicals for risks ( pursuant to tsca section 6 ) ; and promulgated rules to require notification for significant new uses of certain chemical substances ( pursuant to tsca section 5 ) .

since 2005 , members of congress have introduced bills to revise the chemical evaluation process for determining whether regulatory actions are warranted and to address other related purposes .

although the bills were not enacted , they generated debate on whether and how to amend the evaluation process , regulatory criteria , and other elements of the law .

the house bill would amend several provisions in tsca , including: the authority for epa to require testing of chemicals under tsca section 4 ; the process by which epa would evaluate risks of chemicals and regulate those found to present unreasonable risks under tsca section 6 ; the procedures and standards under tsca section 14 for confidential treatment of certain information submitted to epa under tsca ; tsca's relationship to state laws regulating chemicals under tsca section 18 ; and the authority for epa to collect fees under tsca section 26 .

the senate amendment would amend the same provisions of tsca listed above , albeit with differences .

additionally , the senate amendment would amend: the process by which epa reviews new chemical substances or significant new uses of chemicals under tsca section 5 ; the recordkeeping and reporting requirements under tsca section 8 ; and various other provisions .

the following sections provide a brief discussion of seven issues that have received attention in the debate to amend title i of tsca .

the discussions include comparisons between how the house bill and senate amendment would address each issue .

these issues include: prioritization of existing chemical substances for the evaluation of risks ; regulatory threshold criteria under which epa would be authorized to restrict a chemical ; regulatory options available to epa in restricting a chemical found to warrant regulation ; epa's authority to require the development of new information regarding a chemical ; preemption of state laws concerning the regulation of chemicals ; disclosure and protection from disclosure of information submitted to epa ; and resources that may be available for epa to administer the act .

 table 1 of this report presents a side - by - side comparison of existing law , the house bill , and the senate amendment .

the table includes a discussion of each provision of the house bill and the senate amendment , although it does not provide comprehensive analysis of the potential effects of particular provisions in the house bill or the senate amendment .

existing law in the table is presented to the extent that such law would be amended by either the house bill or the senate amendment .

the table organizes the provisions of the house bill and the senate amendment under 10 subheadings selected by crs that reflect the following elements of tsca: 1 .

short title , intent , and definitions ( page crs - 12 ) ; 2 .

policies , procedures , and guidance ; and advisory committee ( page crs - 13 ) ; 3 .

recordkeeping , reporting , chemical inventory , and development of new information ( page crs - 15 ) ; 4 .

confidential treatment and public disclosure of information ( page crs - 20 ) ; 5 .

addressing risks of existing chemical substances and mixtures ( page crs - 28 ) ; 6 .

addressing risks of new chemical substances and significant new uses of chemical substances ( page crs - 36 ) ; 7 .

judicial review and enforcement ( page crs - 39 ) ; 8 .

relationship to state law ( page crs - 42 ) ; 9 .

resources to implement tsca ( page crs - 47 ) ; and 10 .

other provisions ( page crs - 49 ) .

