t he consolidated appropriations act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-13 ) made several changes to the tax treatment of real estate investment trusts ( reits ) and the foreign investment in real property tax act ( firpta , enacted in the omnibus reconciliation act of 1980 , p.l .

96-499 ) as it relates to reits .

reits are corporations that issue shares of stock , are largely invested in real property , and do not generally pay corporate tax .

reits distribute and deduct most of their earned income as dividends to shareholders .

u.s. individual shareholders pay tax at ordinary individual income tax rates on those dividends , rather than the lower rates that normally apply to dividends on corporate stock .

also , firpta imposes a capital gains tax on foreign investments for gains related to real estate , with an exception for a 5% or less ownership of a reit .

the consolidated appropriations act enacted three types of changes to the rules regarding reits: ( 1 ) provisions to prevent tax - free spin - offs of real property into tax - exempt reits by currently taxable , operating corporations ; ( 2 ) provisions to increase foreign investment in u.s. reits by liberalizing firpta rules ; and ( 3 ) a series of technical revisions to reits that had been under consideration for some time .

additional modifications to reit provisions might still be considered in the future if general tax reform is considered .

for instance , the reit provisions proposed in former ways and means chairman camp's proposed tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

1 , 113 th congress ) were generally more restrictive and raised more revenue than the provisions in the consolidated appropriations act .

moreover , other changes made in a tax reform might affect the relative advantage of reits .

this report describes reits and firpta , provides historical developments , presents an overview of reit size and activity , explains the provisions in the consolidated appropriations act , and discusses possible policy issues in the future .

a reit is a real estate company that would otherwise be taxed as a corporation , except that it meets certain tests and faces a number of restrictions .

these requirements and restrictions are listed in table 1 .

its primary business is ownership of real estate assets .

unlike ordinary corporations , reits generally face little or no corporate level tax because distributions to shareholders are treated as deductible expenses .

to qualify , a reit must meet a number of tests , including having at least 75% of its assets and gross income in real estate and distributing at least 90% of profits to shareholders .

dividends paid to individual shareholders are taxed at ordinary individual income tax rates ( rather than the lower rates that generally apply to dividends ) .

basically a reit is taxed similarly to a partnership in many ways , which is subject to the individual income tax , and largely avoids the corporate - level tax .

reits have a number of restrictions that require concentration of their assets in passive investments , primarily real estate , and ensure broad ownership .

the allowance for taxable reit subsidiaries adopted in 1999 , however , has expanded the scope for reits to operate properties .

over time , the rules governing reits have been relaxed , both by legislative and regulatory changes , to allow more involvement not just in holding real estate assets , but also in managing properties and services .

reits were originally designed to be passive real estate owners ( if they did not simply own mortgages ) , with properties operated by others .

the tax reform act of 1986 allowed reits to perform customary services and , thus , to operate their properties directly rather than to employ independent contractors .

legislation in the late 1990s , especially allowing taxable reit subsidiaries , also expanded the scope of operations .

taxable reit subsidiaries also introduced the possibility of reducing taxes by shifting profits into the reit parent through higher than market rents , an effect for which some evidence was found ( although such transactions are subject to a 100% penalty ) .

these and other changes expanded the scope of assets organized as reits .

prior to the 2015 legislation and following a regulatory change in 2001 , corporations have been able to spin off their real estate assets into a separate reit through a tax - free reorganization .

the number of firms spinning off their properties or considering doing so has been growing .

one of the changes in the consolidated appropriations act was to restrict this practice .

reits are organized as equity , mortgage , or hybrid reits , depending on whether they hold real estate , mortgages , or a combination of both .

today , most reits are equity reits .

reits fall into three classes as far as regulation and trading: ( 1 ) public reits traded on the stock exchange , ( 2 ) public reits not traded on the stock exchange but subject to registration with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , and ( 3 ) private reits .

reits are subject to a number of other restrictions and rules .

reits were intended to have passive investments in real estate assets and not to hold property for sale to customers in the ordinary course of business ( as a developer would ) .

gain from these sales would be considered sale of inventory .

such income is not classified as qualified real estate income and there is a 100% prohibited transactions tax on such gain .

this tax does not apply to property obtained through foreclosure and there are safe harbors from the tax including limits on the size of the sale and a holding period of two years .

in general , a foreign person or corporation is not taxed on u.s. source capital gains income .

however , if the income is from selling u.s. real property , the distribution is taxed at the same rates as a u.s. person under the foreign investment in real property tax act ( firpta ) .

the firpta rules , adopted in 1980 , considered investment in real property to be income effectively connected to business , which is generally subject to u.s. taxes .

there is an exception if ( 1 ) the investment is made through a qualified investment entity ; ( 2 ) the u.s. real property is regularly traded on an established u.s. securities market ; and ( 3 ) the recipient foreign person or corporation did not hold more than 5% of that class of stock or beneficial interest within the one - year period ending on the date of distribution .

the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) extended the exception to cover capital gains distributions as well as stock sales .

due to a concern that firpta rules discouraged investment in reits by foreign persons , liberalizing firpta was also included in the consolidated appropriations act .

as mentioned above , reits have changed significantly over time , beginning largely as entities that passively held real estate mortgages , then becoming largely entities holding standard real properties ( eg , apartments and commercial properties ) directly , and more recently expanding into entities holding nontraditional assets ( such as prisons , timber , billboards , and cell towers ) .

recent periods have also been marked by a number of tax - free spin - offs of real property of operating corporations , so that their real property was now in a separate tax - exempt reit .

the national association of real estate investment trusts ( nareit ) , as of november 2015 , estimates the current market capitalization of public reits at $935 billion .

equity reits ( i.e. , reits that invest in property rather than mortgages ) account for 94% or the total ( $875 billion ) .

reits traded on the stock market account for 95% of public reits ( $890 billion ) .

these reits own $1.8 trillion of real estate .

in 2014 , public traded reits paid $42 billion in dividends , and public non - traded reits paid $4 billion .

on average , 67% of the annual dividends paid by reits qualify as ordinary taxable income , 17% qualify as return of capital , and 16% qualify as long - term capital gains .

nareit data do not include private reits , but they appear to be worth less than $100 billion .

the tax benefits from a reit vary depending on the taxpayer's circumstances .

from a tax perspective , tax - exempt investors have the largest benefit from reit treatment compared with treatment as a regular corporation because they have a zero personal level tax and are not subject to the unrelated business income tax .

without reit treatment , income would be subject to a 35% corporate tax rate .

an individual investor with a high tax rate investor who receives all income in dividends would pay a tax of 50.47% with a regular corporate investment ( a 35% corporate tax and a 23.8% individual level tax , including the 39.6% income tax and the additional 3.8% tax enacted in the affordable care act , on the remaining profit of 65% ) .

with reit treatment , dividends would be taxed at 39.6% plus the 3.8% tax , which is a 7.17 percentage point difference .

 ( for earnings received as capital gains the difference is greater. ) .

for an investor in an ordinary corporate firm that pays little or no dividends and where gains are not realized , the tax rate for a reit can be higher than for an ordinary corporation: 43.4% ( 39.6% plus 3.8% ) versus 35% .

in general , therefore , for individual taxpayers , reit tax treatment is most advantageous when ordinary individual income tax rates are low and the investor prefers dividend payouts .

although data on ownership of shares are not consistently available , evidence does not suggest that tax - exempt investors invest heavily in reits .

according to one study , defined benefit ( db ) pension fund holdings in reits were 0.6% of their portfolios .

db and other pension fund assets were reported at $18.8 trillion , suggesting that about 11% of reit shares are held by pension funds if dc pension plans invest at a similar rate .

the majority of reit assets are in more traditional asset types: 24% in retail ( largely shopping centers ) , 15% each in industrial and office and residential ( largely apartments ) , 11% in health ( such as nursing homes ) , and 8% in self - storage .

recently , attention has been directed to nontraditional reits and spin - offs , such as timber , data centers , cell towers , prisons , hotels , document storage , casinos , billboards , and communications .

as noted earlier , however , these might be viewed as nontraditional not as a legal matter ( since many of these types of assets had long been considered real estate assets ) but as not the common passive building rentals .

nontraditional reit asset types account for 4% in timber , 11% in infrastructure , and 4% in lodging and resorts .

in a 2014 paper that identified 20 recent nontraditional or recently converted reits for the years 1999-2015 , four timber reits' market capitalization was $31.4 billion ( with weyerhaeuser accounting for about two - thirds of the total ) .

five data center reits accounted for $35.7 billion ; two cell tower for $65.4 billion ; one real estate for $6.3 billion ; two prison for $6.9 billion ; one hotel for $2.5 billion ; one document storage facility for $6.9 billion ; one casino for $3.7 billion ; two billboards for $9.0 billion ; and one communication center for $6.8 billion .

the nontraditional or recently converted reits amount to a value of $175 billion , or approximately a fifth of reit valuations , and appeared to be accelerating .

a new york times article has a somewhat overlapping list of spin - offs since 2010 , which included an additional 13 tax - free spin - offs , totaling $15.8 billion .

although they were spin - offs from operating companies ( such as darden restaurants , owner of olive garden restaurants ) , many were in more traditional reit activities , such as health centers , shopping malls , and apartments .

that same article noted that several additional spin - offs appeared to be grandfathered in the recent legislation , including caesars casinos , mgm resorts , boyd gaming , hilton , and energy future holdings corporation .

this section summarizes the recent revisions enacted in the consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

114-13 ) along with the revenue gain or loss estimates by the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) .

the jct also has a more detailed explanation of each of the changes .

the revisions in the consolidated appropriations act may lead to a period with no further reit revisions .

nevertheless , in the context of tax reform , reits might be affected directly or indirectly .

for example , some of the revenue - raising reit provisions in former chairman of the house ways and means committee dave camp's proposed tax reform act of 2014 ( h.r .

1 , 113 th congress ) were not enacted in the consolidated appropriations act and might be potential base broadening targets in a tax reform .

the major differences between that bill and the recently enacted provisions were a more restrictive limit on spin - offs ( the revenue gain was estimated at $5.9 billion in the 2014 bill ) by applying the spin - off rules to all transactions including existing reits and imposing a tax on gain for conversions from regular corporate to reit status .

the 2014 bill also had provisions aimed at restricting nontraditional assets in qualifying for reit status by disallowing any asset with a life of less than 27.5 years .

billboards , for example , have a life of 20 years and would have been no longer eligible to be treated as real estate qualifying for reit status .

this change was estimated , assuming the spin - off and gains provisions were adopted , to raise $0.6 billion .

the bill also specifically disallowed timber reits , with a delay in implementation .

one provision that was included in an earlier version of the tax amendments to the appropriations bill and in the 2014 proposal , but not in the final act , was a cap on the amount of rent or interest based on a fixed percentage of income or sales that qualifies as rental income .

a major change in how corporations are taxed could also affect reits indirectly or even lead to proposals for fundamental changes in reit treatment .

for example , a lowering of the corporate tax rate would reduce the relative tax benefit for reits and even make taxes on reits with respect to dividends higher than those on ordinary corporations .

a reduction in individual tax rates would benefit reits .

the 2014 proposal reduced the top individual rate to 35% and the corporate rate to 25% .

a tax - exempt investor would see the tax benefit of a reit fall from 35% to 25% , and a high - income individual would see the benefit fall from 7.17 percentage points to 4.05 percentage points .

proposals for fundamental changes in the tax law , perhaps as an element of tax reform , could also have consequences for reits .

for example , senate finance committee chairman orrin hatch has indicated interest in a corporate tax integration proposal that might allow corporate dividend deductions ( and presumably taxation at ordinary rates for dividends ) , a treatment that would move ordinary corporations closer to the treatment of reits .

