broadband — whether delivered via fiber , cable modem , copper wire , satellite , or wirelessly — is increasingly the technology underlying telecommunications services such as voice , video , and data .

since the initial deployment of high - speed internet in the late 1990s , broadband technologies have been deployed primarily by the private sector throughout the united states .

while the number of new broadband subscribers continues to grow , studies and data suggest that the rate of broadband deployment in urban / suburban and high - income areas is outpacing deployment in rural and low - income areas .

in particular , tribal communities stand out as being among the most unserved or underserved populations with respect to broadband deployment .

according to the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , "[b]y virtually any measure , communities on tribal lands have historically had less access to telecommunications services than any other segment of the population. .

according to census data , about 28.3% of native americans live in households below the poverty level ( compared to 15.5% nationally ) , and tribal communities often lack basic infrastructure such as water and sewer systems , and telecommunications .

high poverty rates and low income levels in tribal lands — along with the fact that many tribal communities are located in remote rural areas ( often with rugged terrain ) — are major factors that explain why tribal areas have comparatively poor levels of broadband access , and why providers may lack an economic incentive to serve those areas .

according to the fcc's office of native affairs and policy ( onap ) : understanding the complexity of the digital divide in indian country requires an appreciation of the unique challenges facing tribal nations , which include deployment , adoption , affordability , and access to spectrum , as well as lack of investment dollars and access to credit and start - up or gap financing .

barriers to the deployment of communications services include rural , remote , rugged terrain , areas that are not connected to a road system , and difficulty in obtaining rights - of - way to deploy infrastructure across some tribal lands — all of which increase the cost of installing , maintaining , and upgrading infrastructure .

affordability of communications services is affected by often endemic levels of poverty .

because tribal nations cannot easily collateralize assets that are held in trust by the federal government , and cannot easily access investment dollars , the ability to obtain credit and financing is limited .

the presence of robust broadband and improved digital connectivity in tribal areas could play a significant role in revitalizing many tribal communities .

the fcc's 2010 national broadband plan identified broadband as a basic infrastructure necessary for improving economic growth , job creation , global competitiveness , and a better way of life .

according to onap , "[t]he lack of robust communications services presents serious impediments to tribal nations' efforts to preserve their cultures and build their internal structures for self - governance , economic opportunity , health , education , public safety , and welfare. .

until recently , data on tribal broadband had been scarce .

the government accountability office ( gao ) noted in 2006 that "[t]he rate of internet subscribership for native american households on tribal lands is unknown because neither the census bureau nor fcc collects this data at the tribal level. .

the fcc and the department of commerce ( census and the national telecommunications and information administration ) have begun to collect and compile data on tribal broadband deployment .

according to december 2017 fcc deployment data , 32% of americans living on tribal lands lacked access to terrestrial fixed broadband at speeds of 25 mbps download / 3 mbps upload .

this is an improvement over 2014 data ( 42.8% without broadband ) and 2013 data ( 62.9% ) .

table 1 shows the percentages of americans with access to fixed terrestrial broadband service with respect to tribal lands , rural areas , urban areas , and the united states as a whole .

source: fcc , communications marketplace report , p. 132 .

table 2 shows broadband availability within the various categories of tribal lands .

areas that are the most lacking in broadband service are rural alaskan villages and rural tribal lands in the lower 48 states .

table 3 shows tribal lands with access to fixed terrestrial broadband by state .

table 4 shows 2013-2017 fixed broadband adoption rates for tribal lands and the united states as a whole .

broadband adoption in this table reflects the percentage of households that actually subscribe to broadband service offering speeds of at least 25 mbps / 3 mbps .

finally , table 5 shows that native americans have a lower rate of internet usage than other races and ethnicities .

the gao september 2018 report , fcc's broadband internet: data overstate access on tribal lands , found that the fcc's tribal broadband data relies exclusively on provider - reported data , and overstates broadband access because the fcc considers broadband to be available for an entire census block if the provider could serve at least one location in that census block .

gao also found that the fcc does not collect data on factors significant to tribal broadband , such as affordability , quality , and denials of service .

gao recommended that the fcc develop and implement methods , such as targeted data collection , for collecting and reporting more accurate broadband data on tribal lands ; develop a formal process , including outreach and technical assistance , to obtain tribal input on the accuracy of provided - submitted broadband data ; and obtain feedback from tribal stakeholders and providers on the effectiveness of the fcc's 2012 statement to providers on how to fulfill their tribal engagement requirements .

a precise accounting of federal funding for tribal broadband is problematic .

a comprehensive listing of all federal funding programs for broadband is found in the publication , guide to federal funding of broadband projects , compiled by the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) .

tribal entities or projects are eligible for virtually all of these programs , but with a few exceptions , there are no carve - outs or dedicated funding streams specifically for tribal applicants or nontribal entities proposing to serve tribal lands .

thus , annual amounts of federal financial assistance vary depending on the number and quality of tribal - related applications received , and the number of tribal - related broadband awards made by the funding agencies .

compounding the challenge in assessing federal funding for tribal broadband , some programs may not formally track funding to tribal areas , making it difficult to come up with an accurate overall number from year to year .

gao , in its 2016 report , challenges to assessing and improving telecommunications for native americans on tribal lands , identified programs in two federal agencies that serve as the primary source of funding for deploying broadband infrastructure in tribal lands and communities: the fcc and the rural utilities service ( rus ) in the u.s. department of agriculture .

subsequently , the september 2018 gao report , tribal broadband: few partnerships exist and the rural utilities service needs to identify and address any funding barriers tribes face , found that few federal funds were provided to tribal entities to increase broadband deployment from 2010 to 2017 .

gao found that "less than 1 percent of fcc funding and about 14 percent of rus funding went directly to tribes and tribally owned providers," and that combined , "fcc and rus funding totaled $34.6 billion during that time period and tribes and tribally owned providers received $235 million , or about 0.7 percent. .

the gao analysis excluded nontribally owned broadband providers that serve tribal areas .

on april 27 , 2016 , an amendment to s. 2644 ( the fcc authorization act of 2016 ) offered by senator cantwell and adopted by the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , would have directed the fcc to develop metrics to measure the impact of universal service support on tribal lands and would have required the fcc to prepare a biennial report to congress on the impact of universal service support on tribes and tribal lands .

s. 2644 was reported by the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation on september 20 , 2016 ( s.rept .

114-355 ) but was not enacted by the 114 th congress .

meanwhile , on april 27 , 2016 , the senate committee on indian affairs held an oversight hearing on the gao report , telecommunications: additional coordination and performance measurement needed for high - speed internet access programs on tribal lands .

testimony was heard from the rus , fcc , gao , and private witnesses .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) appropriated $600 million to rus to conduct a new broadband loan and grant pilot program .

while no funding was specifically set aside for tribal broadband , projects in rural tribal areas would be eligible for funding .

also in p.l .

115-141 , section 508 of division p required the fcc to submit a report to congress evaluating broadband coverage in indian country and on land held by a native corporation pursuant to the alaska native claims settlement act , with the fcc required to complete a proceeding to address the unserved areas identified in the report .

other introduced legislation specifically related to tribal broadband includes the following: h.r .

800 ( huffman ) , introduced on february 1 , 2017 , as the new deal rural broadband act of 2017 , includes a provision ( §4 ) that would have established a tribal broadband assistance program .

the department of agriculture would have been authorized to make grants , loans , or loan guarantees to entities to ( 1 ) plan , construct , acquire , or improve facilities or equipment for the purpose of providing broadband service on tribal lands ; ( 2 ) provide broadband service on tribal lands ; ( 3 ) develop among tribal members technical expertise related to broadband service ; and ( 4 ) improve the adoption of broadband service by individuals on tribal lands .

the bill would have authorized $25 million for each of fiscal years 2017 through 2022 .

referred to the committee on agriculture , and in addition to the committees on natural resources and energy and commerce .

h.r .

1581 ( ruiz ) , introduced on march 16 , 2017 , as the tribal digital access act of 2017 , would have amended the communications act of 1934 to add access to telecommunications and information services in indian country and areas with high populations of indian people to the universal service principle relating to access to such services in rural , insular , and high cost areas .

referred to the committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

3268 ( aderholt ) , the fy2018 agriculture appropriations bill , funds community connect grants and broadband loans , and is accompanied by the house appropriations committee report ( h.rept .

115-232 ) , which includes the following: tribal communities. — the committee notes that tribal communities continue to struggle with gaining access to broadband service .

the committee encourages the secretary to provide a report that identifies the specific challenges indian tribal organizations ( itos ) have in gaining access to broadband service and provide a plan for addressing these challenges , including how the community connect program can assist itos .

h.r .

4506 ( torres ) , introduced on november 30 , 2017 , as the jobs for tribes act , would have directed gao to conduct a study assessing a range of federal programs ( including broadband and telecommunications programs ) available to assist indian communities with business and economic development .

referred to the committees on natural resources ; foreign affairs ; and education and the workforce .

h.r .

5007 ( ruiz ) , introduced on february 13 , 2018 , would have directed the fcc to submit to congress a report evaluating broadband coverage in indian country and on land held by a native corporation and to complete a proceeding to address the unserved areas identified in the report .

referred to the committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

5172 ( o'halleran ) , introduced on march 6 , 2018 , would have assisted indian tribes in maintaining , expanding , and deploying broadband systems .

referred to the committee on agriculture , and in addition to the committee on energy and commerce .

h.r .

5961 ( aderholt ) , introduced on may 24 , 2018 , as the fy2019 agriculture appropriations bill , funds community connect grants and broadband loans , and is accompanied by the house appropriations committee report ( h.rept .

115-706 ) , which includes the following: tribal communities. — the committee notes that tribal communities continue to struggle with gaining access to broadband service .

the committee encourages the secretary to provide a report that identifies the specific challenges indian tribal organizations ( itos ) have in gaining access to broadband service and provide a plan for addressing these challenges , including how the community connect program can assist itos .

s. 1116 ( hoeven ) , introduced on may 11 , 2017 , as the indian community economic enhancement act of 2017 , would have directed gao to conduct a study assessing a range of federal programs ( including broadband and telecommunications programs ) available to assist indian communities with business and economic development .

referred to the committee on senate indian affairs ; reported by committee on october 17 , 2017 ( s.rept .

115-174 ) .

s. 2205 ( heinrich ) , introduced on december 7 , 2017 , as the tribal connect act of 2017 , would have improved access by indian tribes to support from the schools and libraries universal service support program ( e - rate ) of the federal communications commission .

referred to the committee on indian affairs .

with respect to broadband and telecommunications access and adoption , tribal areas and communities continue to lag behind other areas and segments of american society .

many contend that without federal assistance , tribal lands will continue to be on the wrong side of the digital divide .

at issue is what role the federal government can play to most effectively and efficiently support broadband deployment on tribal lands .

aside from providing funding for broadband deployment , the federal government has pursued other policies relevant to tribal broadband .

these include mechanisms for effective coordination and consultation with tribes on broadband issues , spectrum policies to promote wireless broadband deployment on tribal lands , addressing permitting and environmental review issues for deploying broadband infrastructure on tribal lands , and rights - of - way policies to enable broadband infrastructure deployment on public lands .

on january 31 , 2017 , fcc chairman ajit pai announced the formation of a broadband deployment advisory committee , which is developing advice and recommendations to the fcc on how to accelerate the deployment of broadband by reducing and / or removing regulatory barriers to infrastructure investment .

regarding funding , debate has centered on whether federal funding for tribal broadband is sufficient , and the extent to which portions of federal funds available for broadband generally should be specifically targeted for tribal broadband .

the 2010 national broadband plan ( nbp ) found that "[t]ribes need substantially greater financial support than is presently available to them , and accelerating tribal broadband deployment will require increased funding. .

the nbp recommended that congress establish a tribal broadband fund , which would be administered by ntia in consultation with the fcc and the bureau of indian affairs .

to date , no legislation has been enacted by congress that would specifically establish a tribal broadband fund .

currently , the largest overall source of federal funding for telecommunications services is the fcc's universal service fund programs .

as these programs transition toward a broadband - centric orientation ( eg , the connect america fund ) , the issue for tribal broadband is how this transition will affect broadband funding to tribal lands , and to what extent these programs might be configured toward addressing the relatively low levels of broadband deployment and adoption in tribal lands .

in the 116 th congress , notwithstanding whether federal broadband funding programs target tribal lands , whether or not tribal lands will receive additional funding for broadband will likely be determined by the ongoing trajectory of overall federal funding for broadband .

