eligible veterans are entitled to receive certain military honors at their funerals .

in general , these honors are provided by the department of defense ( dod ) to eligible veterans who are interred or inurned at department of veterans affairs ( va ) national cemeteries , state veterans cemeteries , and private cemeteries .

there is no cost to the family of a veteran for military honors .

the current authorization and requirements for the provision of military honors at veterans' funerals are provided in statute at 10 u.s.c .

section 1491 , and were established by section 567 of division a of the strom thurmond national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1999 , p.l .

105-261 ; and amended by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2000 , p.l .

106-65 .

in the conference report accompanying p.l .

105-261 , the conferees provided the following justification for the authorization of military honors for veterans' funerals: the conferees agree that men and women have unselfishly answered the call to arms at tremendous personal sacrifice .

the conferees agree that men and women , who have served honorably , whether in war or peace , deserve commemoration for their military service at the time of their death by an appropriate tribute .

burial honors are an important means of reminding americans of the sacrifices endured to keep the nation free .

prior to the enactment of p.l .

105-261 , there was no formal statutory requirement that the dod provide military honors at veterans' funerals .

however , such honors were customarily provided in accordance with the statutory requirement that a u.s. flag be presented to the next of kin of eligible veterans ; military custom ; and dod directive 1300.15 , issued in 1985 , which directed the military branches to provide to deceased veterans "appropriate tribute within the constraints of available resources. .

active duty servicemembers and members of the selected reserve ( which generally includes members of the national guard ) who die while in service are eligible for military funeral honors .

in addition , federal law provides that veterans who served on active duty and former members of the selected reserve may be eligible for military funeral honors .

federal law prescribes the minimum elements required for military funeral honors .

these include a funeral honors detail of at least two non - retired uniformed members of the armed forces , the folding and presentation of a u.s. flag to the family of the deceased , and the playing of taps .

each branch of the armed forces is free to augment these minimum components with additional elements such as firing parties , color guards , or additional participating military personnel .

the eligibility requirements for interment or inurnment at arlington national cemetery , which is administered by the department of the army and not the va , differ from , and are generally more stringent than , the requirements for eligibility at va national cemeteries and general eligibility for military funeral honors .

there are different eligibility requirements for ground burial and inurnment in the columbarium and niche wall at arlington national cemetery .

once eligibility for ground burial or inurnment at arlington national cemetery is determined , honors are afforded according to rank and provided by the veteran's branch of service .

pursuant to legislation enacted on may 20 , 2016 ( p.l .

114-158 ) , civilians determined by law or the secretary of defense under the gi bill improvement act of 1977 ( p.l .

95-202 ) to have performed active duty military service and been granted veterans status , such as women's air force service pilots , are eligible for inurnment in the columbarium or niche wall at arlington cemetery but not ground burial .

enlisted personnel at pay grades e - 8 or below are entitled to standard military honors , which consist of a casket team of body bearers , a firing party , and a bugler .

senior enlisted personnel at pay grade e - 9 , warrant officers , and commissioned officers entitled to full military honors , which include standard military honors and an escort platoon with size determined by rank ; a military band ; and the use of the caisson , if available .

colonels in the army and marine corps are also entitled to the caparisoned ( decorated ) riderless horse , if available .

general and flag officers , other high state officials , and the president are entitled to cannon or minute gun salutes of varying sizes depending upon rank .

effective january 2 , 2009 , all servicemembers who die from wounds received as a result of enemy action and are being interred , inurned , or memorialized at arlington national cemetery are eligible to receive full military honors regardless of rank .

spouses and eligible dependents of persons eligible for interment or inurnment at arlington cemetery are entitled to a casket team of body bearers from the veteran's branch of service .

pursuant to supreme court's decision in united states v. windsor , declaring section 3 of the defense of marriage act unconstitutional , same - sex spouses are eligible for interment or inurnment at arlington national cemetery and any va national cemetery effective june 26 , 2013 .

