daylight saving time ( dst ) is a period of the year between spring and fall when clocks in the united states are set one hour ahead of standard time .

it is not a new concept .

in 1784 , benjamin franklin , minister to france , had an idea that part of the year when the sun rises while most people are still asleep , clocks could be reset to allow an extra hour of daylight during waking hours .

he calculated that french shopkeepers could save one million francs per year on candles .

in 1907 , william willett , a british builder , member of parliament , and fellow of the royal astronomical society , proposed the adoption of advanced time .

the bill was reported favorably , asserting that dst would move hours of work and recreation more closely to daylight hours , reducing expenditures on artificial light .

after much opposition , however , the bill was not adopted .

during world war i , in an effort to conserve fuel , germany began observing dst on may 1 , 1916 .

as the war progressed , the rest of europe adopted dst .

the plan was not formally adopted in the united states until 1918 .

"an act to preserve daylight and provide standard time for the united states" was enacted on march 19 , 1918 ( 40 stat 450 ) .

it both established standard time zones and set summer dst to begi n on march 31 , 1918 .

the idea was unpopular , however , and congress abolished dst after the war , overriding president woodrow wilson's veto .

dst became a local option and was observed in some states until world war ii , when president franklin roosevelt instituted year - round dst , called "war time," on february 9 , 1942 .

it ended on the last sunday in september 1945 .

the next year , many states and localities adopted summer dst .

by 1962 , the transportation industry found the lack of nationwide consistency in time observance confusing enough to push for federal regulation .

this drive resulted in the uniform time act of 1966 ( p.l .

89-387 ) .

the act mandated standard time within the established time zones and provided for advanced time: clocks would be advanced one hour beginning at 2:00 a.m. on the last sunday in april and turned back one hour at 2:00 a.m. on the last sunday in october .

states were allowed to exempt themselves from dst as long as the entire state did so .

if a state chose to observe dst , the time changes were required to begin and end on the established dates .

in 1968 , arizona became the first state to exempt itself from dst .

in 1972 , the act was amended ( p.l .

92-267 ) , allowing those states split between time zones to exempt either the entire state or that part of the state lying within a different time zone .

the newly created department of transportation ( dot ) was given the power to enforce the law .

currently , the following states and territories do not observe dst: arizona , hawaii , american samoa , guam , the northern mariana islands , puerto rico , and the virgin islands .

during the 1973 oil embargo by the organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) , in an effort to conserve fuel , congress enacted a trial period of year - round dst ( p.l .

93-182 ) , from january 6 , 1974 , to april 27 , 1975 .

from the beginning , the trial was hotly debated .

those in favor pointed to the benefits of increased daylight hours in the winter evening: more time for recreation , reduced lighting and heating demands , reduced crime , and reduced automobile accidents .

the opposition was concerned about children leaving for school in the dark .

the act was amended in october 1974 ( p.l .

93-434 ) to return to standard time for the period beginning october 27 , 1974 , and ending february 23 , 1975 , when dst resumed .

when the trial ended in 1975 , the country returned to observing summer dst ( with the aforementioned exceptions ) .

dot , charged with evaluating the plan of extending dst into march , reported in 1975 that "modest overall benefits might be realized by a shift from the historic six - month dst ( may through october ) in areas of energy conservation , overall traffic safety and reduced violent crime. .

however , dot also reported that these benefits were minimal and difficult to distinguish from seasonal variations and fluctuations in energy prices .

congress then asked the national bureau of standards ( nbs ) to evaluate the dot report .

in an april 1976 report to congress , review and technical evaluation of the dot daylight saving time study , nbs found no significant energy savings or differences in traffic fatalities .

it did find statistically significant evidence of increased fatalities among school - age children in the mornings during the four - month period january - april 1974 as compared with the same period ( non - dst ) of 1973 .

nbs stated that it was impossible to determine what proportion of this increase , if any , was due to dst .

when this same data was compared between 1973 and 1974 for the individual months of march and april , no significant difference was found for fatalities among school - age children in the mornings .

yes .

in 1986 , congress enacted p.l .

99-359 , which amended the uniform time act by changing the beginning of dst to the first sunday in april and having the end remain the last sunday in october .

in 2005 , congress enacted p.l .

109-58 , the energy policy act of 2005 .

section 110 of this act amended the uniform time act , by changing dst to begin the second sunday in march and end the first sunday in november .

the act required the secretary of the department of energy ( doe ) to report to congress on the impact of extended dst on energy consumption in the united states .

in october 2008 , doe sent its report to congress .

after reviewing the doe report , congress retained the right under the law to revert dst to the 2005 time schedule .

for more information on the legislation that changed dst , see crs report rl32860 , energy efficiency and renewable energy legislation in the 109th congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

arizona ( except for the navajo nation ) , hawaii , puerto rico , american samoa , guam , the northern mariana islands , and the u.s. virgin islands do not recognize daylight saving time .

dst is observed in approximately 70 countries , including most of those in north america and europe .

for a complete listing of countries that observe dst , please see worldtimezone.com and webexhibits .org websites .

the department of transportation , office of the general counsel , oversees and regulates dst .

under the uniform time act , moving an area on or off dst is accomplished through legal action at the state level .

some states require legislation , whereas others require executive action such as a governor's executive order .

information on procedures required in a specific state may be obtained from that state's legislature or governor's office .

if a state decides to observe dst , the dates of observance must comply with federal legislation .

as of september 2015 , 12 states were considering opting out of the uniform time act of 1966 .

an area's time zone can only be changed by law .

under the standard time act of 1918 , as amended by the uniform time act of 1966 , moving a state or an area within a state from one time zone to another requires dot regulation .

the governor or state legislature makes the request for a state or any part of the state ; the highest county - elected officials may make the request for that county .

the standard for deciding whether to change the time zone is the area's convenience of commerce .

the convenience of commerce is defined broadly to consider such circumstances as the shipment of goods within the community ; the origin of television and radio broadcasts ; the areas where most residents work , attend school , worship , or receive health care ; the location of airports , railways , and bus stations ; and the major elements of the community's economy .

after receiving a request , dot determines whether it meets the minimum statutory criteria before issuing a notice of proposed rulemaking , which would solicit public comment and schedule a public hearing .

usually the hearing is held in the area requesting the change so that all affected parties can be represented .

after the comment period closes , comments are reviewed and appropriate final action is taken .

if the secretary agrees that the statutory requirement has been met , the change would be instituted , usually at the next changeover to or from dst .

a number of studies have been conducted on dst's impact on energy savings , health , and safety .

following are some recent examples from database searches , such as ebscohost , proquest , and sciencedirect , including a few select sample reports that discuss the impacts of dst on the listed topic .

this is not a comprehensive literature review .

p.l .

109-58 , the energy policy act of 2005 ( introduced as h.r .

6 ) , was enacted on august 8 , 2005 .

section 110 of this act amended the uniform time act , changing the beginning of dst to the second sunday in march and the ending date to the first sunday in november .

this is the only bill related to dst that has been enacted since 1966 .

between the 95 th and 109 th congresses , there were generally a few dst - related bills introduced each congress .

none of the bills were enacted .

illustrative examples include the following .

the department of transportation , office of the general counsel , oversees and regulates dst .

the naval observatory also has useful information , as does nasa .

