a commercial or depository bank is typically a corporation that obtains either a federal or state charter to accept federally insured deposits and pay interest to depositors .

commercial banks also make residential and commercial mortgage loans , consumer loans , provide check cashing and clearing services , and may underwrite securities , including u.s. treasuries , municipal bonds , fannie mae and freddie mac issuances , and commercial paper ( unsecured short - term loans to cover short - term liquid ity needs ) .

the permissible activities of depository banks are defined by statute , namely the glass - steagall act .

by contrast , investment banks ( or brokerage firms ) are not allowed to accept federally insured deposits , and they do not make loans ( i.e. , a debt obligation owed to a single lending source ) .

instead , investment banks receive commissions to facilitate corporate mergers and corporate issuances of securities , such as corporate stocks and bonds ( i.e. , borrowing from the public ) .

congressional interest in the financial conditions of depository banks , also referred to as the commercial banking system , has increased following challenging economic conditions and changes in the regulatory environment .

specifically , the recession that began in december 2007 and ended in 2009 is frequently referred to as the great recession in part due to the financial crisis that unfolded .

both large and small banking institutions experienced losses related to the declining asset values ( of mortgage - related assets ) , resulting in a substantial increase in bank failures .

consequently , higher prudential requirements for u.s. banking institutions were implemented .

the basel committee on banking supervision , which provides an international consensus framework to promote internationally consistent bank prudential regulatory standards , adopted the third basel accord that was subsequently adopted by u.s. federal banking regulators .

in addition , congress passed the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-203 , 124 stat .

1376 ) , which also contained enhanced prudential regulatory requirements for financial institutions .

hence , the challenge for the banking industry is to determine the sustainable amount of financial ( lending ) risk - taking while simultaneously facing higher costs associated with greater financial risk - taking ( i.e. , compliance with prudential regulations designed to minimize the severity of financial distress under deteriorating macroeconomic conditions ) .

this report begins with a general overview of the banking industry .

it describes how banks facilitate the financial intermediation process as well as the associated financial risks .

it also explains the market structure of the banking industry , referring primarily to the asset distribution .

next , this report summarizes profitability and lending activity levels in the banking industry .

particular attention is paid to metrics related to capitalization levels , asset performance , and earnings of depository banks .

financial intermediation is the process of matching savers , who are willing to lend funds to earn a future rate of return , with borrowers , who are in need of funds to make transactions .

it is expensive for savers to locate , underwrite , and monitor repayment behavior of borrowers .

similarly , it is expensive for borrowers to locate a sufficient amount of savers with funds and favorable lending terms .

hence , banks develop expertise in intermediation , or facilitating the transfer of funds from savers to borrowers .

the typical intermediation transaction made by commercial banks provides loans to borrowers at higher rates than the cost to borrow the funds from savers , who provide loanable funds in the form of bank deposits .

generally speaking , banks ( as well as numerous lenders or financial institution types ) profit from the spread between the rates they receive from borrowers and the rates they pay to depositors .

financial intermediation , however , involves risk .

banks face the risk that borrowers will default on their loans , making it more difficult to repay depositors .

in addition , banks face funding or liquidity risk stemming from more frequent movements in short - term interest rates .

banks must have access to an uninterrupted source of short - term funding ( deposits ) until their long - term loans are fully repaid .

consequently , greater variability in short rates may translate into variable profit spreads .

furthermore , depositors could suddenly and simultaneously decide to withdraw their deposits , perhaps due to a sudden change in economic conditions or even speculation about deteriorating economic conditions , resulting in financial distress for one bank or several banks .

hence , bank profitability and financial risk are inextricably linked .

in addition to default and funding risks , financial intermediation increases borrowers' vulnerability to economic downturns .

during business cycle booms , lenders may grow optimistic and increase credit availability as if the ideal economic and financial market conditions will persist .

the trade - off ( or costs ) associated with greater lending is a greater likelihood of severe financial distress if macroeconomic conditions were to deteriorate .

in other words , recessions that occur when individuals have more loan repayment obligations ( or are more leveraged financially ) are likely to be more arduous , in particular if these borrowers suddenly face lower income prospects ( via job losses or pay cuts ) .

after 2007 , the banking system saw unusually high numbers of distressed institutions , with failures at rates not seen since the savings and loan crisis that began in the 1980s and lasted through the early 1990s .

the number of banks that failed , or fell substantially below their minimum capital reserve requirements , increased as the financial crisis of 2008 unfolded .

no banks failed in 2005 and 2006 , and three bank failures occurred in 2007 .

in contrast , the fdic administered 489 bank failures over the 2008-2013 period .

the fdic maintains a problem bank list , which lists banks at risk of failure because their capital reserves have fallen below regulatory minimum levels ( but perhaps not yet far enough below to be shut down ) .

the number of depository institutions on the fdic's problem list spiked beginning in 2008 and peaked at 888 in the first quarter of 2011 .

figure 3 shows the number of problem banks and the total assets of those banks relative to the total assets of the entire banking system .

the chart suggests that problem banks were primarily small institutions because of the small share of total banking assets they held .

the industry has returned to profitability since the recession .

return on assets ( roa ) and return on equity ( roe ) are commonly used metrics to gauge bank profitability .

roa is computed with net revenue ( i.e. , total revenue minus total expenses ) in the numerator and average total assets in the denominator .

the roa measures the financial return of a bank's average assets or lending activities .

because the banking industry relies heavily upon borrowed liabilities to fund assets , the ratio's numerator would be significantly smaller than the denominator ; therefore , a roa of approximately 1% is considered profitable .

roe is computed with net income in the numerator and the total amount of common shareholder equity in the denominator .

the roe is a measure of financial return for shareholders .

unlike roa , roe does not have a barometer of "acceptable" performance because it can increase due to either asset profitability or depleting capital positions , making it difficult to establish a benchmark standard .

nonetheless , double - digit roe returns such as those prior to the recession tend to be more acceptable for shareholders .

the fdic reported industry declines in both roa and roe during the 2007-2009 recession as the numerators of both ratios fell even faster than their denominators .

the negative returns coincided with the wave of loan defaults that also occurred during the recession , which led to the deterioration of capital , increases in the number of banks on the fdic's problem list , and increases in bank failures .

the roa and roe measures , which are illustrated in figure 4 , have exhibited a reversal in course since the recession .

figure 5 shows the increase in noncurrent assets ( i.e. , loans or bonds ) and charge - offs after 2007 .

non - current assets are loans or bonds that borrowers do not repay as scheduled .

the allowance for loan and lease losses ( alll ) is a component of regulatory bank capital set aside for anticipated ( or estimated ) loan losses .

loan loss provisioning refers to increasing the amount of alll when loan default risks increase ; decreases are referred to as charge - offs or deductions from alll when lenders determine that noncurrent assets will not be repaid .

roa and roe movements are essentially related to loan and bond repayment problems .

bank regulators require banking organizations to hold capital for both anticipated and unanticipated default risks .

capital requirements pertaining to the maintenance of equity shareholder levels are designed to buffer against unanticipated losses and generally do not vary .

in contrast , alll requirements change more frequently ( quarterly ) or when expected credit losses may have increased .

hence , a bank may have sufficient capital to meet unanticipated defaults , which may be associated with unforeseen events ( such as a sudden increase in the unemployment rate ) , but it may still need to increase alll provisions should a borrower begin showing signs of repayment difficulties that may result in default .

if banks can absorb anticipated loan losses using current income earnings , their capital will be left intact for unanticipated losses .

the ratio of aggregate alll provisioning to total bank assets , also shown in figure 5 , is an alll proxy .

loan loss provisioning matched and often exceeded the anticipated percentage of problem assets prior to 2007 , which are composed of net charge - offs and noncurrent assets .

the alll indicator suggests that the amount of loan loss provisioning since the recession covers net charge - offs .

the percentage of noncurrent loans , however , must decline even more relative to the current level of alll provisioning ( or alll provisioning must increase more ) before the industry can fully cover its anticipated default risks .

although the alll indicator was constructed for illustrative purposes , the amount of loan loss allowance of noncurrent loans and leases , also referred to as the coverage ratio , is a more commonly used metric to assess the ability to absorb losses from nonperforming assets ( as shown in figure 5 ) .

a coverage ratio below 100% indicates that there is insufficient provisioning to cover weak loans that could go into further distress .

since the recession , regulators have required banks to increase loan - loss provisioning ( as well as other components of regulatory capital ) levels to better match the levels of problem loans .

the asset ( lending ) growth rate of the banking industry is computed using two methodologies ( illustrated in figure 6 ) .

for both methodologies , the total assets per quarter were initially averaged for each year , arguably adjusting for seasonal movements in lending activity over the year .

the asset growth rate ( represented by the more volatile striped bars ) is computed by simply calculating the percentage change of the average total assets from year to year .

the asset growth rate ( represented by the solid bars ) is computed using a moving average smoothing technique that reduces short - term volatility in data .

some economists prefer analyzing smoothed data series to curtail overstating observed activity or directional change .

hence , the asset growth rate using the moving average or smoothing methodology fell below negative 2% beginning in the first quarter of 2009 , which had not occurred since the 1990-1991 recession ; the second and fourth quarters of 2009 also saw negative asset growth .

given the magnitude of loan repayment problems , banks grew more cautious about lending ( or allowing their asset portfolios to grow ) to avoid the risk of further weakening their alll and capital reserve positions .

the bank lending rate has increased since the 2007-2009 recession .

except for the 2001 recession , the more recent growth rates are below the pre - recessionary levels .

figure 7 illustrates some of the more common types of asset holdings in the aggregate banking portfolio .

since the 2007-2009 recession , the banking system holds larger shares of cash and smaller shares of residential mortgages , which is computed in figure 7 using 1-4 family residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit .

the share of cash holdings has more than doubled since 2000 to approximately 12% of aggregate portfolio holdings .

the increase in cash holdings would be consistent with the increase in regulatory capital requirements for banks as shareholders purchase bank stocks with cash .

conversely , the share of residential mortgage credit , which peaked to almost 24% in 2005 , has since steadily declined ( by more than 33% ) to approximately 15% .

the share of commercial and industrial ( c&i ) lending has seen a decrease of approximately 24% since 2000 , but it appears to be rising since the 2007-2009 recession .

as of 2015 , the total asset shares represented by commercial real estate lending , consumer loans ( eg , credit cards , installment loans ) , and securities ( eg , state and municipal bonds , u.s. treasury securities ) approximate pre - recession levels .

lastly , a trading account holds assets that the bank would like to sell or trade .

although banks wanted to sell more assets during the recession , the share of assets for sale has returned to and has fallen below pre - recessionary levels .

as previously stated , banks typically borrow funds from depositors for shorter periods of time relative to their originated loans .

banks must continuously renew their short - term borrowings until longer - term loans have been fully repaid .

for example , suppose a bank originates a consumer loan that is expected to be repaid in full over two years .

over the two years that the loan is being repaid , the bank will simultaneously "fund the loan," meaning that it will treat its depositors' funds as a sequence of quarterly ( for a total of eight quarters ) or monthly ( for a total of 24 months ) short - term loans and make periodic interest payments to depositors .

the spread or difference between lending long and borrowing short is known as the net interest margin .

typically , smaller banks engage in "relationship banking," meaning that they develop close familiarity with their respective customer bases and provide financial services within a circumscribed geographical area .

relationship banking allows these institutions to capture lending risks that are unique , infrequent , and localized .

these institutions , which rely heavily on commercial ( real estate and retail ) lending and funding with deposits , typically have higher net interest margins than large banks .

funding loans with deposits is cheaper than accessing the short - term financial markets , particularly for small institutions that do not have the transaction volume or size to justify the higher costs .

in contrast , large institutions typically engage in "transactional banking" or high - volume lending that employs automated underwriting methodologies that often cannot capture atypical lending risks .

large banks are not as dependent upon deposits to fund their lending activities because of their greater ability to access short - term money markets .

large banks typically have lower spreads because their large - scale activities generate large amounts of fee income from a wide range of activities , which can be used to cover the costs of borrowing in the short - term money markets .

revenues are earned by originating and selling large amounts of loans to nonbank institutions , such as government - sponsored enterprises ( fannie mae and freddie mac ) and non - depository institutions that hold financial assets ( eg , insurance companies , hedge funds ) .

a large share of fees are still generated from traditional banking activities ( eg , safe deposit , payroll processing , trust services , payment services ) and from facilitating daily purchase and payment transactions , in which service fees may be collected from checking , money orders , and electronic payment card ( debit and credit ) transactions .

hence , transactional or high - volume banking activities allow large banks to generate fee income and engage in financial transactions characterized by minimum deal size or institutional size requirements , which simultaneously act as a participation barrier for community banks .

because of the differences in the composition of bank revenue streams , the net interest margins and fee income streams are illustrated by asset size categories .

figure 8 presents the net interest margins ( or spreads ) by bank size .

by 2009 , the net interest margins had declined for small banks , but they still remained higher over time than the margins for larger banks .

the net interest margins for large banks increased over the recession period as they experienced a large influx of deposits during the recession , perhaps due to uncertainty in the money market ; this "flight to safety" influx resulted in a substantial drop in their funding costs .

in other words , large banks were able to rely relatively less on short - term financial markets and could , instead , take advantage of cheaper funding from deposits .

although net interest margins may appear to be returning to pre - recession trends , the future performance of this spread would still be affected by a shift in the composition of asset holdings .

for example , the spread may be affected by an increase in liquid asset holdings ( eg , securities backed by the u.s. federal government ) , perhaps due to weaker demand for more illiquid loans ( eg , mortgages , commercial loans ) or lower capital requirements associated with holding more liquid loans .

banks may alter the composition of their asset portfolios , attempting to seek higher yielding lending opportunities ( eg , holding less mortgages and more credit card loans ) to help maintain spreads above 3% .

bank spreads may also be affected by the amount of deposits that remain or flow out of the banking system as the economy strengthens .

hence , it has become more challenging to predict future profitability arising from more traditional lending activities .

figure 9 presents noninterest income as a percentage of assets by bank size .

the overall trend of fee - generating activities has rebounded since the recession , but there appears to be more volatility in fee - income revenues of smaller institutions .

although greater reliance upon fee income as a percentage of ( large ) bank income suggests a reduction in exposure to credit and funding risks , it may not necessarily translate into greater stability of earnings streams .

for example , banks no longer generate as much fee income by selling ( mortgage ) loans to private - label securitization markets , particularly those largely abandoned by investors at the beginning of the financial crisis .

in other words , high - volume fee - generating transactions are still dependent upon fluctuations in investor demand for securities created from securitized ( structured finance ) deals , which adds variability to income .

in addition , regulatory costs may reduce fee income .

recent regulation of fees that large institutions may collect from debit transactions would affect the earnings streams .

banks might respond by seeking new opportunities to provide financial services to generate new fee revenues .

hence , future fee - generating activities are still affected by financial market uncertainty .

since the 2007-2009 financial crisis , the banking industry has exhibited profitability .

net interest margins and fee income as a percentage of assets are less volatile now than when the u.s. economy was in recession , but they are still lower in comparison to 2000 .

the industry is still accumulating sufficient reserves to cover noncurrent assets .

these factors may be influencing the asset growth rate , which has been positive since 2011 , but remains below the average rate of growth observed over the past two decades .

profitability in the banking industry should not be interpreted as evidence of a return to previous lending patterns .

the industry is adapting its business models to the post - recession regulatory environment in which higher overall capital requirements would be expected to increase funding costs and the choice of financial assets held in portfolios .

because large banks may be less dependent upon traditional lending activities than smaller banks , large institutions might be able to generate sufficient fee income from a wide range of other financial activities to remain profitable even if lending activity does not resemble pre - recessionary levels .

hence , profitability trends may differ for banks by size .

