on october 27 , 2015 , the department of defense ( dod ) announced its intention to award a contract to build the new long range strike - bomber ( lrs - b ) to the northrop grumman corporation .

subsequently , the secretary of the air force announced that the bomber would be designated the b - 21 "raider," in honor of the doolittle raiders of world war ii .

the b - 21 is intended to operate in both conventional and nuclear roles , with the capability of penetrating and surviving in advanced air defense environments .

it will be capable of operation by an onboard crew or piloted remotely .

it is projected to enter service in the 2020s , building to an initial fleet of 100 aircraft .

the b - 21 is one of the air force's top three procurement priorities .

although the specific design remains classified , and the air force has released an artist's rendering of the bomber , the b - 21 was designed around three specific capabilities: 1 .

a large and flexible payload bay capable of carrying a full range of current and future armament .

2 .

range ( although classified ) .

3 .

projected average procurement unit cost of $550 million per plane in fy2010 dollars , which was announced publicly to encourage competing manufacturers to constrain their designs .

in an effort to achieve the $550 million cost target , unit cost was designated as a key performance parameter in the acquisition strategy , meaning that inability to reach that price could disqualify a bid .

 ( that price is based on acquisition of 100 aircraft ; variations in quantity may affect actual unit cost. ) .

at the award announcement , the independent cost estimate for northrop's winning bid was revealed to be $511 million per plane , equivalent to $564 million in fy2016 dollars .

the released rendering ( figure 1 ) shows a flying - wing design not dissimilar to the b - 2 , although simpler in shape .

it resembles early proposed designs that later evolved into the b - 2 .

initial b - 21s will be manned , with unmanned operation possible several years after initial operational capability ( ioc ) .

nuclear qualification will also take two years or so after ioc .

few technical details have been revealed .

no mention has been made of a desired speed , although the combination of long range , large payload , and cost constraints strongly suggest b - 21 will be subsonic .

details such as the b - 21's size , required stealth , structure , number and type of engines , projected weapons , and onboard sensors remain classified , which makes evaluating the proposed cost difficult .

a previous crs insight noted that the b - 21's proposed funding and deployment schedule implied that considerable development had been accomplished prior to contract award .

the air force later confirmed this , with senior program officials stating that both competing designs were at an unusually high level of detail and development for a system in which the prime contractor had not been selected .

the low - observable characteristics of both designs were investigated in detail against current and anticipated threats , and final designs were complete down to the level of , for example , individual access panels .

this high level of technical readiness may help explain why the air force anticipates ioc approximately 10 years from contract award , whereas other technically complex aircraft like f - 22 and f - 35 have taken more than 20 years .

major subsystem risk reduction was also accomplished , and both competitors' designs incorporated substantial quantities of existing subsystems ( sometimes with b - 21-specific refinements ) .

this effort presumably reduces technological risk and shortens the time required for the engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) phase that precedes production .

indeed , although dod's usual technology readiness levels are not being used to measure maturity on the program , program officials stated that no further technology development is required to move b - 21 to production .

they see the most challenging part of b - 21 as the integration of technologies in the emd phase .

air force officials have emphasized that b - 21 is part of a family of systems , implying that it is the node of a larger , distributed network of sensors and communications , not all of which may have been publicly disclosed .

connectivity with this family of systems has been included in the b - 21 design from the start , although it is not possible to gauge the maturity or stability of these systems―and thus how much the b - 21 may have to be adapted in the future should those external systems change .

b - 21 will employ open systems architecture , similar to that already being demonstrated on f - 22 , u - 2 , b - 2 , and other platforms .

open architecture allows new sensors or other subsystems from various vendors to be easily integrated into the aircraft .

as a result , the initial b - 21 aircraft can be augmented more easily as advanced technologies are developed ; it also means that what might otherwise be expensive development of advanced sensors and / or other subsystems may be deferred and / or competed independent of the aircraft itself .

this comports with earlier comments about the possibility of b - 21 being part of a family of systems , and suggests that some relevant capabilities may be under development in other budget lines .

although it is one of the air force's largest programs , b - 21 is being acquired through nontraditional means .

instead of the regular acquisition process , the b - 21 program is managed and acquired through the air force rapid capabilities office , with reduced overhead including a much smaller program office than typical for such a significant program .

nevertheless , b - 21 will be designated as a major defense acquisition program and is therefore subject to nunn - mccurdy requirements .

plans call for initial acquisition of b - 21s to take place in five low - rate production lots totaling 21 aircraft .

two or three test aircraft will precede the production lots .

the development program began on friday , october 23 , 2015 , when under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology and logistics frank kendall selected northrop grumman as the prime contractor .

according to program officials , selection of a contractor constituted "milestone b" in this acquisition , although it is not clear whether all of the required steps for a formal milestone b review were carried out under the b - 21's rapid acquisition construct .

subsequently , the air force announced the b - 21 had passed its preliminary design review , a step normally required before milestone b. dod proposes to acquire the b - 21 through a cost - plus - incentive - fee development contract followed by firm - fixed - price procurement .

this has occasioned some critical comment ; see " issues for congress " below for further discussion .

as depicted in table 1 , projected annual funding for the b - 21 , after increasing markedly over the past several years , has begun to decline .

over the same time , the accompanying projections for each year's future years defense program ( fydp ) had usually shown a substantial increase in funding in the following five years .

as figure 2 shows , however , the outyear funding projection changed in the fy2017 administration budget proposal , which cut $3.5 billion over the fydp from the previous projection while maintaining approximately the same rate of growth .

senior air force officials indicate that this revision is due to the actual bids for the b - 21 being considerably lower than either the air force's budget estimate or the independent estimate developed by dod's office of cost analysis and program evaluation .

this budget revision results in the program growing at approximately the same rate , but starting from a lower baseline .

the current unclassified budget projection does not include procurement funds for the b - 21 , nor explain whether the initial lrip lots will be purchased with procurement or r&d funding .

northrop grumman intends to build the b - 21 at its facilities at air force plant 42 in palmdale , ca , which were previously used to produce the b - 2 .

the company currently builds f - 35 subassemblies and global hawk and triton uavs on the site , and this work would continue alongside the b - 21 .

although the delivery schedule has not been announced , work has been underway for some time to prepare the production line .

on march 7 , 2016 , the air force released a list of b - 21 major subcontractors , without commenting on what part of the aircraft they would provide .

subcontractors include pratt & whitney , east hartford , ct ; bae systems , nashua , nh ; gkn aerospace , st. louis , mo ; janicki industries , sedro - woolley , wa ; orbital atk , clearfield , ut , and dayton , oh ; rockwell collins , cedar rapids , ia ; and spirit aerosystems , wichita , ks .

following the b - 21 contract award to northrop grumman , lockheed martin will remain the principal supplier of purpose - built combat aircraft to the dod , as shown in figure 3 .

when it initially released information about the program , the air force announced that it hoped to buy "80 to 100" b - 21s .

that number was subsequently resolved to a request for 100 in the fy2017 budget submission and subsequent testimony .

we require a fleet size that will ensure sustained dominance well into this century and intend to procure a minimum of 100 b - 21s .

procuring at least 100 b - 21s will also reduce lifecycle ownership costs .

further , we are continuing to study the right size of the total future bomber force .

through a spokesman , the air force confirmed the number , saying the change happened "in spring 2016" at the request of air force global strike command .

at that time , usaf established 100 "as the floor — not the ceiling" for the b - 21 fleet size , he said .

afgsc "requires a minimum of 100 b - 21 raider aircraft , with a mix of legacy bombers , to meet future cocom [combatant commander] requirements," the spokesman said .

the b - 21 is intended to initially replace the 20 b - 2 and 63 b - 1 strategic bombers currently in the fleet .

b - 2s date from the 1990s ; b - 1s date from the 1980s .

when the b - 2 was procured in the 1990s , initial plans called for 132 aircraft .

ultimately , 21 b - 2s were procured .

the b - 2 was not primarily intended to replace existing bombers , but to add stealth capability to the fleet .

arguably , that role as an enhancement rather than a replacement made it easier to reduce the number bought , since adding any quantity of b - 2s would leave the bomber force more capable than before .

by contrast , the air force plans to retire its b - 2s and b - 1s by 2040 .

following those retirements , with the full planned buy of 100 b - 21s , the bomber fleet would grow in number from 159 to 176 .

in testimony , the air force deputy chief of staff for strategic plans , programs and requirements stated that the united states needed a fleet of 165 bombers .

others argue that the resulting bomber force will be too small , and that dod should acquire more than 100 b - 21s .

for example , a paper by retired air force lieutenant general michael moeller recommended a force of 150 to 160 combat - coded bombers , which would require 200 b - 21s .

subsequently , secretary of the air force heather wilson announced a goal of increasing the bomber fleet by seven squadrons .

although the goal was not accompanied by specific procurement plans , observers note that would likely necessitate 75 additional bombers , with only the b - 21 then in production .

in deciding whether and how quickly to acquire b - 21s , congress may wish to consider the trade - off between the cost and effectiveness of new aircraft and extending the service lives of existing b - 52s , b - 1s , and b - 2s .

this may be a challenging comparison , particularly as the b - 52s are already scheduled to remain in service for 80 years , an unprecedented service life for a combat aircraft .

quite apart from the b - 52's suitability to operate in evolving air defense environments , the challenges of maintaining and operating an 80-year - old aircraft in regular service are unknown .

that said , many of the b - 52's systems have already been upgraded and replaced over the years , so the time since manufacture may not represent the actual maturity of the aircraft .

budget documents and testimony have long indicated that the b - 21 was expected to reach ioc in the mid - 2020s .

more recently , air force statements have raised the possibility of a later ioc .

the b - 21 bomber is "progressing really well," global strike command chief gen. robin rand told reporters ... it looks like "in the mid - 2020s , we'll have the first one at one of our bases," with initial operating capability "in the late '20s" .

he reiterated his "strong recommendation" that usaf buy "at least 100" of the bombers and "make sure we get to that [number] by the late '30s. .

at such a rate , production would be around five per year .

it is not clear whether the move to a potential "late 2020s" ioc is driven by program issues , budget constraints , or other issues .

it may also simply be a misstatement , but subsequent air force testimony has not refuted this projection .

in testimony , the air force vice - chief of staff said , "the air force remains committed to b - 21 affordability , with the average procurement cost of $564 million in base year 2016 dollars. .

as noted above , many aspects of the b - 21's design remain classified , which makes validating the proposed cost difficult .

further , the unclassified budget for the b - 21 shown in air force research , development , test & evaluation line 604015f is only a portion of the funding for the program .

whether b - 21 itself enjoys additional ( presumably classified ) funding , air force officials have stated that b - 21 is part of a family of systems , and that work on enabling technologies continues .

it is not clear to what extent the b - 21 depends on these other systems in order to accomplish its missions .

if they are essential to some or all of the b - 21's missions , however , the cost of those enablers might be considered as part of the cost of the b - 21 .

to the extent they enable other systems besides b - 21 , a portion of the enablers' cost could be attributed to b - 21 .

dod has not publicly identified these enabling systems , nor where in the budget their development appears .

both the house and senate - passed versions of the fy2017 defense authorization bill included requirements that dod disclose the total cost of the b - 21 .

however , those provisions did not appear in the final conference report .

as noted earlier , one of the issues in the earlier next - generation bomber program was whether to incur the additional cost of making the bomber nuclear - capable .

that decision has been made in the affirmative for the b - 21 .

congress may wish to consider the trade - off between the cost of making the b - 21 nuclear - capable and other means of delivering nuclear weapons .

the contribution of each leg of the nuclear triad to deterrence is a long - standing debate , as are the questions of the cost / effectiveness issue between penetrating platforms and standoff weapons .

the latter question is coming to the fore again with dod's proposals for the long - range standoff missile ( popularly lrso ) and the arsenal plane ( see footnote 8 ) .

whether standoff missiles or land - or sea - based icbms offer the same flexibility as a bomber , and the value of any additional flexibility , may figure into congress's considerations not only of b - 21 , but of other nuclear modernization programs .

as noted above , b - 21 development is being conducted through a cost - plus - incentive - fee development contract followed by firm - fixed - price procurement .

the late senator john mccain publicly challenged this contract structure , arguing that a fixed - price development contract would be more beneficial to the government: "i will not authorize a program that has a cost - plus contract — and i told them that," said mccain , r - ariz. "if you have a cost - plus contract , tell me one time that there hasn't been additional costs , then i would reconsider .

the mindset in the pentagon that still somehow these are still acceptable is infuriating. .

others noted that fixed - price development worked better when the major technology issues had been solved and there was a broad market for the product that would allow the contractor to recoup its development costs should they be higher than the fixed price .

in evaluating the acquisition strategy , congress may attempt to assess to what degree the declared subsystem risk reduction has actually reduced the technology risk of the entire b - 21 program .

congress may also consider whether it prefers to fix development costs and take a risk on which capabilities can be achieved for that cost , or fix the technology requirement and take a risk that costs will increase .

it may also wish to consider any cost inherent in changing the acquisition strategy already being executed .

in this context , it may be worth noting that dod has found "no statistical correlation between the use of contract type ( eg , cost - plus and fixed - price types ) and lower cost or schedule growth. .

as noted above , the winning bid for the b - 21 came in substantially below dod's independent estimates .

in the past , contractors have been accused of bidding unrealistically low prices in order to win a given contract , then using their incumbency to appeal for higher appropriations .

use of cost - plus - incentive - fee development , as in the current contract , appears to put some cost risk on the government , while firm - fixed - price procurement appears to put much of the risk for subsequent cost increases on the contractor .

congress may wish to revisit dod's cost estimation to understand why the estimated cost was significantly higher than the actual bid .

in addition , congress may wish to use its oversight mechanisms to verify that the contract can be executed at the price bid and / or select a contract type maximizing contractor responsibility to meet the bid price .

b - 21 is being acquired through nontraditional means , using the air force's rapid capability office instead of a standard dedicated program office , as is more typical .

although this approach may improve the speed and ease of the acquisition , congress has relatively little experience overseeing rapid acquisitions processes .

at $3 billion a year , this program is significantly larger than those that have traditionally been the subject of rapid acquisition .

congress may wish to consider whether its ability to oversee such acquisitions is sufficient , and if the advantages gained through rapid acquisition processes outweigh the challenges of oversight when applied to major defense acquisition programs .

alternatively , congress may consider revising the existing acquisition regulations to more closely approximate the rapid acquisition process .

like many defense technology programs , most of the b - 21 program is designated as a special access program .

special access programs implement stricter access requirements than those necessary to obtain information classified at confidential , secret , or top secret levels .

house and senate rules govern the manner in which members of congress and their staffs may gain access to national security classified information .

primary oversight responsibility for government programs typically lies with the members of committees with jurisdiction established by house and senate rules .

with regard to the b - 21 program , these committees include the house and senate armed services committees , as well as the defense subcommittees of the house and senate appropriations committees .

due to the size of the b - 21 program , its implications for defense budgeting , and other issues like the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. defense strategy , the b - 21 may attract interest from members not typically involved in such issues .

congress may wish to consider whether such members' interests require a greater level of access to program data , or whether the issues can be adequately addressed under the current rules .

the fy2017 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

115-31 ) required the department of defense inspector general to review the secrecy surrounding b - 21 development , with a report to congress due by november 2017 .

that review is underway .

in 2015 , congress authorized that the ohio replacement program , the ssbn ( x ) , which like b - 21 has a nuclear mission , be funded not from the navy budget , but through a national sea - based deterrence fund in the defense - wide budget .

on march 16 , 2016 , air force secretary deborah lee james told the house armed services committee that all u.s. strategic forces should be funded outside of service budgets .

two days later , secretary of defense ashton carter agreed "that a broader nuclear deterrent fund may be appropriate. .

those who support a separate nuclear deterrence fund argue that the nuclear deterrence mission is a joint and national effort , not distinct to a particular military service , and thus should be funded outside the services' budgets .

they also note that the military services are facing a "bow wave" of deferred modernization and recapitalization following more than a decade of war , and that moving the expensive nuclear forces to a separate budget will allow the services to focus on enhancing capability for their unique missions without the competing expense of deterrence forces .

others note that regardless of the budget line used , all of these funds will come under the dod topline , and that reallocating funds to a dod - wide deterrence fund will reduce the overall amounts available for all of the services .

