this report responds to frequently asked questions about the small business administration ( sba ) disaster loan program .

authorized by the small business act , the sba disaster loan program has been a source of economic assistance to businesses , nonprofit organizations , homeowners , and renters as they repair or replace property damaged or destroyed in a federally declared disaster .

the sba disaster loan program is also designed to help small agricultural cooperatives recover from economic injury resulting from a disaster .

sba disaster loans include ( 1 ) home and personal property disaster loans , ( 2 ) business physical disaster loans , and ( 3 ) economic injury disaster loans ( eidl ) .

as demonstrated in figure 1 and figure 2 , most direct disaster loans ( approximately 83% ) are awarded to individuals and households rather than small businesses .

the program generally offers low - interest disaster loans at a fixed rate that have loan maturities of up to 30 years .

sba offers loans to help businesses repair and replace damaged property and financial assistance to businesses that have suffered economic loss as a result of a disaster .

disaster loans provided to businesses fall into two categories: business physical disaster loans and eidls .

any business , regardless of size ( other than an agricultural enterprise ) , and private , nonprofit organizations located in a declared disaster area may be eligible for a business physical disaster loan .

business physical disaster loans provide up to $2 million to repair or replace damaged physical property including machinery , equipment , fixtures , inventory , and leasehold improvements that are not covered by insurance .

damaged vehicles normally used for recreational purposes may be repaired or replaced with sba loan proceeds if the borrower can submit evidence that the vehicles were used for business purposes .

businesses may utilize up to 20% of the verified loss amount for mitigation measures ( eg , grading or contouring of land , relocating or elevating utilities or mechanical equipment , building retaining walls , safe rooms or similar structures designed to protect occupants from natural disasters , or installing sewer backflow valves ) in an effort to prevent loss should a similar disaster occur in the future .

interest rates for business physical disaster loans cannot exceed 8% per annum or 4% per annum if the business cannot obtain credit elsewhere .

borrowers generally pay equal monthly installments of principal and interest starting five months from the date of the loan .

business physical disaster loans can have maturities up to 30 years .

eidls provide up to $2 million to help meet financial obligations and operating expenses that could have been met had the disaster not occurred .

loan proceeds can only be used for working capital necessary to enable the business or organization to alleviate the specific economic injury and to resume normal operations .

loan amounts for eidls are based on actual economic injury and financial needs , regardless of whether the business suffered any property damage .

eidls are available only to businesses that are located in a declared disaster area , have suffered substantial economic injury , are unable to obtain credit elsewhere , and are defined as small by sba size regulations .

size standards vary according to a variety of factors including industry type , average firm size , and start - up costs and entry barriers .

small agricultural cooperatives and most private and nonprofit organizations that have suffered substantial economic injury as the result of a declared disaster are also eligible for eidls .

businesses can secure both an eidl and a business physical disaster loan to rebuild , repair , and recover from economic loss .

the loan amount cannot exceed $2 million .

interest rate ceilings are statutorily set at 4% per annum or less and loans can have maturities up to 30 years .

collateral requirements vary by declaration type .

in presidential declarations , business physical disaster loans over $25,000 must be secured to the extent possible .

for agency declarations , business physical disaster loans over $25,000 must be secured to the extent possible .

the sba administrator is prohibited from requiring businesses to use their personal residence as collateral for loans under $200,000 if the applicant has other collateral , including assets related to the operation of the business that is sufficient to cover the value of the loan .

sba will not require collateral to secure an eidl of $25,000 or less .

all eidl loans over $25,000 must be secured to the extent possible .

sba takes real estate as collateral when it is available .

sba will not decline a loan for lack of collateral .

however , the applicant is required to pledge by what they have available as collateral .

