signed into law on august 2 , 2011 , the budget control act ( p.l .

112-25 , hereinafter the bca ) established a set of limits on federal spending , as well as a set of mechanisms to adjust those limits to accommodate spending that has special priority .

one of these mechanisms — a limited allowable adjustment to pay for the congressionally designated costs of major disasters under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( hereinafter "the disaster relief allowable adjustment" or "allowable adjustment" ) — represented a new approach to paying for disaster relief .

by providing this flexibility in the budget caps , congress changed the way it approached funding disaster relief and recovery efforts .

the bca is now halfway through its 10-year term .

this report looks at how the adjustment has functioned over the first five years , and what the future of disaster relief ( as defined under the bca ) may look like under current law for the next five years and beyond .

one of the more visible impacts of the allowable adjustment for disaster relief is increased funding for the disaster relief fund through the annual appropriations process .

by essentially removing the funding for the costs of major disasters from the debate on discretionary spending , the annual appropriation now more closely resembles the annual expenditure .

prior to the enactment of the bca , there was an incentive to fund the drf at lower amounts annually in favor of other priorities , with the assumption that any shortages could be made up through a supplemental appropriations bill should the need arise during the fiscal year .

by making the majority of the drf eligible for funding outside discretionary spending limits , the bca removed that incentive , and it became easier to request and appropriate more budget authority for the drf on an annual basis .

as noted above , the allowable adjustment has largely been used to fund the drf: yet both fy2015 and fy2016 consolidated appropriations bills funded other disaster accounts using the disaster relief designation .

use of the disaster relief designation and the allowable adjustment to more broadly pre - fund commonly used disaster relief accounts may allow some federal agencies to exercise their disaster response authorities after major disasters without waiting for emergency funding , or relying on transfers from other funded activities .

however , removing the urgency from the supplemental appropriations process may have unintended consequences for programs whose agencies may anticipate relying on supplemental appropriations to fund their efforts .

when hurricane sandy struck , a combination of two timely features ensured that the drf had adequate resources to deal with the immediate needs presented by the storm: a $6.4 billion supplemental appropriation for the drf in fy2012 and a continuing resolution for the beginning of fy2013 that provided interim funding for the drf at a rate based on that large supplemental appropriation .

the immediate availability of those resources may have allowed the administration to move more deliberately in response to the storm than would have been the case had the drf not been relatively flush — for example , the administration's request for supplemental appropriations was not sent to congress until six weeks after the storm had passed .

other programs — even some of those included in the supplemental request — did not have the benefit of those ready resources , and had to rely on transfers or reprogramming of resources if they wished to move ahead , or wait for the passage of a supplemental appropriations bill .

as noted earlier , the bca defined "disaster relief" as activities carried out pursuant to a declaration of a major disaster under the stafford act .

according to omb , to be accounted for under the allowable adjustment , and to be included in the calculation of the 10-year rolling average on which the adjustment is based , appropriations must be designated by congress as disaster relief .

not all costs of major disasters receive the disaster relief designation .

as noted above , in the case of fy2013 , if all the costs of those combined major disasters paid in p.l .

113-2 had been designated as disaster relief , those designations would have exceeded the allowable adjustment .

as a result , the majority of disaster relief was designated as emergency appropriations .

furthermore , the definition of disaster relief in the bca is a limiting factor — it already excludes some forms of federal disaster assistance by focusing on the major disaster declaration .

two specific types of stafford act disaster declarations funded through the drf are not linked to major disasters , and are therefore not included in the 10-year average of disaster relief spending: emergency declarations and fire management assistance grants ( fmag ) .

emergency declarations at the federal level — made by the president — authorize assistance that helps states and localities carry out essential services during emergency situations .

fmags authorize various forms of federal assistance such as the provision of equipment , personnel , and grants to state , local , and tribal governments for the control , management , and mitigation of any fire on public or private forest land or grassland that might become a major disaster .

spending levels for emergency declarations and fmags are much lower than the spending level for major disaster declarations .

from fy1992-fy2015 , $155.60 billion was spent pursuant to major disaster declarations , an average of $6.48 billion per year .

over that same period , $4.23 billion was spent pursuant to emergency declarations and fire management grants , an average of $176 million per year — less than 3% of spending on major disaster declarations .

thus , it might be argued that their inclusion would not make an appreciable difference to the 10-year average .

others may argue that emergencies and fmags should be included to provide a more precise and complete calculation of federal disaster relief .

a similar argument could be made for the inclusion of disaster assistance programs that can be carried out under an authority separate from the stafford act .

for example , the secretary of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has general authority under the public health service act to provide public health assistance to states , upon their request , without a stafford act declaration .

another significant example is the u.s. forest service ( fs ) and the u.s. department of the interior ( doi ) which provide assistance to suppress wildfires and protect lives .

these examples of federal disaster assistance would not be part of the annual calculation of the allowable adjustment , specifically because of their lack of a nexus to a major disaster declaration under the stafford act .

some might argue that the definition of disaster relief and the calculation of the allowable adjustment should capture all instances of federal disaster relief — not just what is provided under the stafford act as a major disaster .

doing so would require much more complete reporting of disaster assistance spending , which in turn could allow for more thorough congressional oversight and policy innovation .

it should be noted , however , that historically , obtaining a comprehensive financial picture of federal funding for disaster assistance has proven to be a difficult task for a variety of reasons: it is difficult to identify all of the federal entities that provide disaster assistance because many federal entities provide aid through a wide range of programs , not necessarily through those designated specifically as "disaster assistance" programs .

the degree of transparency in reporting funding levels for disaster relief varies tremendously among federal entities .

as an example , congress requires fema to submit monthly status reports on the drf , detailing balances , obligations , allocations , and expenditures for a range of major disasters .

this requirement has not been extended to other agencies , and limited data exist , particularly on a state - by - state or disaster - by - disaster basis , on other federal funding for emergencies and major disasters .

scoping what constitutes a disaster is difficult because disaster definitions vary by statute , regulation , and program .

some might argue that all these definitions should be combined to get an accurate measure of federal expenditures for disaster assistance .

others might argue it makes the universe of disaster assistance too broad and may include items such as emergency preparedness and mitigation efforts , livestock losses , economic disasters , and search and rescue missions .

some observers mistakenly believe that the allowable adjustment for disaster relief is a constraint on how much congress can spend on disaster assistance .

this is a misconception .

a spokesman for then - majority leader eric cantor put it thusly: one of the reasons house republicans insisted on reforming the disaster funding process , which we did as part of the budget control act , was so that we would have a separate dedicated pot of money available based on historical disaster needs.... we also provided that should a disaster exceed that capacity , congress and the president could provide additional emergency funds .

the allowable adjustment is a constraint on the amount congress can adjust the discretionary spending limits to accommodate designated disaster relief .

while the bca states that designated disaster relief is not eligible for designation as emergency funding , the definition of emergency under the bca encompasses a range of eventualities that includes disasters: designated new budget authority and outlays are "for the prevention or mitigation of , or response to , loss of life or property , or a threat to national security ; and ... is unanticipated. .

in the wake of hurricane sandy , the allowable adjustment was exhausted , and supplemental appropriations were covered largely by emergency designations , as explained above .

during the 114 th congress legislation addressing the allowable adjustment for disasters under the bca took two different approaches .

several pieces of legislation proposed directly amending the bca to permit additional forms of disaster spending ( eg , wildfire suppression activities ) .

legislation passed by the house during the 1 st session of the 114 th congress ( h.r .

2467 ) used a "work - around" to avoid directly amending the bca .

the measure passed by the house ( h.r .

2647 ) would instead amend the stafford act , which is the main disaster relief legislation administered by fema following a major disaster declaration .

the measure would create new definitions and spending authorities under the stafford act .

these changes would allow federal agencies to request declarations for disaster impacts on federal lands — currently not within the stafford act's jurisdiction — and therefore fund a new set of disaster response activities through drf .

as this report has noted , it appears that the allowable adjustment for disaster relief may settle around $7.5-$9.5 billion as more expensive incidents drop out of the current calculation method .

the projected allowable adjustment could change , however , if there are future high - expense incidents .

arguably , the inclusion of an additional category of incidents approved by the president as disasters could eventually increase the rolling average over time , although in initial years , it would reduce the impact of carryover .

h.r .

2647 addresses issues related to funding for disaster - related costs incurred in federal efforts to fight wildfires .

it could be argued that modifying the stafford act addresses a known disaster risk and provides a funding avenue to meet unanticipated needs that is preferable to intra - agency borrowing .

however , modifying the stafford act could also be viewed as placing wildfire funding for federal agencies in competition with requests from governors for supplemental disaster relief from the drf .

this could be seen as jeopardizing a long - standing federal backstop for states for other perils and hazards that are beyond their capacity to respond to and recover from .

as it currently stands , the discretionary spending limits pursuant to the budget control act expire after fy2021 .

should congress choose to continue with annual caps on discretionary spending , it may choose to maintain the existing allowable adjustment for disaster relief , or modify its approach .

should congress choose to modify its approach , there are several options to consider .

congress may continue to provide mechanisms in its budget process that allow for funding outside the discretionary spending levels outlined in annual budget resolutions in special circumstances , either generically as "emergency" spending , or with more specific ends , such as funding for overseas military operations , disaster relief , or for other specific ends .

it may choose unlimited adjustments , limited allowable adjustments , or possibly a combination of such approaches as it has under the budget control act .

if congress chooses to continue to provide an adjustment for disaster relief , linking the definition of disaster relief to major disasters under the stafford act and limiting the adjustment available by formula could continue without the prescription of discretionary spending limits in law , or the threat of sequestration .

congress may choose to revisit its definition of disaster relief , or whether the adjustment is limited .

if congress chooses an allowable adjustment model , it may also seek to change the formula for calculating the allowable adjustment , in any number of ways: extending the time period being averaged ; including the high and low years ; or modifying the scope of disaster assistance included in the calculations .

a more fundamental change to how the federal government pays for the costs of disaster relief is also possible .

congress could take steps to shift costs paid by the federal government to states and localities , or provide borrowing authority to agencies responding to disasters rather than discretionary budget authority through the appropriations process .

however , these options would require legislative actions traditionally outside the budget process to implement .

