watching television used to mean tuning into one of a few broadcast television stations with the help of an antenna .

people living in areas with trees or mountains that interfered with these signals could receive broadcast signals retransmitted by cable television systems , which began operating in the 1940s .

the emergence of satellite technology in the 1970s enabled television networks and some broadcast stations ( known as "superstations" ) to deliver signals to cable systems from great distances , providing viewers with dozens of alternatives to their local broadcast television stations .

people living in areas where broadcast reception was poor and cable systems were unavailable installed their own backyard satellite dishes to intercept satellite signals , enabling them to watch programming at home .

more recently , viewers have taken to watching tv programming on their computers , tablets , mobile phones , and other internet - connected devices , dispensing with television stations , and cable and satellite operators altogether .

technological innovation has made this possible , but behind the scenes a thicket of laws and federal regulations govern how television programs make their way to viewers .

with each innovation in the distribution of television , congress , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , and the courts have applied a combination of communications and copyright laws to regulate the conditions under which cable and satellite operators may retransmit the signals of television stations .

three key public policies are intertwined: 1. protecting the property rights of the copyright owners to encourage the production of television programs ; 2. promoting competition among distributors of video programming ; and 3. enabling broadcast television stations to serve the local communities to which they are licensed by the fcc .

the copyright act , as amended in 1976 ( with respect to cable operators ) and in later years ( with respect to satellite operators ) , governs the rights of owners of copyrights to programming carried in retransmitted broadcast television signals .

based on the copyright act , the copyright royalty board ( crb ) , which is composed of three administrative judges appointed by the librarian of congress , sets the rates cable and satellite operators pay copyright owners for this programming .

a combination of communications statutes and fcc regulations govern the retransmission of broadcast television signals by cable and satellite operators .

this regulatory and legal structure has come under increasing stress as firms offer alternative ways to watch television programming , upsetting established relationships and raising questions about whether the key public policy goals defined by congress can still be achieved .

in particular , firms offering television programming to consumers over the internet , known as online video distributors ( ovds ) , are not covered by some of the laws and regulations governing video distribution by providers that rely on their own facilities , such as cable and satellite operators .

both cable and satellite operators have special , technology - specific copyright exemptions with respect to programming contained within retransmitted broadcast television signals .

federal courts have reached conflicting conclusions about the extent to which some ovd services are covered by existing copyright laws .

the fcc is proposing to modify its regulations governing the retransmission of broadcast television signals by cable and satellite operators to cover certain ovds in order to promote competition among distributors of video programming .

due to the disparity between copyright laws applying to ovds and mvpds , however , creating legal and economic parity between them is not a matter entirely within the fcc's jurisdiction .

in addition , the fcc suggests that some of its existing regulations may no longer be necessary to enable broadcast television stations to serve their local communities .

both the house judiciary committee and the house energy and commerce committee have announced plans to review copyright and communications laws , respectively .

because of the intertwined relationship between copyright and communications laws , major reform of the regulatory structure is likely to require congress or the courts to consider how copyright and communications laws intersect .

the television industry comprises many players .

while the terms describing the roles of the players are not standardized , the following framework offers a way to understand the relationships among industry participants .

individual corporations may operate in one or more of the following categories: co ntent o wners hold the copyrights to television programs , movies , and sporting events .

content owners may create the content themselves , or pay producers to create the content for them .

generally , content owners license or sell the copyrights to television programs to television networks or broadcast television stations .

examples of content owners include television studios , movie studios , and sports teams .

in addition , television networks and broadcast stations may own the copyrights to programs they produce themselves .

packager s assemble various television series , movies , and sporting events .

generally , packagers license content from content owners and resell it to cable operators , satellite operators , broadcast television stations , and ovds .

they may also sell packages of programs directly to consumers .

examples of packagers include cable networks , broadcast networks , and certain types of online distributors of video programming .

broadcast stations , by assembling programming from broadcast television networks , studios , sports leagues , and their own news departments , also operate as packagers .

distributors deliver television programs to consumers over their own facilities .

they purchase from packagers the rights to "publicly perform" television programming , as defined in copyright law , and to retransmit that programing to viewers .

congress has defined a class of distributors , multichannel video programming distributors ( mvpds ) , that have certain rights and obligations under copyright and communications laws .

these include the right and / or obligation to retransmit the signals of broadcast television stations .

mvpds distribute programs , including the retransmitted signals of broadcast stations , via cables , telephone lines , or satellite dishes on the viewer's premises .

thus , mvpds comprise cable operators and satellite operators .

because broadcast television stations can deliver programming directly to viewers via over - the - air broadcast signals , they also act as distributors , but are not mvpds .

the big bang theory , a popular television series , illustrates these industry interactions .

chuck lorre productions hires writers , directors , actors , and staff to produce episodes of the show under a contract with warner brothers television studio ( warner brothers ) , which acquires the copyright to the content .

warner brothers , in turn , has sold the columbia broadcasting system ( the cbs broadcast network ) , a packager , the exclusive right to offer the episodes produced for the current broadcast season .

separately , warner brothers licenses the right to show past seasons of the big bang theory to the turner broadcasting system ( tbs ) , a cable network with the same corporate parent , and to local broadcast television stations owned and operated by 21 st century fox .

thus , tbs and broadcast television stations airing the big bang theory also act as packagers .

the cbs network's broadcast station affiliates , the tbs cable network , and the local broadcast stations that have licensed rights to past seasons all rely on mvpds to distribute their programs to the mvpds' subscribers .

tbs and many of the broadcast stations receive payment from the mvpds .

viewers who do not subscribe to mvpds may receive the big bang theory directly from broadcast television stations via over - the - air reception .

figure 1 depicts the complex relationships within the television industry in simplified form .

most of the 116 million u.s. television households continue to rely on broadcast television stations or mvpds to receive television programming .

approximately 86% of u.s. television households subscribe to an mvpd service .

about 11% of u.s. television households receive broadcast signals "over the air" from a television station .

the remaining 3% rely exclusively on an internet connection to watch television programming .

since congress enacted the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 ( 1992 cable act ; p.l .

102-385 ) to foster competition in the delivery of video programming services , the number of cable subscribers has declined .

in 1993 , the fcc reported that 60% of u.s. television households , about 57.4 million , subscribed to cable .

as of the fourth quarter of 2015 , the nielsen company estimated that 45% of u.s. television households , about 52 million , subscribed to cable .

within the last 22 years , the emergence of alternative distributors of television programming , including satellite operators , has increased competition .

mergers between mvpds have nonetheless increased concentration among video programming distributors , enabling some operators to reach large numbers of customers .

the reach of these larger mvpds has increased their bargaining power with respect to negotiating distribution agreements with television stations , television networks , and copyright owners .

consolidation among broadcast stations , television networks , and copyright owners has increased their bargaining power as well .

on both sides of these video distribution negotiations , large companies have leverage over smaller companies .

as described in table 2 , many leading companies in the television industry are engaged in multiple aspects of television production , packaging , and distribution .

companies are in frequent negotiation with one another for the right to transmit cable network programming or to retransmit broadcast signals .

in some cases , these negotiations are governed directly by communications and copyright laws , as when mvpds negotiate with broadcast television stations for the right to carry broadcast signals .

in other instances , negotiations over the right to broadcast or resell programming are based more on market forces and reciprocal relationships , with fewer government - imposed strictures .

television programs are distributed to viewers in multiple formats and versions .

a key concept underlying agreements between the various players in the television industry is "exclusivity. .

exclusivity — that is , unique rights to show programing to viewers — is delineated by both time and geography .

distinct time periods of viewing are called "windows. .

distinct geographical zones of exclusivity are called "local television markets. .

copyright laws , by giving content owners control over the distribution of their content , enable content owners to enforce window and market exclusivity .

however , the copyright laws contain limitations with respect to the geographic exclusivity of broadcast signals retransmitted by mvpds .

geographic exclusivity is reinforced by communications laws and regulations administered by the fcc .

in general , these laws and regulations are intended to protect broadcast stations' exclusive rights to distribute television programming within local television markets .

one of the policy goals is to enable stations to generate sufficient revenue to cover the costs of producing local news that meets the needs of the viewers in their communities .

federal regulations enable broadcast television stations to enforce contractual provisions that make them the exclusive distributors of linear programming within geographic zones based on their communities of license .

specifically , the fcc's exclusivity rules provide broadcast stations with a means of enforcing contractual exclusivity provisions between stations and program suppliers , including both broadcast networks and studios that license syndicated programming .

these rules apply to television stations as well as cable and satellite distributors .

in general , they respond to congressional concern about the availability of local news , weather , emergency , and community - oriented programming .

the fcc has consistently taken the view that the importation of distant television signals carrying the same programming as a local station could divert the local station's audience , diminishing the station's advertising revenues and threatening its ability to serve the local community .

the geographic zones in which broadcast stations may exercise their exclusivity rights vary , depending on the distribution technology .

when the fcc first adopted exclusivity rules in the 1940s with respect to broadcast stations , the zones coincided with the station's communities of licenses .

when the fcc adopted exclusivity rules with respect to cable operators in the 1970s and subsequently extended them to satellite operators , it based the zones on a 35-mile radius from a designated center of the stations' communities of license .

when the fcc first established exclusivity rules with respect to cable operators in 1972 , its action , under the authority of the communications act of 1934 , was closely related to a parallel debate about the applicability of copyright law to cable operators .

as the fcc later explained , "cable television systems [at that time] operated outside of the traditional program supply markets as a result of the operation of the copyright act of 1909 , creating what was viewed as unfair competition between cable television systems and television broadcast stations. .

according to senator john mcclellan , who in the early 1970s was chairman of the senate judiciary committee subcommittee on patents , trade - marks , and copyrights , the question of copyright liability for cable operators was "the only significant obstacle faced to final action by the congress on a [new] copyright bill" to update the original copyright act from 1909 .

after several copyright updates proposed in congress failed to pass , clay j. whitehead , the director of the office of telecommunications policy in the white house under president richard m. nixon , proposed a "take it or leave it" compromise in 1971 .

this compromise , endorsed by then fcc chairman dean burch and senator mcclellan , provided for ( 1 ) exclusivity rules to be adopted by the fcc and ( 2 ) a commitment on the part of broadcast stations , cable operators , and studios to support separate copyright legislation providing for compulsory licensing .

this 1971 compromise is still cited as a reason why the fcc should not repeal its current exclusivity rules absent congress's repeal of statutory copyright licensing .

from the 1960s through the late 1980s , a centerpiece of the fcc's regulation of cable operators was the requirement that cable operators carry any broadcast television signal considered to be "local" upon the station's request .

neither congress nor the fcc gave broadcast television stations the right to negotiate for carriage .

the courts voided the fcc's "must - carry" rules in 1985 .

thus , from 1985 to 1992 , cable operators paid neither copyright holders nor broadcast television stations for the right to retransmit local broadcast signals .

in 1989 , the fcc recommended that congress reexamine the compulsory license with a view toward replacing it with a regime of full copyright liability for retransmission of both distant and local signals .

instead , congress retained the statutory licensing regime of the copyright act , and addressed broadcast stations' control over the retransmission of their signals in the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 ( 1992 cable act ; p.l .

102-385 ) , which amended the communications act .

under this law , mvpds may not redistribute a broadcast signal to their customers unless they have obtained the permission of the broadcast station that originated the signal .

when granting permission , commercial stations have two options: "must - carry" gives a station the right to require carriage by cable operators , and to a more limited extent , satellite operators , serving subscribers located within the dma served by the station .

commercial stations airing programming from religious broadcasters or other programming that may appeal to a specialized audience often choose this option , because they believe mvpds might not be willing to pay significant amounts to retransmit their programming .

"retransmission consent" gives a station the right to negotiate for payment in exchange for carriage by cable and satellite operators serving subscribers located within the station's dma .

by choosing this option , a station runs the risk of failing to reach an agreement with the cable or satellite carrier and therefore not being carried .

in determining which stations were local , congress decided that a third - party commercial research service , rather than a government agency , should define the boundaries of a station's local market .

a television station was entitled to must - carry status on all cable systems located in the same market .

both the house judiciary committee and the house energy and commerce committee have announced plans to review and potentially modernize copyright and communications laws , respectively , in light of technological developments .

in the meantime , developments in the television industry , including the emergence of "virtual" cable and satellite operators , have prompted the fcc and courts to reexamine their interpretation of these laws .

in 2014 , the fcc proposed eliminating or modifying its exclusivity rules with respect to satellite and cable operators .

fcc chairman tom wheeler has noted that since congress adopted compulsory copyright provisions for cable operators in 1976 , congress passed retransmission consent legislation in 1992 giving broadcasters the right to negotiate with cable and satellite operators for the right to retransmit their signals .

furthermore , he stated that "the presence of the exclusivity rules prohibits the market from operating in a fair and efficient manner and aggravates the harm to consumers during retransmission consent disputes," while their elimination would not trigger any harm , because network affiliation contracts already contain exclusivity provisions .

the following are among the numerous questions on which the fcc sought comment: would elimination of the exclusivity rules be inconsistent with the intent of the 1992 cable act ? .

would elimination of the exclusivity rules go beyond the fcc's statutory authority ? .

how would the elimination of the exclusivity rules affect the policy goal of "localism" ? .

to what extent do existing network / affiliate agreements prohibit a local broadcaster from allowing its signal to be imported by a distant cable operator without reference to an fcc prohibition ? .

to what extent do program suppliers "dilute" broadcasters' exclusivity by making their programming available via alternative outlets ( eg , by licensing programs to cable networks and broadcast stations simultaneously , or to ovds ) ? .

how would the rules' elimination affect retransmission consent negotiations ? .

stelar directed the fcc to update the "totality of circumstances" test in its "good faith negotiations" rules ( 47 u.s.c .

§325 ( b ) ( 3 ) ( c ) ) .

in september 2015 , the fcc sought comment on specific practices that it could identify as evidence of bad faith under this test .

some of those potentially prohibited practices are those raised by mediacom communications corporation ( mediacom ) in a petition for an fcc rulemaking , and other mvpds and broadcasters who responded to mediacom's petition .

these include the following: broadcast stations' and / or networks' blocking online access to their programing during retransmission consent disputes .

in its committee report , the senate commerce committee also directed the fcc to examine the role "digital rights and online video programming have begun to play in retransmission consent negotiations. .

broadcast stations' relinquishing to third parties , including broadcast networks and stations located in separate geographic television markets , their right to grant retransmission consent .

broadcast stations' bundling of their signals with those of other broadcast stations or cable networks , including networks that have not yet launched .

the fcc stated that if a broadcast station requires an mvpd to purchase less popular programming in order to purchase more desired programming , the mvpds may be forced to pay for programming they do not want and may in turn pass those costs onto consumers .

the fcc sought comment on 25 additional practices identified that might be inconsistent with the obligation to negotiate in good faith .

in december 2014 , the fcc proposed new rules that would expand its definition of an "mvpd" to include ovds that offer linear programming .

in singling out these types of ovds for inclusion , the fcc cites the definition of "video programming" in the 1934 communications act .

the fcc stated that "such an approach will ensure that both incumbent providers will continue to be subject to ... regulations that apply to mvpds as they transition [the delivery of] their services to the internet , and that nascent , internet - based video programming service will have access to the tools they need to compete with established providers. .

among the questions on which the fcc sought comment are the following: whether the fcc should consider the exemption or waiver of certain fcc regulations , if allowed under the statute ; how expanding the definition of "mvpd" would affect the retransmission consent negotiation process , including requirements to negotiate in good faith ; how network affiliation agreements affect the carriage of broadcast stations on internet - based mvpds ; how the fcc's expansion of its mvpd definition would interrelate with copyright law .

the fcc noted that even if an ovd qualified as an mvpd under the fcc's rules , it would not be subject to a number of regulations and statutory requirements specifically applicable to cable and satellite operators unless it also qualified as one of those services .

among those requirements are the network non - duplication rules and must - carry requirements .

the issue of whether an online distributor of video programming that retransmits the signals of broadcast television stations meets the statutory definition of a "cable system," and is thereby entitled to statutory copyright licensing under 17 u.s.c .

§111 , has split federal judges over the last two years .

circuit courts in washington , dc , and new york , and a district court in illinois , have said online video distributors cannot use the statutory license .

a u.s. district court in california , however , ruled that ovds can use the statutory license .

