thirty years after having enacted it , congress is reviewing the 1986 goldwater - nichols defense reform act .

deeply controversial at the time , goldwater - nichols augmented command relationships , strengthened the role of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , enhanced joint procurement , and redesigned personnel incentives in order to prioritize "jointness" among the services — a characteristic that the u.s. department of defense demonstrably lacked prior to the reforms .

congress is now determining whether further reforms are needed , and if so , what those might be .

to that end , the senate armed services committee has held a number of hearings over the second session of the 114 th congress , specifically focused on defense reform .

spurred on by congressional interest , the dod has undertaken its own "goldwater - nichols" review of its internal structures , and plans to present suggested legislative changes to congress in the coming weeks and months .

among defense scholars , observers , and practitioners there has been a near - constant drumbeat to reform one aspect or another of the dod since its inception in 1947 .

most observers agree that after 30 years , a comprehensive review of the goldwater - nichols legislation is warranted .

further , there appears to be a broad consensus among observers that dod must retain its strength while becoming considerably more agile in order to enable the united states to meet a variety of critical emerging national security challenges .

yet agreement seemingly ends there .

there appears to be little consensus regarding what changes are needed within dod and what specific direction reform ought to take .

discussions have begun to coalesce around a number of proposals , including reforming defense acquisition processes , further strengthening the joint staff , reducing pentagon staffs , and better empowering the services in the "joint" arena .

however , ideas vary on how , specifically , to accomplish those goals .

disagreement also exists as to whether or not reorganizing dod alone will be sufficient .

some observers maintain that a reform of the broader interagency system on national security matters is needed .

this lack of consensus appears to result from diverging ideas as to what are the key challenges with the way dod — and the national security architecture more broadly — is organized and operates .

the variety of views reflects the complexity of these institutions .

one observer refers to the present dod reform debate as akin to a "rorschach test," noting that defense experts tend to diagnose what they believe to be critical national security challenges based on their own experiences and priorities .

without a common understanding of the root causes of these organizational frictions , solutions to the national security organization challenge differ considerably .

the complex nature of the pentagon and national security bureaucracies adds to the many challenges of dod management reform .

despite these obstacles , the case for reforming the department of defense is gaining traction among observers .

the international security environment has grown ever more complex , in manners unforeseen when the goldwater - nichols legislation was enacted .

this report is designed to assist congress as it evaluates the many different defense reform proposals suggested by the variety of stakeholders and institutions within the u.s. national security community .

it includes an outline of the strategic context for defense reform , both in the goldwater - nichols era and today .

it then builds a framework to understand the dod management challenge , and situates some of the most - discussed reform proposals within that framework .

it concludes with some questions congress may ponder as it exercises oversight over the pentagon .

the changes that the goldwater - nichols legislation made to the department of defense , and in particular , the way that dod conducts military operations , are in many ways central to how the department conducts military operations today .

indeed , many organization design decisions that were taken — in particular , clarifying the chain of command for more effective prosecution of joint operations and improving the quality of military advice provided to senior leaders — are so fundamental to the way dod does business today that it is difficult to recall that it once conducted its operations quite differently .

dod's mission is to "provide the military forces needed to deter war and protect the security of our country. .

in order to do so , dod must plan for current and future threats and then prepare military forces with the training and other military capabilities necessary to meet those threats .

it must also propose and manage a budget appropriate to the nation's defense needs and articulate acceptable levels and areas of risk .

while simple in theory , orchestrating and synchronizing these activities is a highly complex endeavor .

hundreds of studies , comprising thousands of recommendations and tens of thousands of pages , have been dedicated to reforming the department of defense and its many facets .

the scale and complexity of the dod make it a uniquely challenging organization to manage .

as one management expert stated in 1997: the most difficult problem in the entire world right now is the transformation of russia into a democratic , free - market economy .

you may not realize that the second most difficult problem i can possibly envision is that of reforming the defense department .

over the duration of the department's history , a number of administrations have sought to improve its management and efficiency .

these reforms have generally taken one of three approaches .

the first advocates for more centralization , shifting more authority and resources from the military departments to joint institutions and / or office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) control in order to improve interoperability and efficiency .

the second approach favors more decentralization , through retaining or bolstering semi - autonomous military services , properly guided by osd decisionmaking and resource allocation processes , thereby promoting creativity and innovation through competition .

the third "business matrix" approach attempts to infuse business management structures into existing pentagon architectures using cross - functional teams , boards , and councils to promote collaboration .

yet , as noted by the u.s. commission on national security in the 21 st century ( the hart - rudman commission ) : the current structure of dod's major staffs ( and their functions ) represents a meshwork of all three models , and the net result has been a diffusion of authority , responsibility and accountability .

in many cases , the three different paradigms work at cross - purposes to obstruct and block each other .

this dilutes the department's ability to transform itself internally .

it hinders the identification of problems , the development of alternative solutions , and the elevation of decisions to senior officials for resolution .

while consensus on specific reform solutions remains elusive , many scholars and practitioners agree on the characteristics that dod must have if it is to grapple effectively with current and emerging strategic challenges .

namely , many believe that the department must be better able to respond to multiple complex contingencies around the world , both anticipated and unforeseen .

rapid adaptation and "agility" is therefore necessary .

with respect to the latter point , as noted by chairman of the house armed services committee mac thornberry in january 2016: i think there are two primary characteristics that describe the military capability that we need .

and they are strength and agility .

we know from sports that you can't do with one and not the other .

you have to have both .

in march 2016 , senate armed services committee chairman john mccain fleshed out his own concept of what dod must be able to do: i believe we have a rather clear definition of the challenge that we all must address .

the focus of goldwater - nichols was operational effectiveness , improving our military's ability to fight as a joint force .

the challenge today is strategic integration .

by that , i mean improving the ability of the department of defense to develop strategies and integrate military power globally to confront a series of threats , both states and non - state actors , all of which span multiple regions of the world and numerous military functions .

the center for strategic and international studies ( csis ) "open letter on defense reform," signed by a bipartisan group of senior defense observers and practitioners , frames the dod reform challenge slightly differently .

instead of articulating the desired characteristics of a future dod , they focus on some of the key organizational problems that , in their view need to be overcome: the defense department , and even more so the broader u.s. national security complex , appear[s] sclerotic in their planning , prioritization , and decision - making processes .

we should identify better ways to pace and get ahead of this changing environment .

second , the defense enterprise is too inefficient .

these two problems are intertwined .

there appears to be significant duplication of responsibilities and layering of structure , which contributes materially to the perception that we are at risk of being outpaced and outwitted by adversaries .

moreover , our military and defense civilian personnel systems , requirements and acquisition systems , security cooperation and foreign military sales systems , and strategy , planning , programming , and budgeting systems reflect twentieth - century approaches that often seem out of step with modern best practices .

while experts convened by csis could not agree on specific reform proposals , they did note that two principles should guide defense reform efforts: first , we must sustain civilian control of the military through the secretary of defense and the president of the united states and with the oversight of congress .

second , military advice should be independent of politics and provided in the truest ethos of the profession of arms .

on april 5 , 2016 , secretary of defense ashton carter articulated his ideas regarding defense reform and the areas within the department that need improvement: it's time that we consider practical updates to this critical organizational framework , while still preserving its spirit and intent .

for example , we can see in some areas how the pendulum between service equities and jointness may have swung too far , as in not involving the service chiefs enough in acquisition decision - making and accountability ; or where subsequent world events suggest nudging the pendulum further , as in taking more steps to strengthen the capability of the chairman and the joint chiefs to support force management , planning , and execution across the combatant commands , particularly in the face of threats that cut across regional and functional combatant command areas of responsibility , as many increasingly do .

secretary carter further intimated that dod will be augmenting some of its internal processes as well as submitting statutory changes to congress for consideration .

as noted earlier in this report , no consensus currently exists regarding specific recommendations to "fix" the pentagon .

this , in part , stems from a lack of agreement on the nature of the bureaucratic challenges currently besetting the department of defense and preventing it from accomplishing what many perceive to be core tasks .

during hearings held in the second session of the 114 th congress , experts recommended scores of proposals to reform dod .

these are in addition to the many other proposals advocated by a variety of scholars and practitioners across the defense and national security policy community .

for purposes of bringing a degree of analytic coherence and clarity to the present discussion , crs grouped together and condensed similar dod reform proposals raised by experts in their testimonies to the senate armed services committee .

reform suggestions tabled outside the context of the hearings were not included .

crs then sought to better link each set of recommendations with the problems they are attempting to solve through organizing the proposals into one of four categories .

three of these categories align with the core areas of defense enterprise management articulated earlier in this report: managing costs , formulating requirements and building capabilities .

the fourth category includes proposals for reforming the broader interagency national security system .

this listing of defense reform proposals should be treated as illustrative of the state of the debate at present ; evaluating the relative strengths and weaknesses of each set of proposals is beyond the scope of this report .

the house armed services committee formally expressed its diagnosis of the defense reform challenge in h.rept .

114-537 , stating the committee recognizes that security challenges have become more transregional , multi - domain , and multi - functional ; that u.s. superiority in key warfighting areas is at risk with other nations' technological advances ; and that the department of defense lacks the agility and adaptability necessary to support timely decisionmaking and the rapid fielding of new capabilities... .

the proposals contained in this subtitle are focused on increasing accountability and oversight , enhancing global synchronization and joint operations , and strengthening strategic thinking and planning , while preserving civilian control of the military and the role of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff as the principal , independent military advisor to the president and the secretary of defense .

while the senate armed services committee declined to state its formal view on the overall goals for its defense reform agenda in s.rept .

114-255 , chairman john mccain has previously noted the focus of goldwater - nichols was operational effectiveness , improving our military's ability to fight as a joint force .

the challenge today is strategic integration .

by that , i mean improving the ability of the department of defense to develop strategies and integrate military power globally to confront a series of threats , both states and non - state actors , all of which span multiple regions of the world and numerous military functions .

this sentiment appears to provide a logical underpinning for a number of the defense reform proposals presented in s. 2943 .

the following table organizes the various legislative proposals included in "title ix – department of defense organization and management" sections of both h.r .

4909 and s. 2943 .

as the obama administration did not send formal legislative proposals to congress to inform these debates , when possible and appropriate the table refers to recommendations formulated by dod in conjunction with its own goldwater - nichols review .

as the debate on reforming the department of defense begins to take shape , congress may consider the following questions: what kinds of characteristics must dod have if it is to be able to effectively respond to the nation's current and future national security challenges ? .

is improved global synchronization , as proposed by the dod , sufficient to enable dod to achieve desired characteristics ( eg , agility or innovativeness ) ? .

will the proposed changes to dod's structures and processes enable the department to achieve the overall aim of strengthening strategic integration and strategic planning ? .

will they enable the dod to be more flexible and agile ? .

what might be some of the unintended consequences of each reform proposal ? .

how might those be mitigated ? .

what kinds of missions are national leaders likely to require u.s. military forces to perform ? .

is the department configured in a manner that enables the performance of those missions ? .

should other government departments perform certain critical tasks currently being performed by dod ? .

will reforming dod sufficiently enable the united states to grapple with emerging national security challenges , or is a broader examination of the interagency national security architecture required ? .

what processes within the department are working well ? .

which are not working well ? .

what functions are currently accomplished by working outside existing or established dod processes ? .

what changes to dod's culture might be necessary to foster a climate of innovation and experimentation ? .

what , if anything , might be done to improve the quality of military and strategic advice delivered to senior defense and national security leaders ? .

over dod's history , reform efforts have tended to be prompted when leaders in the executive branch or congress perceive deficiencies in the way that the department formulates requirements , build capabilities , or manages its costs .

for example , cost overruns in the 1980s led the reagan administration to establish the packard commission , tasked with identifying ways to improve efficiency across the government , with particular attention paid to dod .

simultaneously , congressional concern that dod was failing to build the institutional capabilities necessary to effectively prosecute joint operations led to the goldwater - nichols reform act of 1986 .

after the end of the cold war , concerns that dod strategy was no longer keeping pace with changing strategic realities led to the formulation — and institutionalization — of the quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) process ; concerns that the qdr was not effectively articulating and accounting for u.s. national security risks led congress to reform the quadrennial strategy process ( now called the defense strategy review ) in the fy2015 ndaa ( p.l .

113-291 ) .

key reform initiatives and proposals , with particular emphasis on reforms and changes to defense strategy , management , and organization , since 1980 include the following: 1983-1984 — president's private sector survey on cost control ( the "grace commission" ) on june 30 , 1982 , president reagan signed executive order 12369 formally establishing the president's private sector survey on cost control in the executive branch .

an executive committee under the chairmanship of j. peter grace was established , consisting of 161 high - level private sector executives — mostly chairmen and chief executive officers — from many of the nation's leading corporations .

the report delivered nearly 2,500 recommendations to president reagan to improve efficiency and deliver cost savings across the executive branch .

with respect to defense specifically , in june 1983 the grace commission stated that the department of defense could save $92 billion over three years by reducing major weapon purchases , closing military commissaries in the united states , consolidating or shutting down military bases , and reforming the military health care system .

the grace commission also identified federal retirement programs , specifically including the uniformed services retirement system , as potential sources of substantial cost savings .

it also proposed alternatives formulated solely on the basis of cost savings rather than on uniformed services manpower force requirements .

president reagan endorsed , and implemented , a large proportion of the commission's recommendations across the executive branch .

as a result , the dod's acquisition system was improved , the department of veteran's affairs health system was overhauled , and the base realignment and closure process closed dozens of facilities .

1985 — "defense organization: the need for change" in january 1985 , senators barry m. goldwater and samuel a. nunn ( chairman and ranking member of the senate armed services committee respectively ) reinvigorated a defense reform study initially directed in june 1983 by their respective predecessors .

james locher , committee staff member and study director , submitted a 645-page study , entitled "defense organization: the need for change," on october 16 , 1985 .

sasc began a 10-day series of hearings on dod reform that same date ; locher's findings informed those deliberations .

the study identified 16 key problems with the department and its operations: limited mission integration at dod's policymaking level ; imbalance between service and joint interests ; imbalance between modernization and readiness ; inter - service logrolling ; inadequate joint advice ; failure to implement adequately the concept of unified command ; unnecessary staff layers and duplication of effort in the top management headquarters of the military departments ; predominance of programming and budgeting ; lack of clarity of strategic goals ; insufficient mechanisms for change ; inadequate feedback ; inadequate quality of political appointees and joint duty military personnel ; failure to clarify the desired division of work ; excessive spans of control ; insufficient power and influence of the secretary of defense ; and inconsistent and contradictory pattern of congressional oversight .

of the 91 recommendations that locher made in order to address this problem , the 12 generally deemed most important were the following: establish three mission - oriented under secretary positions in the office of the secretary of defense for ( a ) nuclear deterrence ; ( b ) nato defense ; and ( c ) regional defense and force projection .

disestablish the joint chiefs of staff and , thereby , permit the service chiefs to dedicate all their time to service duties .

establish a joint military advisory council consisting of a chairman and a four - star military officer from each service on his last tour of duty to serve as principal military advisors to the president , the national security council , and the secretary of defense .

authorize the chairman of the joint military advisory council to provide military advice in his own right .

designate one of the members of the joint military advisory council , from a different service pair ( army / air force and navy / marine corps ) than the chairman , as deputy chairman .

specify that one of the responsibilities of the joint military advisory council is to inform higher authority of all legitimate policy alternatives .

authorize the chairman of the joint military advisory council to develop and administer a personnel management system for all military officers assigned to joint duty .

establish in each service a joint duty career specialty .

make the chairman of the joint military advisory council ( jmac ) the principal military advisor to the secretary of defense on operational matters and the sole command voice of higher authority within the jmac system while ensuring absolute clarity that the jmac chairman is not part of the chain of command .

remove the service component commanders within the unified commands from the operational chain of command .

fully integrate the secretariats and military headquarters staffs in the departments of the army and air force and partially integrate the secretariat and military headquarters staffs in the department of the navy ( the department of the navy is treated differently because of its dual - service structure ) .

create the position of assistant secretary of defense ( strategic planning ) , who would be responsible for establishing and maintaining a well - designed and highly interactive strategic planning process .

while the study proposed some radical changes , only a few of them were adopted , mostly in the areas of personnel management and the chain of command , through the goldwater - nichols legislation ( see below ) .

1986 — the packard commission president ronald reagan established his blue ribbon commission on defense management on july 15 , 1985 .

the commission , which was headed by david packard ( founder of hewlett - packard and former deputy secretary of defense ) , was instructed to "study defense management policies and procedures , including the budget process , the procurement system , legislative oversight , and the organizational and operational arrangements , both formal and informal , among the office of the secretary of defense , the organization of the joint chiefs of staff , the unified and specified command system , the military departments , and the congress. .

while the study explored many facets of the dod and its management , the overall objective was to identify efficiencies and associated cost savings .

ultimately , the commission found that "establishment of strong centralized policies implemented through highly decentralized management structures" would improve dod's efficiency and effectiveness .

the recommendations themselves were organized into four areas: national security planning and budgeting ; military organization and command ; acquisition organization and procedures ; and government - industry accountability .

the report noted: meeting these challenges will require , we believe , a rededication by all concerned to some basic principles of management .

capable people must be given the responsibility and authority to do their job .

lines of communication must be kept as short as possible .

people on the job must be held accountable for results .

these are the principles that guide our recommendations on defense organization and acquisition .

they apply whether one is fighting a war or managing a weapons program .

many of the packard report's recommendations pertained to defense acquisition ; of note , it argued for the creation of two - year defense budgets in order to find efficiencies in the defense program through fiscal stability .

this recommendation was somewhat implemented in the 1986 defense authorization act , which required dod to submit two - year budgets to congress .

however , dod never received both authorizations and appropriations to cover this biennial period ; and therefore the department had to submit an additional one - year budget to the second session of congress .

this biennial budgetary provision was repealed in the fy2008 ndaa .

1986 — national security decision directive ( nsdd ) 219 president ronald reagan established his blue ribbon commission on defense management on july 15 , 1985 ( discussed below ) .

one month after president ronald reagan received the packard commission's interim report he issued nsdd 219 in order to implement the commission's findings .

key provisions included the following: improving the integration of national security strategy with fiscal guidance provided to the department of defense .

this included issuing provisional five - year budget levels to dod ; developing procedures for producing a military strategy to support national objectives ; a net assessment of military capabilities ; and the selecting by the president of a military program and the associated budget level .

strengthening military command , control , and advice .

this included improving procedures for the chairman , joint chiefs of staff to channel the reports of the combatant commanders to the secretary of defense and channel presidential and secretary of defense orders to the combatant commanders ; revising the unified command plan and other related publications to provide broader authority to the combatant commanders to structure subordinate commands , joint task forces , and support activities ; providing options on combatant command ( cocom ) organizational structures to accommodate the "shortest possible" chain of command ; increasing flexibility to deal with situations that overlap cocom geographical boundaries ; and repealing the statutory provision against the establishment of a single unified command for transportation .

improving acquisition management .

anticipating the establishment of a new under secretary of defense for acquisition , nsdd 219 directed the secretary of defense to develop a directive outlining the roles and responsibilities of the new under secretary , to include defining the scope of the "acquisition" function ; setting policy for procurement and research and development ; supervising of the entire department acquisition system ; establishing policy for oversight of defense contractors ; and developing appropriate guidance for auditing defense contractors .

1986 — goldwater - nichols act the goldwater - nichols act was the first major defense organizational reform legislation since the defense reorganization act of 1958 .

building on the results of its own investigations , as well as packard commission findings , congress sought to address what it believed were fundamental systemic problems in dod .

these included serious organizational defects in the organization of the joint chiefs of staff , an inability of the military services to work together , a lack of mission focus in the office of the secretary of defense , weaknesses in the budget process , and deficiencies in congressional oversight of dod programs and plans .

its five main titles dealt with the organization of dod , including the office of the secretary of defense , and the powers and duties of the secretary ; the joint chiefs of staff and the combatant commands ; defense agencies and field activities ; joint officer personnel policy ; and the military departments .

the goldwater - nichols act , which was resisted by members of the administration and the military , specifically focused on areas for improving "jointness" among the military services .

in late 1986 , senators nunn and cohen introduced legislation to promote jointness for the special operations community .

the resulting public law amended the goldwater - nichols act by establishing a four - star special operations combatant command , as well as an assistant secretary position within the office of the secretary of defense responsible for special operations / low intensity conflict .

1989 — defense management review in february 1989 , president george bush addressed a joint session of congress , announcing he was directing the secretary of defense to develop a plan to improve the defense procurement process and management of the pentagon , and to "accomplish full implementation of the recommendations of the packard commission and to realize substantial improvements in defense management overall. .

key recommendations included the following: achieving better management of defense agencies and components through better synchronization of senior leaders' roles and responsibilities , and by assigning overall responsibility for dod's day to day management , operations , and the planning , programming , and budgeting system ( ppbs ) to the deputy secretary of defense ; establishing a defense executive committee of dod senior leadership , replacing the defense resources board with a defense planning and resources board ; better prioritizing programs and incorporating alternative planning scenarios in the ppbs , thereby making it more responsive to emerging requirements while operating on a two - year budgeting cycle ( consistent with packard commission recommendations ) in order to achieve better programmatic stability ; streamlining acquisition and procurement processes ; reducing the acquisition workforce and requiring each military service to submit plans for a dedicated corps of officers who would make a full - time career as acquisition specialists ; streamlining the number of directives and issuances associated with acquisition ; and improving logistics management , to include reducing supply , repair parts , and transportation costs .

the report also suggested several legislative changes , particularly pertaining to acquisition .

1992 — base force review developed under then - chairman of the joint chiefs of staff colin powell , the "base force" review was an initiative to understand the minimum required force structure for the emerging post - cold war security environment .

although the base force review was presented to congress in 1991 , it was not until the 1992 national military strategy ( nms ) was released that its full implications would become clear .

the 1992 nms identified four "foundations" for national military strategy: strategic deterrence and defense ; forward presence ; crisis response ; and reconstitution ( or , the capacity to rebuild forces if necessary ) .

u.s. force structure would be designed to accomplish these tasks and advance u.s. interests in regions vital to the united states , rather than on the basis of fighting multiple major regional conflicts ( as later defense plans would argue for ) .

three force packages comprised the core of the base force's conventional structure: atlantic f orces .

to meet threats and secure interests across the atlantic in europe , southwest asia , and the middle east .

these forces were to be "heavy," and were to have a significant reserve component .

pacific f orces .

these forces were to advance u.s. interests in east asia and the pacific .

pacific forces were to be "light" and predominantly maritime , and were to include some army and air force forward - deployed presence , and less of a reserve component than the atlantic forces .

contingency forces .

these were to consist of light , mobile forces that were conus - based and "ready to go on a moment's notice. .

these rapidly mobile , highly lethal forces were seen as likely to serve as the leading edge of forces being introduced for major regional contingencies and were to be less reliant on reserve components than the atlantic and pacific forces .

thus , the "base force" would comprise 20 army divisions ( 12 active , 6 reserve , and 2 reserve cadre divisions ) ; 26.5 usaf tactical fighter wing equivalents ( 15.25 active , 11.25 reserve ) ; 4 marine expeditionary forces ( mefs ) ; and 12 navy carriers .

these force packages entailed a reduction in major force elements and manpower ranging from 20% to 40% , depending on service / component ( with an approximate 25% reduction department - wide ) .

with respect to acquisition , longer - term investment accounts were prioritized while procurement spending declined in order to meet top - line defense spending reductions .

1993 — chairman of the joint chiefs of staff report on the roles , missions , and functions of the u.s. armed forces informed by the findings of the base force review , in february 1993 , chairman of the joint chiefs of staff colin powell released a roles and missions report .

key recommendations included removing any and all marine corps and army requirements for nuclear forces ; closing some 800 bases overseas and cutting of some 100 defense acquisition programs ; putting forces based in the united states under a joint command ( atlantic command ) ; and placing u.s. space command under u.s. strategic command .

1993 — the bottom - up review ( bur ) in order to further reorient the department away from the cold war threat environment , in 1993 secretary of defense les aspin directed a comprehensive review of the "nation's defense strategy , force structure , modernization , infrastructure and foundations. .

the bottom - up review ( bur ) sought to find further efficiencies ( the "peace dividend" ) while simultaneously reconceptualizing the threat environment in which u.s. forces would be required to operate .

the bur organized the department and its capabilities into four "building blocks": major regional contingencies .

this pertained to the u.s. ability to fight a major regional conflict against a substantial regional threat .

the operational concept for this kind of campaign was broken into four phases: ( 1 ) halt an invasion ; ( 2 ) build up u.s. combat power in the region while reducing the enemy's ability to operate ; ( 3 ) decisively defeat the enemy ; and ( 4 ) provide for post - war stability .

peace enforcement and intervention operations .

this block was to be capable of forcing entry into , seizing , and holding key facilities ; controlling troop and supply movements ; establishing safe havens ; securing protected zones from internal threats such as snipers , terrorist attacks , or sabotage ; and preparing the environment for relief by peacekeeping units or civilian authorities .

overseas presence operations .

this block was designed to deter adventurism and coercion by potentially hostile states , reassure friends , enhance regional stability , and underwrite a larger strategy of international engagement , prevention , and partnership .

it also was to help improve u.s. ability to respond effectively to crises or aggression , provide the leading edge of a rapid response capability needed in a crisis , and improve interoperability .

address nuclear dangers .

this block included activities associated with reducing the threat of wmd use by adversaries against the united states and its interests .

in addition to retaining the capacity for nuclear retaliation against those who might use wmd against the united states , other activities included cooperative threat reduction , nuclear nonproliferation , counter - proliferation , and active and passive defenses against nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons and their delivery systems .

the bur also stipulated a further reduction in forces from fy1990 , seeking to reduce the size of the armed forces by approximately 33% — well beyond the base force's planned overall 25% force reduction .

1995 — commission on the roles and missions of the armed forces john p. white , former assistant secretary of defense from 1977 to 1978 , chaired the commission on roles and missions , which issued its report , directions for defense , in may 1995 .

it concluded that in the 21 st century , every dod element must focus on supporting the operations of the unified commanders in chief ( cincs ) — now referred to as combatant commanders ( cocoms ) .

recommendations were designed to strengthen this support and included improving jointness .

the chairman of the jcs should propose to the secretary of defense a unified vision for joint operations to guide force and materiel development ; integrate support to cincs in such critical areas as theater air / missile defense and intelligence ; improve joint doctrine development ; develop and monitor joint readiness standards ; and increase emphasis on joint training ; elevating cincs .

larger roles for the cincs in structuring and controlling command , control , and intelligence support ; joint training ; and theater logistics ; establish a new "jointness" cinc .

creation of a new , functional unified command responsible for joint training and integration of all forces based in the continental united states ( note , this resulted in the re - designation of atlantic command as u.s. joint forces command ) ; planning for peace operations .

differentiating peace operations from "operations other than war" ( ootw ) in order to give them greater prominence in contingency planning ; increasing service focus on "core competencies. .

rather than attempt to eliminate duplication of assets between services ( i.e. , eliminate the "four air forces" problem ) , the report found that existing problems with service roles are symptoms of the need for dod to concentrate more intensely on unified operations ; improving health care .

giving beneficiaries of dod health care more choice between military and civilian care ; and improving acquisition infrastructure .

rejecting a "monolithic" acquisition organization independent of the services , as it could undermine core combat capabilities .

instead , infrastructure supporting the purchase and maintenance of equipment should be improved .

the report also called for better dod coordination with other usg agencies for tasks including combating proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , information warfare , operations other than war , and in overall national security strategy development .

1996 — joint vision 2010 in 1996 , chairman of the joint chiefs of staff shalikashvili issued a "conceptual template for how america's armed forces will channel the vitality and innovation of our people and leverage technological opportunities to achieve new levels of effectiveness in joint warfighting. .

while not a secretary of defense or congressionally mandated reform initiative per se , the document formed the intellectual foundation for subsequent defense organization reform proposals through the remainder of the clinton administration .

the vision of future warfighting that shalikashvili proposed "embraces information superiority and the technological advances that will transform traditional warfighting via new operational concepts , organizational arrangements , and weapons systems. .

in other words , joint vision 2010 explored the ways in which the united states military might build upon — and take advantage of — its technological superiority ( the "revolution in military affairs" ) .

the necessity of building and exploiting u.s. technological advantage in the battle space subsequently became a key concept in defense strategy and planning , especially as it enabled ( at least in theory ) force structure reductions through improving effectiveness of the joint force .

1997 — quadrennial defense review the 1997 quadrennial defense review , which was congressionally mandated , embraced the notion of defense transformation ( or , the adoption of , and investment in , technology to improve the manner in which the united states conducts its military operations ) .

in particular , it argued for improving command and control capabilities through advanced command , control , communications , computers , intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( c4isr ) architectures .

it also noted the department's intent to leverage new technologies to harness the "revolution in military affairs" through new operational concepts , doctrine , and organizational changes .

this qdr reaffirmed the "two major theater war" force sizing construct , and accordingly justified the need to retain a nuclear deterrent based on a triad of forces , as well as to retain 10 army divisions , 12 aircraft carriers , 20 fighter wings , and 3 marine expeditionary forces .

it also reaffirmed the requirement to keep approximately 100,000 personnel forward deployed both in europe and in the pacific and to regularly deploy naval , air , ground , and amphibious forces around the world .

additional recommendations included further reducing civilian and military personnel associated with infrastructure beyond the initiatives in the dod budget for fy1998 by 109,000 , bringing the total reduction to infrastructure employment since 1989 to 39% ; requesting authority for two additional rounds of brac , one in 1999 and the second in 2001 ; improving efficiency and performance of dod support activities by adopting innovative management and business practices of the private sector .

these include "reengineering" or "reinventing" dod support functions , for example , streamlining , reorganizing , downsizing , consolidating , computerizing , and commercializing operations ; considering far more non - warfighting dod support functions as candidates for outsourcing — inviting commercial companies to compete with the public sector to undertake certain support functions .

other recommendations in the qdr were included in the defense reform initiative .

1997 — defense reform initiative based on the findings of the 1997 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) process , secretary of defense william cohen established a task force on defense reform to find ways to improve the organization and procedures in the department .

it was asked to recommend organizational reforms , reductions in management overhead , and streamlined business practices in the department , with emphasis on the office of the secretary of defense , the defense agencies , dod field activities , and the military departments .

the task force specifically looked at the private sector and sought to adapt best practices and lessons learned from industry to pentagon operations .

the report recommended reforms in four broad categories: adopting modern business practices to achieve world - class standards of performance .

this included moving toward electronic ( versus paper ) business operations ; adopting prime vendor contracting at key facilities for maintenance , repair , and operating materials ; consolidating logistics and transportation ; reengineering dod travel procedures and systems ; and giving greater options to servicemembers for movement of household goods .

streamlining organizations , particularly osd , the services , and cocoms , to remove redundancy and maximize synergy .

this included reducing personnel in osd ( reduced by 33% from fy1996 levels ) , the defense agencies ( 21% reduction ) and field activities ( 36% reduction ) , the joint staff ( 29% reduction ) , the service headquarters ( 10% reduction ) , and the combatant command headquarters ( 10% reduction ) .

further actions included establishing the defense threat reduction and treaty compliance agency to help manage the wmd threat ; establishing a chancellor for education and professional development ; requiring that the deputy director of military support for domestic civil emergencies be a general officer from the national guard bureau ; and recommending that osd policy consolidate from four assistant secretary of defense offices to three .

applying market mechanisms to improve quality , reduce costs , and respond to customer needs .

this included looking for opportunities to outsource services and functions to the private sector and improve competition for depot maintenance .

reducing excess support structures to free resources and focus on core competencies .

this included base closures and revitalizing base housing and utilities with private sector capital .

1997 — national defense panel report established as an independent panel by the secretary of defense under section 924 of the military force structure act of 1996 , "transforming defense: national security in the 21 st century" provided congress with an alternative view of the 1997 quadrennial defense review .

while it noted that important reforms were ongoing under secretary of defense cohen , the report argued that the pace of dod transformation should be broader as well as accelerated .

key findings included the following: the united states should undertake a broad transformation of its military and national security structures , operational concepts , and equipment , and dod's key business processes ; transformation should go beyond operational concepts , force structures , and equipment , and should include procurement reform and changes to the support structure , including base closures ; the concept of "jointness" should be extended beyond the military to the broader national security establishment ( a "goldwater - nichols for the interagency" ) ; the unified command plan should be augmented through: the establishment of an "americas command," to address the challenges of homeland defense as well as those of the western hemisphere ; the establishment of a joint forces command to be the force provider to the geographic cincs ( later to be called combatant commands ) , address standardization among the various unified commands , oversee joint training and experimentation , and coordinate and integrate activities among the networked service battle labs ; elimination of u.s. atlantic command , subordination of southern command ; establishment of a logistics command that merges necessary support functions divided among various agencies ; assignment of the information domain to space command ; initiation of planning and preparedness for urban operations as a matter of priority ; enhanced defense intelligence capabilities , and in particular prioritization of human intelligence ( humint ) collection capabilities ; reconsideration and / or redesign of the ppbs .

2000 — the hart - rudman commission perhaps picking up from themes touched upon in the 1995 roles and missions report and the 1997 national defense panel report , the u.s. commission on national security in the 21 st century was established in 1998 by secretary of defense william cohen to examine whether u.s. national institutions were appropriately designed to meet the complex challenges of the current and future security environment .

it did so in three phases: by first "describing the emerging world in the first quarter of the 21 st century , then to design a national security strategy appropriate to that world , and finally to propose necessary changes to the national security structure in order to implement that strategy effectively. .

with respect to dod , the commission issued a 91-page report outlining key reform proposals , which included restructuring the office of the under secretary of defense for policy ( usd ( p ) ) by creating a new assistant secretary dedicated to strategy and planning ( s / p ) and abolishing the office of the assistant secretary for special operations and low - intensity conflict ; establishing a 10-year goal to reduce infrastructure costs by 20% to 25% through outsourcing and privatizing as many dod support agencies and activities as possible ; creating a brac - like commission on dod infrastructure reduction that would report to both the legislative and executive branches ; moving the qdr to the second year of an administration , and using the qdr as a foundation for the ppbs process ; requiring the secretary of defense to produce defense policy and planning guidance that defined specific goals and established relative priorities ; requiring those conducting the qdr to aim at defining defense modernization requirements for two distinct planning horizons: near - term ( 1 to 3 years ) and long - term ( 4 to 15 years ) ; introducing a new process , different from the ppbs , that would require the services to compete for allocation of some resources within the overall dod budget ; revising the major force programs ( mfps ) used in the defense program review to focus on a different mix of military capabilities .

the 11 mfps should be expanded into 13 different programs divided into three major categories: combat force programs , combat support programs , and service support programs ; updating and modernizing defense war gaming tools used to assess capabilities and size forces ; establishing and employing a two - track acquisition system — one for major acquisitions and a second , "fast track" for a limited number of breakthrough systems , especially those in the area of command and control ; returning to the pattern of increased prototyping and the testing of selected weapons and support systems , specifically to foster innovation ; implementing two - year defense budgeting solely for the modernization element of the dod budget ( r&d / procurement ) because of its long - term character , and expanding the use of multi - year procurement ; rewriting the defense sections of the federal acquisition regulations ; and shifting from a threat - based , two major theater war force sizing process to one that measures against recent operational activity trends , actual intelligence estimates of potential adversary's capabilities , and national security objectives once formulated in the new administration's national security strategy .

2001 — quadrennial defense review report the 2001 qdr report argued for the recalibration of u.s. strategy to focus on four core goals: assuring allies and friends ; dissuading adversaries ; deterring aggression and coercion ; and defeating enemies .

accordingly , it argued that the department ought to move from a "threat - based" model to a "capabilities based" model that focused more on how an adversary might fight rather than specifically who the adversary might be or where a war might occur .

still , it retained the essentials of the "two major theater war" construct , noting that "u.s. forces will remain capable of swiftly defeating attacks against u.s. allies and friends in any two theaters of operation in overlapping timeframes," while also building in the planning requirement to conduct limited , smaller - scale contingencies .

it also sought to better account for risk in defense policy formulation .

other recommendations included the following: maintaining regionally tailored forces forward stationed and deployed in europe , northeast asia , the east asian littoral , and the middle east / southwest asia to assure allies and friends , counter coercion , and deter aggression ; enhancing security cooperation with allies and partners ; reorienting the u.s. global military posture to enhance deterrent presence , flexibility , and rapid response in crises ; strengthening joint operations through technology ; introducing "modularity" to the joint forces ; streamlining dod overhead structure and flattening the organization ; consolidating and modernizing defense facility infrastructure ; and recalibrating the deploy - to - dwell ratios in order to better control the amount of time dod personnel are deployed away from home station .

2003 — transformation planning guidance two years into the global war on terror , secretary of defense donald rumsfeld issued his transformation planning guidance with the goal of transitioning the u.s. military from the industrial age to the information age .

as the logic went , particularly after the september 11 th attacks , the united states could not afford to react to threats slowly or have large forces tied down for lengthy periods .

rather , the united states needed forces that could take action from a forward position , rapidly reinforce from other areas , and defeat adversaries swiftly and decisively while conducting an active defense of u.s. territory .

the roadmap was broken out into eight task categories , to include shaping transformation policy ; concept development and experimentation ; interoperability ; transformation roadmaps ; innovative processes ; testing ; training and education ; and measuring progress .

it also sought to ensure that transformation activities were included as part of the ppbs cycle .

2004 — joint defense capabilities study in march 2003 , secretary of defense rumsfeld chartered a study — formally named the joint defense capabilities study — to examine how dod developed resources and provided joint capabilities .

key findings included the following: services dominate the current requirements process .

much of dod's focus is on service programs and platforms rather than capabilities required to accomplish combatant command missions ; service planning does not consider the full range of solutions available to meet joint warfighting needs ; and the resourcing function focuses senior leadership effort on fixing problems at the end of the process , rather than being involved early in the planning process .

key recommendations included that joint needs should form the foundation for the defense program ; planning for major joint capabilities should be accomplished at the department rather than the component level ; senior leaders should focus on providing guidance and making decisions at the "front end" of the process ; and a strategic planning council , chaired by the secretary of defense , should be established to provide senior leaders with a venue to offer formal inputs to shape defense strategy and support effective oversight of a "capabilities - based" planning system .

on october 31 , 2003 , secretary of defense rumsfeld issued a memorandum adopting many of these recommendations .

these included the planned issuance of a fiscally informed strategic planning guidance document that would replace the policy / strategy sections of the defense planning guidance ; the initiation of an enhanced , collaborative joint planning process that articulated metrics for success in the defense program ; the planned issuance of fiscally constrained joint programming guidance replacing the programmatic elements of the defense planning guidance ; and the issuance of a defense budget informed by all the above activities .

2006 — quadrennial defense review the 2006 qdr process was a key opportunity for dod to assess the progress it was making , both with respect to the global war on terror as well as its implementation of the transformation agenda .

accordingly , it focused on key requirements emerging from operational and defense managerial necessity .

of note , it articulated the need for greater collaboration with other agencies in the national security interagency system to manage a variety of challenges , from counterinsurgency and stability operations to humanitarian assistance and disaster response missions .

in its reorientation , it argued for a shift in dod capabilities from its "traditional" portfolio to one better suited to defeat terrorist networks , prevent acquisition or use of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) , defend the homeland in depth , and shape choices of countries at a strategic crossroads .

key reforms contained within the document included the following: a department - wide emphasis on irregular warfare , building partnership capacity , strategic communication , intelligence , and defense institutional reform and governance ; an increase of special operations forces by 15% ; establishment of a marine corps special operations command ; adoption of a "more transparent , open and agile decision - making process" using common information sources , combining department - level financial databases , and standardization of analytic processes ; establishment of "capital accounts" for major acquisition programs ; development of "joint capability portfolios" ; and establishment of the defense business systems management committee to improve governance of the department's transformation efforts .

the 2006 qdr was accompanied by a series of implementation "road maps," overseen by the deputy secretary of defense .

2010 — quadrennial defense review report this qdr sought to rebalance the department and its activities to accomplish the following key priorities: prevail in today's wars ; prevent and deter conflict ; prepare to defeat adversaries and succeed in a wide range of contingencies ; and preserve and enhance the all - volunteer force .

it also paid specific attention to alliance relationships and basing and posture agreements .

key proposed reforms to dod business practices in the 2010 qdr include the following: reforming security assistance ; reforming defense acquisition through a revitalization of the acquisition workforce , bolstering cost analysis , and better integrating risk into cost assessments ; institutionalizing rapid acquisition capability ; and reforming the u.s. export control system .

2010 — secretary of defense gates's reforms during his tenure as secretary of defense , robert gates sought to recalibrate the department away from fighting future wars , and instead prioritize fighting and winning the conflicts in which the nation was embroiled at the time , to include iraq and afghanistan .

he also sought to reduce dod bureaucracy while at the same time rebuilding the defense civil service .

in particular , secretary gates disestablished joint forces command ; and directed the department to find $100 billion in overhead savings over five years , and redirect those savings toward personnel and units , force structure , and investment in future capabilities .

in addition , he sought to institutionalize the capabilities necessary to wage asymmetric conflicts ; "right - size" the dod workforce through "in - sourcing" — hiring 13,600 civil servants to replace contractors and hire an additional 33,600 civil servants over five years ; reinvigorate the acquisition workforce through adding 4,080 acquisition professionals ; and improve medical support during combat operations , for wounded soldiers , and for veterans .

2012 — defense strategic guidance on january 5 , 2012 , secretary leon panetta released strategic guidance intended to articulate priorities for the department .

it argued that four missions would be used to size the force: counterterrorism ; deterring and defeating aggression ; countering wmd ; and homeland defense .

it specifically stated that the department would no longer plan for "large - scale" counterinsurgency or stability operations missions .

key recommendations and decisions taken include managing the force in ways that protect its ability to regenerate capabilities that might be needed to meet future , unforeseen demands ; ensuring "reversibility" of decisions — including the vectors on which dod places its industrial base , so that capabilities that have been divested can be reconstituted if necessary ; rebuilding force readiness ; reducing defense costs , including growth of manpower costs , and finding efficiencies in headquarters , business practices , and other support activities ; examining the mix of active component and reserve components .

2013 — secretary of defense hagel's reforms the budget control act of 2011 eventually resulted in "sequestration," or mandatory budget reductions for the department of defense .

this prompted secretary of defense hagel to initiate a "strategic choices and management review," which sought to help dod balance strategic ends , ways , and means under different budget scenarios .

it also scrutinized "every aspect" of dod's budget , including contingency planning , business practices , force structure , pay and benefits , acquisition practices , and modernization portfolios .

key findings / recommendations included reducing the department's major headquarters budgets by 20% , beginning with the office of the secretary of defense , the joint staff , service headquarters and secretariats , combatant commands , and defense agencies and field activities .

organizations should strive for a goal of 20% reductions in civilian and military personnel on headquarters staffs ; reducing the number of direct reports to the secretary of defense and eliminating positions ; and reducing intelligence analysis and production at combatant commands .

2014 — quadrennial defense review report in part due to fiscal austerity prompted by budget restrictions associated with the budget control act , the 2014 qdr refocused the department on three strategic objectives: defending the homeland ; building security globally by projecting u.s. influence and deterring aggression ; and remaining prepared to win decisively against any adversary .

this qdr announced force structure reductions , while protecting investments in key capability areas including cybersecurity ; missile defense ; deterrence ; space ; air / sea battle ; precision strike ; intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance ( isr ) ; counterterrorism ; and special operations capabilities .

it also sought to rebalance the department's "tooth to tail" ratio .

the 2014 qdr did not announce many reforms per se ; rather , it was focused on recalibrating the defense budget .

