cybersecurity is a major concern of financial services providers and their federal regulators .

in many ways , it is an important extension of physical security .

providers of financial services are concerned about both physical and electronic theft of money and other assets such as intellectual property .

they want to prevent the destruction of property , whether it is a building or a website .

they do not want to be closed down by either a physical storm or an electronic denial - of - service attack .

they want to minimize human error , whether it is someone failing to secure written documents or an employee falling victim to a phishing attack .

when it comes to keeping unauthorized persons away from sensitive electronic equipment , physical security and cybersecurity often overlap .

there is a growing recognition by the federal government of the importance of cybersecurity in the financial services industry , as evidenced by the inclusion of financial services in the government's list of 16 critical infrastructure sectors .

this report provides information on the landscape of federal laws and regulatory agencies directly regulating or establishing standards for financial services cybersecurity .

because each of the applicable federal laws contains specific implementation provisions , there are varying degrees and methods of regulatory oversight of cybersecurity in the financial sector .

some laws distribute authority to issue regulations and take enforcement actions among a number of agencies ; others require one agency to issue implementing regulations and distribute enforcement authority among several agencies ; and finally , some laws delegate all authority for issuing regulations and administrative enforcement to a single agency .

some agencies have authority to issue notice and comment rules ; others have authority to impose requirements on the institutions that they regulate by guidance that has the same legal force as notice and comment rulemaking .

the federal bank supervisory agencies , which have broad general authority to issue regulations , also issue any number of types of guidance documents under a variety of names such as policy statements , supervision and regulatory ( sr ) letters , financial institution letters ( fil ) , letters , bulletins , and other forms of communication .

many of the regulators issue informal guidance and bring adjudicatory enforcement actions on a case - by - case basis that often are interpreted as precedential signals to the regulated community as to how the agency interprets aspects of its regulatory authority .

this report also provides brief descriptions and examples of the role of state law and of private sector initiatives .

its focus is , however , on the array of federal regulators and the varying ways in which federal laws impose information technology and cybersecurity requirements on financial services providers to protect the security , confidentiality , and integrity of data assembled and maintained in their businesses .

acronyms and abbreviations are listed in a glossary at the end of this report .

financial services are a critical part of any modern economy .

these services include accepting deposits ; making loans ; processing payments ; providing insurance and other financial products to spread risks ; dealing in securities such as stocks , bonds , and derivatives ; and offering , administrating , or advising employee benefit programs .

commercial and investment banks , stock and commodity markets , and insurance companies using various securities and commodity contracts , funds , trusts , and other financial vehicles provide these services .

banking institutions are subject to comprehensive prudential regulation touching many aspects of their daily operations .

regulation of the financial sector is based on both form ( the type of charter the entity has ) and function ( what the entity does ) .

there are special and distinct institution - based regulatory regimes and regulators for depositories , securities firms , and insurance companies , as well as multiple regulations based on the services or products that a financial institution provides .

in addition to the traditional type of financial regulation in which various financial organizations , functions , activities , or products are subjected to regulatory controls , the federal government also treats financial services as one of 16 critical infrastructure sectors with which it has arrangements to prevent disruptions to the nation's economy and harm to its wellbeing .

distinctions are often made between commercial banking ( accepting deposits and making loans to businesses and individuals ) and investment banking ( dealing in stocks , bonds , and related securities on the bank's account or for customers ) .

in this report , the term "bank" will be used as a general term for depository institutions .

the term will be employed to cover banks , savings associations , thrifts , and credit unions with federally insured deposits .

the term will also be used to cover the companies that own or control banks or thrifts ( i.e. , bank holding companies , financial holding companies , and savings and loan holding companies ) .

the term "commercial bank" will be used to refer to national banks and state - chartered banks but not savings and loans or thrifts or credit unions .

when focusing on a nonbank subsidiary of a holding company , however , "bank" will not be used , but the report will indicate the type of organization in question ( i.e. , stock exchange , insurance company , securities firm , mortgage broker , etc. ) .

currently there are four federal commercial bank regulators , two federal securities regulators , one credit union federal regulator , but no primary federal regulator of insurance companies .

although primary regulation of insurance companies is the prerogative of the states , publicly traded insurance companies must comply with various securities laws and certain insurance company subsidiaries of financial holding companies may be subjected to requirements imposed by the board of governors of the federal reserve system ( the fed ) .

prudential regulation of depositories and holding companies for safety and soundness now includes concern for cybersecurity .

prudential regulation of depository institutions and their holding companies involves virtually every aspect of their capitalization , management , operations , activities , and services , as well as periodic on - site examination and continuing supervision .

it is generally based upon organic legislation that establishes each regulator to charter and supervise banks , savings and loans , holding companies , or credit unions .

these laws have been amended over time to provide regulators with authority to deal with changing issues and circumstances as they have arisen .

in addition to federal bank regulators , other federal regulators oversee securities , markets , government - sponsored enterprises in the secondary mortgage market , agricultural credit , and certain aspects of consumer protection .

major laws that include data security provisions affecting the financial services industry include dodd - frank , the gramm - leach - bliley act , the fair credit reporting act of 1970 , the fair and accurate credit transactions act of 2003 , and the sarbanes - oxley act of 2002 .

it might be noted that there are other laws , which are not specifically directed to the financial sector or to financial products , which may have an impact on the cybersecurity requirements of any financial institution .

for example , the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) and the health information technology for economic and clinical health act of 2009 impose privacy and security standards relating to health information .

financial institutions holding covered health information must comply with their requirements , which include data security standards .

currently , one presidential directive and two executive orders address the critical role of financial services in the national economy .

first , presidential policy directive 21 ( ppd - 21 ) , "critical infrastructure security and resilience," issued on february 12 , 2013 , revoked homeland security presidential directive 7 ( hspd - 7 ) .

it identified the current 16 critical infrastructure sectors , including financial services , and designated the department of the treasury as the sector - specific agency .

ppd - 21 set out three "strategic imperatives" as follows: 1. refine and clarify functional relationships across the federal government to advance the national unity of effort to strengthen critical infrastructure security and resilience , 2. enable efficient information exchange by identifying baseline data and systems requirements for the federal government , and 3. implement an integration and analysis function to inform planning and operational decisions regarding critical infrastructure .

second , executive order 13636 , "improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity," was issued on february 12 , 2013 .

it ordered the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) to develop a baseline cybersecurity framework that could be voluntarily adopted by the critical infrastructure sectors , including financial services .

additionally , as a sector - specific agency , treasury was directed to consult with the department of homeland security , office of management and budget , and the national security staff to determine if existing cybersecurity regulations should be modified considering current and projected risks .

third , executive order 13681 , "improving the security of consumer financial transactions," was issued on october 17 , 2014 .

it directed federal agencies to improve the cybersecurity of their consumer financial transactions by purchasing chip and pin payment terminals and by issuing chip and pin payment cards for official purchases .

chip and pin is generally considered more secure than the chip and signature system being adopted by private sector .

the additional security is effective only if both payment terminals and payment cards have pins .

except for official government payment cards , most new payment cards issued in the united states lack pins .

the payment card industry's security standards council , founded in 2006 by american express , discover , jcb international , mastercard , and visa inc. , develops , maintains , and updates payment card industry data security standards ( pci dss ) .

according to the council , [m]aintaining payment security is required for all entities that store , process or transmit cardholder data .

guidance for maintaining payment security is provided in pci security standards .

these set the technical and operational requirements for organizations accepting or processing payment transactions , and for software developers and manufacturers of applications and devices used in those transactions .

banks issuing credit and debit cards , merchants accepting such cards , and others processing transactions involving card payments are subject to contractual obligations to comply with pci dss standards addressing data security .

the 2015 version of the pci dss standard for assessing security procedures runs 115 pages and "comprises a minimum set of requirements for protecting account data [but] does not supersede local or regional laws , government regulations , or other legal requirements. .

among the "high level standards" are the following: do not use default passwords .

encrypt cardholder data when transmitted over open , public networks .

track and monitor all access to network resources and cardholder data .

regularly test security systems and processes .

independent qualified security assessors are used to assess compliance with pci dss in most cases .

the rules are enforced by a series of contracts .

one group of contracts is between a card brand , such as mastercard , visa , or american express , and the banks that issue the payment cards or process payments .

another group of contracts is between these banks and those accepting the payment cards such as retailers and hotels .

since all of these contracts are private business transactions , relatively little is known about the terms .

an exception to this occurs when the parties contest certain provisions in court .

for example , in the litigation resulting from the target data breach of 2013 , the parties introduced some of these provisions into evidence .

oversight of financial services cybersecurity reflects a complex and sometimes overlapping array of state and federal laws , regulators , regulations , and guidance .

cybersecurity is a critical component of protecting the vital services to the economy provided by the financial sector .

maintaining the confidentiality , security , and integrity of the data held by financial institutions is critical to sustaining the level of trust which allows businesses and consumers to rely on the financial services industry to supply services on which they depend .

in recognition of the importance of the information systems that support financial services , regulators have increasingly devoted attention to cybersecurity concerns by issuing regulations and various forms of guidance .

as discussed herein , the federal government's oversight of the financial sector includes cybersecurity and involves at least four separate types of oversight and specific encouragement of voluntary cooperation .

depository institutions are subjected to comprehensive prudential regulation and supervision for safety and soundness .

the federal securities regulators , who administer a regime that mandates disclosure of material information by publicly traded companies , oversee the major components of the securities industry by means of a system of self - regulation .

this consists of an array of sros , such as the national securities exchanges and securities associations registered with the sec .

some federal agencies are charged with specific aspects of consumer protections that apply to products of the financial services industry .

some federal laws , which apply broadly , require financial institutions to safeguard information .

both congress , with the enactment of the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 , and the executive branch , pursuant to a series of executive orders , are encouraging voluntary cooperation among owners and operators of critical infrastructure , including financial services providers , to implement cybersecurity practices and procedures best suited to safeguard the information that they hold which is critical to u.s. national security .

there is every indication that there will be increased attention to cybersecurity at both the federal and state levels .

