the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) was comprehensively reauthorized by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) on december 10 , 2015 .

the title i - a program is the largest grant program authorized under the esea and is funded at $15.8 billion for fy2018 .

title i - a of the esea authorizes aid to leas for the education of disadvantaged children .

title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending pre - kindergarten through grade 12 schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families .

title i - a has also become a vehicle to which a number of requirements affecting broad aspects of public k - 12 education for all students have been attached as conditions for receiving title i - a grants .

under title i - a , funds are distributed to state educational agencies ( seas ) and local educational agencies ( leas ) based on four formulas .

the essa made few changes to these formulas .

one notable change is an increase in the set - aside for the bureau of indian education ( bie ) and outlying areas from 1.0% to 1.1% .

this change will take effect beginning in fy2017 provided the total amount available for state grants would not be less than the amount available in fy2016 .

all changes to the title i - a grant allocation process made by the essa will take effect beginning in fy2017 .

this report provides a detailed discussion of the four title i - a formulas used to determine grants as modified by the essa .

table a - 1 in appendix a offers an overview of the key elements included in the four formulas .

appendix b provides an overview of title i - a appropriations levels in recent years .

under title i - a , funds are allocated to leas via states using four different allocation formulas specified in statute: basic grants , concentration grants , targeted grants , and education finance incentive grants ( efig ) .

annual appropriations bills specify that portions of each year's appropriation be allocated under each of these different formulas .

in fy2018 , an estimated 41% of title i - a appropriations were allocated through the basic grant formula , 9% through the concentration grant formula , and 25% through each of the targeted grant and efig formulas .

the current four formula strategy has evolved over time , beginning with the basic grant formula when the esea was originally enacted .

the concentration grant formula was added in the 1970s in an attempt to focus funding more effectively on leas with relatively large numbers or high percentages of formula children ( i.e. , low - income children or children in need ) .

during consideration of esea reauthorization in the early 1990s , there was an attempt to replace the two existing formulas with a new formula that would target title i - a funds better by providing more funding per formula child as the percentage or number of formula children in an lea increased .

both the house and the senate developed formulas intended to accomplish this goal ( targeted grants and efig , respectively ) .

a compromise on one new formula was not reached ; nor was there agreement on eliminating the existing formulas .

as a result , funds are allocated through four formulas under current law .

for each formula , a maximum grant is calculated by multiplying a "formula child count," consisting primarily of estimated numbers of school - age children in poor families , by an "expenditure factor" based on state average per pupil expenditures for public k - 12 education .

in some formulas , additional factors are multiplied by the formula child count and expenditure factor .

then these maximum grants are reduced to equal the level of available appropriations for each formula , taking into account a variety of state and lea minimum grant and "hold harmless" provisions .

in general , leas must have a minimum number of formula children and / or a minimum formula child rate to be eligible to receive a grant under a specific title i - a formula .

some leas may qualify for a grant under only one formula , while other leas may be eligible to receive grants under multiple formulas .

under three of the formulas — basic grants , concentration grants , and targeted grants — funds are initially calculated at the lea level .

state grants are the total of allocations for all leas in the state adjusted for state minimum grant provisions .

under efig , grants are first calculated for each state overall and then are subsequently suballocated to leas within a state using a different formula .

once funds reach leas , the amounts allocated under the four formulas are combined and used jointly .

unlike other federal elementary and secondary education programs , most title i - a funds are subsequently allocated to individual schools by formula , although leas retain substantial discretion to control the use of a significant share of title i - a grants at a central district level .

while there are several rules related to school selection , leas must generally rank their public schools by their percentages of students from low - income families , and serve them in rank order .

this must be done without regard to grade span for any eligible school attendance area in which the concentration of children from low - income families exceeds 75% .

below this point , an lea can choose to serve schools in rank order at specific grade levels ( eg , only serve elementary schools in order of their percentages of children from low - income families ) .

beginning in fy2017 , leas will have the option to serve elementary and middle schools with more than 75% of their children from low - income families and high schools with more than 50% of their children from low - income families before choosing to serve schools in rank order by specific grade levels .

all participating schools must generally have a percentage of children from low - income families that is higher than the lea's average , or 35% , whichever of these two figures is lower , although leas have the option of setting school eligibility thresholds higher than the minimum in order to concentrate available funds on a smaller number of schools .

in a large majority of cases , the data used to determine which students are from low - income families for the distribution of funds to schools are not the same as those used to identify school - age children in poor families for purposes of calculating allocations to states and leas .

this is because data are not typically available on the number of school - age children enrolled in a school , or living in a residential school attendance zone , with income below the standard federal poverty threshold .

such "population in poverty" estimates , as used in the formulas for allocation of funds to states and leas ( discussed above ) , are usually available only for leas , counties , and states .

thus , leas must use available proxies for low - income status .

the title i - a statute allows leas to use the following low - income measures: ( 1 ) the number of children ages 5 through 17 in poverty counted in the most recent census data approved by the secretary ; ( 2 ) eligibility for free and reduced - price school lunches ; ( 3 ) eligibility for temporary assistance to needy families ( tanf ) ; or ( 4 ) eligibility for medicaid .

at the level of individual schools , the most commonly used criterion for determining whether students are from low - income families is eligibility for free and reduced - price school lunches .

the income eligibility thresholds for free and reduced - price lunches are higher than the poverty levels used in the allocation formulas to states and leas: 130% of poverty for free lunches , 185% for reduced - price lunches .

funds are allocated among schools in proportion to their number of students from low - income families , although grants to eligible schools per student from a low - income family need not be equal for all schools .

leas may choose to provide higher grants per child from a low - income family to schools with higher percentages of such students ( eg , higher grants per child to a school where 70% of students are from low - income families than to a school where 40% of students are from low - income families ) .

if an lea provides title i - a funds to schools with low - income child percentages below 35% , then it must provide a minimum amount of funds per child from a low - income family — equal to at least 125% of the lea's title i - a grant per child from a low - income family — to each participating school .

similarly , the share of funds to be used by each recipient lea to serve educationally disadvantaged students attending private schools is determined on the basis of the number of children from low - income families living in the attendance areas served by public schools selected to receive title i - a grants .

for this purpose , leas may use either the same source of data used to select and allocate funds among public schools ( usually free / reduced - price school lunch data ) or one of a specified range of alternatives .

appendix a .

title i - a formula characteristics appendix b. esea title i - a appropriations figure b - 1 and table b - 1 detail the appropriations levels for title i - a since fy2001 .

overall , after the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) reauthorized the esea , there was a steady increase in title i - a appropriations through fy2005 , and a second period of increasing appropriations from fy2007 to fy2009 .

there has also been an increase in appropriations from fy2013 through fy2018 .

table b - 2 provides the appropriations level and share by title i - a formula since fy2001 .

as previously discussed , all post - fy2001 increases in title i - a appropriations have been divided between targeted grants and efig .

thus , the share of appropriations allocated via the targeted grant and efig formulas has been steadily increasing while the share of appropriations allocated via the basic grant formula has been steadily decreasing .

