the white collar crimes on the supreme court's 2015 docket consist of three hobbs act cases and one on computer fraud .

the sex offense entries on the court's docket involve the sex offender registration obligations of an overseas resident and construction of the recidivist mandatory minimum sentencing provisions of federal law .

perhaps spurred on by the result below , the supreme court held that stun guns used for self - defense are not necessarily beyond the guarantees of the second amendment right to bear arms .

the other firearms cases on the court's docket raise interpretative issues under the armed career criminal act and the firearm possession disqualification triggered by a domestic violence misdemeanor .

the trio of fourth amendment cases presents questions on the exclusionary rule , the warrant requirement for sobriety tests , and qualified official immunity in the face of use of excessive force allegations .

the court's sixth amendment cases this term offer a variety of issues ranging from speedy trial , to forfeiture and the right to counsel of choice , to the use of uncounseled convictions as predicate offenses .

capital punishment cases represent the lion's share of the court's sentencing cases this term .

however , the class also includes the matter of the retroactive application of miller v. alabama 's prohibition on a life without parole sentence for murder by a juvenile and the harmless error standard in sentencing cases .

the prisoner reform litigation act designed to curb frivolous inmate suits generated two of the cases on the court's 2015 docket — one on the act's installment payment feature and the other on the required exhaustion of administrative remedies .

holding : "[m]onthly installment payments [to cover the costs of in forma pauperis court filings under the prisoner reform litigation act] , like the initial partial payment , are to be based on a per - case basis .... [section] 1915 ( b ) ( 2 ) calls for simultaneous , not sequential , recoupment of multiple filing fees . .

early in the year , the supreme court resolved a split among the circuits involving federal inmate payments for court filing fees with a decision that held that the monthly assessments under the prisoner reform litigation act ( prla ) must be stacked rather than satisfied on a one - a - month basis .

the prla states in relevant part: ( b ) ( 1 ) ... ( a ) , if a prisoner brings a civil action or files an appeal in forma pauperis , the prisoner shall be required to pay the full amount of a filing fee .

the court shall assess and , when funds exist , collect , as a partial payment of any court fees required by law , an initial partial filing fee of 20 percent of the [the prisoner's account] ... ( 2 ) after payment of the initial partial filing fee , the prisoner shall be required to make monthly payments of 20 percent of the preceding month's income credited to the prisoner's account .

the agency having custody of the prisoner shall forward payments from the prisoner's account to the clerk of the court each time the amount in the account exceeds $10 until the filing fees are paid .

bruce , a federal inmate with several pending cases and outstanding filing fee assessments , sued to challenge his assignment to a "special management unit. .

he argued that collection for the filing fees for the new case should begin only after he had paid the last installment on the filing fees from his earlier cases — that the installments should be lined up , one beginning only after the final installment of its predecessor .

the united states district court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit , from whom he sought a writ of mandamus , disagreed .

it explained in simple terms , the "monthly payment obligation ... applies on a per - case basis. .

the supreme court in a brief unanimous opinion written by justice ginsburg agreed .

in the eyes of the court , "[t]he per - case approach more vigorously serves the statutory objective of containing prisoner litigation. .

holding : the fourth circuit's "special circumstances" exception to the prison litigation reform act's exhaustion requirement is "inconsistent" with the text and history of the a ct , which permits only one exception: prisoners need not exhaust if administrative remedies are not "available. .

the supreme court recently opined on the legality of a judicially created exception to the exhaustion requirement in the prison litigation reform act of 1995 ( plra , or the act ) in ross v. blake .

congress enacted the plra , in part , to reduce frivolous prisoner lawsuits that purportedly had been overwhelming federal courts .

the act , in relevant part , states that "[n]o action shall be brought" by inmates about prison conditions "until such administrative remedies as are available are exhausted. .

in ross , the fourth circuit joined the second circuit in concluding that an inmate may bypass the plra's exhaustion requirement and maintain a suit in federal court if special circumstances created a situation in which the inmate "reasonably believed that he had sufficiently exhausted his remedies. .

other circuits had concluded differently , perhaps prompting the supreme court's review of this case .

during a cell block transfer of shaidon blake , a maryland inmate , a state corrections officer , lieutenant james madigan — with a key wrapped around his fingers — punched blake in the face five times .

when madigan struck , another state corrections officer , lieutenant michael ross , was holding a handcuffed blake against a wall and failed to intervene .

blake reported the episode to senior corrections officers .

the internal investigative unit ( iiu ) of the maryland department of public safety and correctional services concluded , after a year - long investigation , that madigan used excessive force .

blake did not submit an administrative complaint in accordance with maryland's administrative remedy procedure ( arp ) for inmate grievances .

he later filed a civil - rights suit under 42 u.s.c .

section 1983 against madigan and ross ( among other prison personnel ) , alleging that the lieutenants violated his eighth amendment rights when madigan struck him multiple times and ross failed to protect him .

the district court granted summary judgment for ross on the ground that blake failed to exhaust available administrative remedies before filing suit .

 ( madigan , however , did not raise the affirmative defense of exhaustion and was found civilly liable after a trial. ) .

blake successfully appealed the district court's ruling for ross to the fourth circuit .

the court framed the question before it as whether blake failed to exhaust administrative remedies as required by the plra .

a majority of the fourth circuit panel concluded that "special circumstances" justified blake's failure to comply with maryland's administrative procedures .

in doing so , the fourth circuit adopted the methodology established by the second circuit in an earlier case , which asks ( 1 ) whether the inmate "was justified in believing" that his participation in another investigatory proceeding procedurally exhausted his administrative remedies ; and ( 2 ) whether the inmate's participation in that other proceeding substantively exhausted his administrative remedies by giving the prison an opportunity to address the complaint internally .

the fourth circuit concluded that this two - part inquiry , by having a procedural component — which "ensures that an uncounseled inmate attempting to navigate the grievance system will not be penalized for making a reasonable , albeit flawed , attempt to comply with the relevant administrative procedures" — along with a substantive component — which "safeguards a prison from unnecessary and unexpected litigation" — is consistent with the purposes behind the plra's exhaustion requirement .

applying that test , the majority concluded that "blake reasonably interpreted maryland's murky grievance procedures" and that his participation in the iiu investigation "provided the department [of public safety and correctional services] with ample notice and opportunity to address internally the issues raised. .

judge agee dissented , asserting that "[t]he plra's exhaustion requirement may not even be amenable to any exceptions," and , even if it was , blake failed to satisfy the test that the majority announced .

additionally , judge agee noted that three other circuits have ruled that an inmate does not exhaust administrative remedies by participating in an internal investigation .

the supreme court , presented with the opportunity to resolve the circuit split , asked the parties to address whether the fourth circuit misapplied supreme court precedents "in holding , in conflict with several other federal courts of appeals , that there is a common law 'special circumstances' exception to the prison litigation reform act. .

ross argued , among other things , that the second and fourth circuits' exhaustion exception conflicts with congress's intent in enacting the plra as well as the supreme court's interpretation of the act and its goals .

ross contended that in two previous cases , booth v. churner and woodford v. ngo , the supreme court refused to uphold other judicially created exceptions to the plra's exhaustion requirement .

for instance , the court stated in booth that "we stress the point ... that we will not read ... exceptions into statutory exhaustion requirements where congress has provided otherwise. .

additionally , ross contended that the plra's mandatory exhaustion requirement was designed to fix an alleged flaw in the act's precursor — the civil rights of institutionalized persons act of 1980 ( cripa ) — which authorized , but did not obligate , courts to require exhaustion "in the interests of justice. .

thus , ross argued , allowing the exception would "restore[] to courts a significant amount of the discretion expressly removed by congress" when enacting the plra .

blake , in his response brief , devoted little space to answering the question that the supreme court certified , contending , instead , that this case is really about whether administrative remedies were "available" to him .

he contended that there were no "available" administrative remedies for him to exhaust ( as the statute requires ) , and so he did not need to prove any exceptions to the requirement .

according to blake , when the iiu is investigating a prison incident , "the prison will dismiss any other administrative grievance as procedurally improper" and thus the court should affirm on the alternative ground that maryland's arp was not available to blake or dismiss the writ of certiorari as improvidently granted .

in a unanimous ruling the supreme court reversed the fourth circuit , concluding that the text and history of the plra did not allow the circuit court's "special circumstances" exception to the plra's exhaustion requirement .

focusing on the plra's text , the court reasoned that the language is mandatory and does not permit a court to excuse a failure to exhaust available remedies .

indeed , the court added , to date it had "reject[ed] every attempt to deviate ... from [the act's] textual mandate," including in booth and woodford — the cases cited by ross .

the court also agreed with ross's contention that "the history of the plra underscores the mandatory nature of its exhaustion regime," noting that "[i]n enacting the plra , congress thus substituted an 'invigorated' exhaustion provision" for the "weak exhaustion provision" in the former cripa .

and permitting the special circumstances exception , in the court's view , would "resurrect cripa's scheme , in which a court could look to all particulars of a case to decide whether to excuse a failure to exhaust administrative remedies .

next , the supreme court considered blake's contention that administrative remedies were unavailable to him — the exception written into the text of the plra — clarifying when administrative remedies are "unavailable. .

under that exception , "an inmate is required to exhaust those , but only those , grievance procedures that are 'capable of use' to obtain 'some relief for the action complained of.' .

thus , remedies are unavailable when ( 1 ) "it operates as a simple dead end — with officers unable or consistently unwilling to provide any relief to aggrieved inmates" ; ( 2 ) when the administrative remedial scheme is "so opaque that it becomes , practically speaking , incapable of use," such that "no ordinary prison can discern or navigate it" ; and ( 3 ) "when prison administrators thwart inmates from taking advantage of a grievance process through machination , misrepresentation , or intimidation. .

because "[t]he facts of this case raise questions about whether , given these principles , blake had an 'available' administrative remedy to exhaust," the court remanded the case to the lower court to evaluate that question in the first instance .

