the defense nuclear nonproliferation ( dnn ) programs were reorganized starting with the fy2016 request .

there are two main mission areas under the dnn appropriation: the defense nuclear nonproliferation program and the nuclear counterterrorism and incident response program ( nctir ) .

nctir was previously funded under weapons activities .

according to the fy2016 budget justification , "these transfers align all nnsa funding to prevent , counter , and respond to nuclear proliferation and terrorism in one appropriation. .

the dnn program is now divided into six functional areas: materials management and minimization ( m3 ) conducts activities to reduce and , where possible , eliminate stockpiles of weapons - useable material around the world .

major activities include conversion of reactors that use highly enriched uranium ( useable for weapons ) to low enriched uranium , removal and consolidation of nuclear material stockpiles , and disposition of excess nuclear materials .

global material security has three major program elements: international nuclear security , radiological security , and nuclear smuggling detection and deterrence .

activities toward achieving those goals include the provision of equipment and training , workshops and exercises , and collaboration with international organizations .

nonproliferation and arms control implements programs that aim to strengthen international nuclear safeguards , control the spread of dual - use technologies and expertise , and verify nuclear reductions and compliance with treaties and agreements .

this program conducts reviews of nuclear export applications and technology transfer authorizations .

national technical nuclear forensics research and development ( ntnf r&d ) examines and evaluates nuclear materials and devices , nuclear test explosions or radiological dispersals , and post - detonation debris through nuclear forensics development at the national laboratories .

the program includes a field response capability to assist the interagency in the event of a nuclear or radiological incident .

defense nuclear nonproliferation research and development ( dnn r&d ) advances u.s. capabilities to detect and characterize global nuclear security threats such as foreign nuclear material and weapons production , diversion of special nuclear material , and nuclear detonations .

the nonproliferation construction program consists of the surplus plutonium disposition project ( spd ) and the mixed - oxide ( mox ) fuel fabrication facility ( mfff ) , which was to be built in south carolina to convert surplus weapons plutonium into nuclear reactor fuel .

this project was terminated and replaced with a different disposal method ( see below ) .

the nuclear counterterrorism and incident response program ( nctir ) evaluates nuclear and radiological threats and develops emergency preparedness plans , including organizing scientific teams to provide rapid response to nuclear or radiological incidents or accidents worldwide .

the fy2021 request for dnn appropriations totaled $2.031 billion , reflecting a 6.2% decrease from fy2020-enacted levels .

the budget justification says that this decrease is mainly due to the "completion of funding for contractual termination" of the mixed oxide fuel fabrication facility ( mox ) project at the savannah river site .

funding for that program was decreased by 50% ( - $150 million ) .

a $42 million , or 9.65% , decrease to the global material security program was due to an increase in fy2020 funds for the cesium irradiator replace program .

the budget proposal requests a $37.2 million , or 10% , increase in funding for the material management minimization program .

the increase is mainly in the conversion subprogram , which is working to establish non - heu based molybdenum - 99 production technologies in the united states .

the national technical nuclear forensics research and development ( ntnf r&d ) is a new program in fy2021 .

the budget request says that the program will allow nnsa to "take on a more active leadership role" in nuclear forensics .

the $40 million in funding for ntnf was moved from the dnn r&d nuclear detonation detection subprogram .

as in past years , the fy2020 appropriations included a provision prohibiting funds in the defense nuclear nonproliferation account for certain activities and assistance in the russian federation .

appropriations bills have prohibited this since fy2015 .

the fy2021 budget justification requests funds related to the u.s. plutonium disposition program in the m3 material disposition subprogram and nonproliferation construction surplus plutonium disposition subprogram .

the united states pledged to dispose of 34 metric tons of u.s. surplus weapons plutonium , which was originally to be converted into fuel for commercial power reactors .

the u.s. facility for this purpose was to be the mixed oxide fuel fabrication facility ( mfff ) , which had been under construction at the doe savannah river site in south carolina .

the mfff faced sharply escalating construction and operation cost estimates , and the obama administration proposed to terminate it in fy2017 .

after congressional approval , in 2018 doe ended mfff construction and began pursuing a replacement disposal method , dilute and dispose ( d&d ) , for this material .

the d&d method consists of "blending plutonium with an inert mixture , packaging it for safe storage and transport , and disposing of it in a geologic repository," according to the fy2021 request .

the nonproliferation construction account's proposed decrease of $150 million in fy2021 is due to the final steps in ending construction of the mfff .

in her testimony before the house appropriations committee , nnsa administrator lisa gordon - hagerty said that decrease reflects the completion of the mox contractual termination settlement .

she said that the requested $148.6 million would be used for the surplus plutonium disposition ( spd ) project , in support of the d&d method .

fy2021 activities would include "execution of early site preparation and long lead procurements activities , as well as continuing the maturation of the design for all major systems supporting the plutonium processing gloveboxes. .

