e ach year congress provides funding for a variety of grant programs through the department of justice ( doj ) .

these programs provide support to state , local , and tribal governments and nonprofit organizations for a variety of criminal justice - related purposes , such as combatting violence against women , reducing backlogs of dna evidence , supporting community policing , assisting crime victims , promoting prisoner reentry , and improving the functioning of the juvenile justice system .

congress funds these programs through five accounts in the annual commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) appropriations act: violence against women programs ; research , evaluation , and statistics ; state and local law enforcement assistance ; juvenile justice programs ; and community oriented policing services .

this report provides an overview of congressional actions to fund doj's grant programs through these accounts for fy2017 .

the report also provides information on fy2016 appropriations for doj's grant programs .

the office on violence against women ( ovw ) was established to administer programs created under the violence against women act ( vawa ) of 1994 .

these programs provide financial and technical assistance to communities around the country to facilitate the creation of programs , policies , and practices designed to improve criminal justice responses related to domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking .

the obama administration's fy2017 request for ovw was $489 million , 1.9% more than the fy2016 appropriation of $480 million .

the obama administration also proposed transferring $326 million from the crime victims fund to the ovw .

the obama administration's fy2017 request was mostly in line with the fy2016 appropriation , but it requested increases for grants to encourage arrests in domestic violence cases and enforce protection orders ( +$11 million ) , civil legal assistance ( +$8 million ) , grants to combat violence on college campuses ( +$6 million ) , grants to combat abuse against the elderly ( +$1 million ) , and grants to strengthen tribal justice systems' response to domestic violence on tribal lands ( +$3 million ) .

additionally , the obama administration proposed funding two new initiatives through set - asides from other grant programs: reducing firearm lethality in domestic violence cases and enhancing colleges' and universities' responses to instances of campus sexual assault .

finally , the obama administration's request proposed reducing funding for the service - training - officers - prosecutors ( stop ) formula grant program by $15 million .

in the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) , congress adopted the obama administration's proposal to supplement direct appropriations for ovw with a $326 million transfer from the crime victims fund .

however , congress largely declined to support the rest of the obama administration's proposals .

the act increased funding for grants to encourage arrests in domestic violence cases and enforce protection orders and grants to strengthen tribal justice systems' response to domestic violence on tribal lands , but not at the level proposed by the obama administration .

congress also declined to support the obama administration's proposal to reduce funding for stop grants .

for fy2017 , congress funded stop grants at an amount equal to the fy2016 appropriation .

the office of justice programs ( ojp ) manages and coordinates the national institute of justice ; bureau of justice statistics ; office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ; office of victims of crimes ; bureau of justice assistance ; office of sex offender sentencing , monitoring , apprehending , registering , and tracking ; and related grant programs .

the community oriented policing services ( cops ) office awards grants to state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies throughout the united states so they can hire new officers , train them in community policing , purchase and deploy new crime - fighting technologies , and develop and test new and innovative policing strategies .

the obama administration's fy2017 request for cops was $74 million more than the fy2016 appropriation of $212 million .

the obama administration requested a $42 million increase in funding for the cops hiring program .

the administration's request would also have established the tribal resources grant program and training and technical assistance on cops's collaborative reform model as separate line items in the account rather than as set - asides from the funding for the hiring program .

congress appropriated $222 million for the cops account for fy2017 , a 4.5% increase in funding compared to the fy2016 appropriation .

congress increased funding for the cops hiring program from $187 million to $195 million , but after set - asides are accounted for , actual funding for the hiring program remained unchanged ( $137 million ) .

congress also provided a $3 million increase in funding for the anti - heroin task forces program .

for fy2017 , congress provided funding for the regional information sharing system ( riss ) under the cops account .

p.l .

115-31 requires this funding to be transferred to ojp .

congress also set - aside $8 million from the cops hiring program for the police act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-199 ) .

the act allows cops grants to be used for active shooter training .

as a part of its fy2017 budget request for doj , the administration requested $500 million for the 21 st century justice initiative .

this proposed initiative would have been a new mandatory program that would have invested $5 billion — $500 million a year for 10 years — in criminal justice reform efforts .

the initiative would have used federal funding to promote innovative approaches to reducing both crime and unnecessary incarceration .

the program would have focused on achieving three objectives: reducing crime , reversing practices that have led to unnecessarily long sentences and unnecessary incarceration , and building community trust .

states would have been able to use this funding to focus on one or more of the following objectives for their adult and juvenile systems: ( 1 ) examining and changing state laws and policies that contribute to unnecessarily long sentences and unnecessary incarceration , without sacrificing public safety ; ( 2 ) promoting critical advancements in community - oriented policing ; and ( 3 ) providing comprehensive diversion and reentry services .

in addition , this initiative would have dedicated 10% of the funding for reform efforts in the federal criminal justice system , including improving skills , education , mental health , addiction , and other recidivism - reduction programming in the bureau of prisons .

congress declined to provide funding for this program .

