r apidly evolving technology presents opportunities and challenges for u.s. law enforcement .

some technological advances have arguably opened a treasure trove of information for investigators and analysts ; others have presented unique hurdles .

on the one hand , some argue that today's technology age has fostered a "golden age of surveillance" for law enforcement .

investigators have a large body of information at their fingertips .

they can use information such as location data , personal contacts , and social media websites to create digital profiles of individuals .

on the other hand , some posit that law enforcement is "going dark" as their investigative capabilities are outpaced by the speed of technological change .

as such , law enforcement cannot access certain information they otherwise may be authorized to obtain .

those asserting that law enforcement is going dark have cited strong encryption as one tool contributing to this issue — specifically , what law enforcement has referred to as "warrant - proof" encryption .

notably , while encryption is only one element of the going dark debate , it is a central element of the conversation ; as such , it is the principal focus of this report .

other factors influencing law enforcement's ability to obtain information , and thus contributing to the going dark debate , include provider limits on data retention ; bounds on companies' technological capabilities to produce specific data points for law enforcement ; tools facilitating anonymity online ; and a landscape of mixed wireless , cellular , and other networks through which individuals and information are constantly passing .

the ideas of law enforcement ( 1 ) being in a golden age of surveillance and ( 2 ) going dark may not be mutually exclusive .

rather , law enforcement may exist at the intersection of the two , and this may blur the policy debate .

policymakers have long been faced with the challenge of balancing technological change , law enforcement tools and authorities , information security , and individual privacy .

this balance has come under renewed scrutiny over the past several years as technology companies have implemented automatic end - to - end encryption on certain devices and communications systems .

for instance , companies such as apple and google who employ such strong encryption stress that they do not hold encryption keys .

this means they may not be readily able to unlock , or decrypt , the devices or communications — not even for law enforcement presenting an authorized search warrant or wiretap order .

one broad question is whether — and how — strong encryption and other evolving technologies might impact law enforcement investigations .

might law enforcement be able to circumvent "warrant - proof" encryption or employ other policing tactics in order to access certain communications and / or stored data ? .

are they losing critical information that could help prevent or solve crimes ? .

policymakers have been examining existing statutes , law enforcement practices , and the relationship between law enforcement and technology companies .

they have been evaluating whether legislation may be a necessary or appropriate element in the current debate on going dark — particularly on the encryption aspect .

a range of legislative options exists that could impact law enforcement capabilities or resources .

legislation could also place certain requirements on technology companies or individuals utilizing certain communications systems and devices .

this report provides historical context for legislation addressing the tension between evolving technology — specifically relating to encrypted communications — and law enforcement capabilities .

the report also outlines the current environment and discussion around legislation impacting law enforcement access to encrypted data and communications .

it concludes with a discussion of selected issues that congress may confront should it consider potential legislation in this arena .

technology has afforded law enforcement tools and opportunities to gather and utilize information to which it previously did not have access .

simultaneously , it has created certain barriers for law enforcement .

this dichotomy has received congressional attention for several decades and remains a central point of contention between law enforcement and technology companies .

in addition to members of congress , the obama administration also debated whether to push for legislation addressing the going dark question .

in particular , discussions were around whether to require technology companies to build back door access points into encryption .

at an october 1 , 2015 , cabinet meeting , the obama administration reportedly decided against pursuing such legislation .

this decision followed the national security council reportedly drafting a paper outlining strategic options for confronting issues arising from encryption on communications devices .

the three options offered in this paper , while differing in strength and timeline , all had the same immediate implication: the obama administration did not push a legislative framework requiring technology companies to make changes to their encryption systems .

the options included "explicitly rejecting a legislative mandate , deferring legislation and remaining undecided while discussions continue. .

these options were not entirely dissimilar from other official recommendations the obama administration received on the encryption issue .

previously , the president's review group on intelligence and communications technologies released a report and recommendations on protecting national security as well as privacy and innovation .

with respect to global communications technology , and more specifically encryption technology , the review group concluded that the us government should take additional steps to promote security , by ( 1 ) fully supporting and not undermining efforts to create encryption standards ; ( 2 ) making clear that it will not in any way subvert , undermine , weaken , or make vulnerable generally available commercial encryption ; and ( 3 ) supporting efforts to encourage the greater use of encryption technology for data in transit , at rest , in the cloud , and in storage .

essentially , the review group concluded that the administration should avoid repeating the crypto wars of the 1990s .

policymakers may now watch what positions the trump administration takes with respect to communications and encryption technology .

while the obama administration and many policymakers held off on pushing specific legislation on the going dark debate ( particularly with respect to encryption ) , the issue has made its way to the courts .

the courts have addressed it in several cases involving a dispute between federal law enforcement and technology companies ( namely apple ) .

policymakers may choose to let this debate play out in court , or they may elect to take legislative action on the issue .

legislative options could take a number of forms .

these include mandating that technology companies build in a "back door" or some other form of access point to their products ( or prohibiting such a mandate ) , establishing criminal penalties for individuals who refuse to provide their passcode to law enforcement , and supporting law enforcement efforts to create new surveillance capabilities that can keep pace with developing technology .

whether or not congress elects to take action on the going dark debate , there are a number of implications for consideration .

as policymakers consider legislative options to amend calea or otherwise impact law enforcement access to communications and devices protected by strong encryption , such legislation would generally apply to entities and products operating , sold , or used in the united states .

as some have noted , the legislation "could not bind device - makers and software engineers overseas. .

therefore , one question is whether legislation would be effective if it can only impose requirements on products imported , manufactured , or sold in the united states .

as experts have noted , "crypto has no borders. .

the issue has been highlighted with state - level proposals to ban the sale of smartphones and devices with strong encryption lacking a back door that can be unlocked .

california and new york , for instance , have introduced such proposals in the past few years .

if some states were to adopt laws prohibiting certain strong encryption platforms , companies such as apple and google would be faced with options including ceasing to sell fully encrypted products in jurisdictions with prohibitions , creating separate products with varying levels of encryption based on the jurisdiction in which they are sold , or ceasing to create and sell products without back doors into the encrypted systems .

a similar scenario would arguably be at play if national legislation with encryption limitations were to be adopted .

how might this impact companies operating internationally ? .

would they need to stop selling certain products in certain countries , develop country - specific products to comply with the relevant encryption - related laws , or produce only products with back doors for government access ? .

none of the resulting options for technology companies , however , would necessarily stop individuals from crossing jurisdictional boundaries and obtaining products and services with the desired privacy capabilities .

because crypto has no borders , this challenges crypto - related legislation that does not span jurisdictional boundaries .

individuals could readily obtain products from other jurisdictions , they could download applications with the desired capabilities , and they could modify software after purchase .

in considering future legislation on or regulation of encrypted systems and communications , the issue of exceptional access has been raised: is it possible to create a system with sufficiently narrow and protected access points that these points can only be entered by authorized entities and not exploited by others ? .

experts have generally responded , no .

for instance , one group of computer scientists and security experts contends that requiring exceptional access "will open doors through which criminals and malicious nation - states can attack the very individuals law enforcement seeks to defend. .

as was the case during the crypto wars of the 1990s , new technology ( the clipper chip ) was introduced that was intended to only allow access to certain communications under specified conditions .

researchers were soon able to expose vulnerabilities in the proposed system , thus halting the implementation of the clipper chip .

one concern is that if new technology were introduced to provide exceptional access to officials , malicious actors may find a way to obtain and exploit this technology more quickly than companies could detect and secure vulnerabilities .

these malicious actors could range from criminals looking to profit from the sale of intellectual property to business competitors or nation states seeking proprietary information .

in addition , the insider threat has been cited as the largest cybersecurity issue — an employee with access and knowledge of the company could potentially do greater harm than someone from the outside .

for example , apple employees and others with access to software apple may create to reduce the security of the iphone could leverage their position and knowledge for malicious purposes .

this is the tradeoff .

policymakers may debate which is more advantageous for the nation on the whole: increased security coupled with potentially fewer data breaches and possibly greater impediments to law enforcement investigations , or increased access to data paired with potentially greater vulnerability to malicious actors .

much of the ongoing discussion has pitted the notions of encryption and personal privacy against security , and this is largely the debate reinvigorated after the terrorist attacks in paris and san bernardino .

in this dichotomy , security is framed as that provided by intelligence and law enforcement if able to access encrypted communications .

this security , however , does not have a clearly defined metric .

this is in part because there have not been publicly available data establishing the number of cases in which law enforcement access to encrypted communications and content has led to the prevention of a crime or to its solution .

some have posited that the debate should not necessarily be framed as privacy versus security , but rather security versus security .

as some have noted , "[s]ecurity enables security , offline or online .

that's why we close and lock the doors and windows in our homes. .

in addition , security enables privacy , both offline and online .

locking doors and windows helps maintain both the security and privacy of one's home ; encrypting devices and communications helps maintain the security and privacy of data .

government officials from law enforcement and intelligence have themselves supported strong encryption .

because of this , some have suggested that rather than pushing for loosened encryption standards , the government should encourage strong encryption and simultaneously support law enforcement efforts to bolster their technological capabilities to gain access to encrypted devices and communications .

as noted , disputes between law enforcement and technology companies have made their way to the courts .

whether policymakers choose to take legislative action on the issues or let them be settled by the courts , the outcome could set a precedent for future law enforcement investigations and standards for other countries .

take the recent dispute between apple , inc. and the fbi , for example .

if apple is ultimately required to develop an operating system to assist law enforcement in accessing encrypted data on locked devices in certain investigations ( terrorism cases or drug trafficking cases , for instance ) , what precedent does this set for apple and other companies' compliance with other law enforcement investigations ? .

the fbi has indicated that encryption is not only an issue in terrorism investigations , but in cases against kidnappers , murderers , drug traffickers , and others .

would apple , google , and others need to help the fbi develop operating systems to circumvent security features in every case where the fbi or another law enforcement entity requests assistance ? .

indeed , some law enforcement officials have noted they would rely upon apple to assist law enforcement in other cases .

further , would companies such as apple need to assist foreign law enforcement entities with similar requests ? .

these are the kind of questions that congress may choose to address through legislation or allow to be decided by the courts .

policymakers may also question the example that the united states seeks to set for other countries , particularly authoritarian regimes , regarding access to individuals' communications and data .

in support of maintaining strong encryption , one expert noted that "united states support for human rights is a cornerstone of u.s. foreign policy .

it includes strong support for private and secure communications , for such capabilities are a necessity for human rights workers in repressive nations. .

similar conversations have been held around other tools facilitating secure communications , such as anonymizing browsers like tor .

individuals may rely upon such secure communications to access content that might be blocked in certain parts of the world or to express political dissent in areas where such communication could threaten individual safety .

if restrictions are placed on encrypted data and communications in the united states , what message might that send to other nations where human rights have been viewed by some as a concern ? .

it appears as though officials are still deciding how best to simultaneously protect the privacy of encrypted communications and support legitimate law enforcement access .

as such , the discussion will likely continue both in the courts and on the policy stage .

in the 114 th congress , for instance , members of the house judiciary committee and energy and commerce committee established an encryption working group to "identify potential solutions that preserve the benefits of strong encryption — including the protection of americans' privacy and information security — while also ensuring law enforcement has the tools needed to keep us safe and prevent crime. .

the working group released a year - end report in december 2016 with four key observations: any measure that weakens encryption would work against the nation's interest .

encryption technology is widely used and increasingly available worldwide .

there is no one - size - fits - all solution to the encryption and going dark challenge .

congress should promote cooperation between the law enforcement and technology communities .

the working group presented these observations as a basis for policy discussions in the 115 th congress .

