i n the spring of 2016 , the u.s. supreme court considered a set of challenges alleging that the contraceptive coverage regulations under the affordable care act ( aca ) violate the federal religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ) .

following oral arguments in which the eight sitting justices appeared to be evenly divided , the court unanimously declined to declare an answer in the set of seven consolidated cases , each brought by nonprofit religious entities with objections to the provision and use of contraceptives as well as to the process by which their objections may be accommodated under aca regulations that require employers to provide contraceptive coverage in group health plans .

the question at issue is whether the accommodation process — requiring employers with religious objections to inform the government of their objection and third - party insurers to provide required coverage to the employer's employees — would impose a substantial burden on religious exercise in violation of rfra .

the court's consideration of these cases ( consolidated under the case name zubik v. burwell and referred to collectively throughout this report as "the nonprofit challenges" ) followed its landmark 2014 decision , burwell v. hobby lobby stores , inc. , and presented the court with an opportunity to clarify the meaning of substantial burden on religious exercise under rfra .

however , the court's disposition of the case provided no decision on the merits , instead vacating and remanding each of the cases to the respective federal appellate courts for reconsideration after allowing time for the parties to reach a compromise that would accommodate the employers' religious objections and the government's interest in ensuring contraceptive coverage for female employees .

this report examines the current parameters on governmental restrictions on religious exercise .

it discusses the history of federal protection offered under the free exercise clause of the first amendment and rfra , and notes parallel protections available at the state level .

it analyzes the current interpretations of rfra as applied to the contraceptive coverage requirement of the aca , including discussion of hobby lobby and a review of the lower courts' interpretations of the nonprofit challenges .

finally , the report highlights a range of issue areas of interest to congress that may be affected by the court's interpretation of rfra .

federal law includes several protections to prevent the government from interfering with the free exercise of religion .

both constitutional and statutory protections exist to protect the ability of individuals and groups to exercise their sincerely held religious beliefs .

since its enactment , the supreme court has considered only a few cases under rfra .

early on , the court addressed the constitutionality of rfra's application , while later decisions in cases related to the controlled substances act ( csa ) and the aca have clarified how rfra applies in challenges to particular governmental actions that allegedly burden religious exercise and the scope of its protections .

the religious organizations challenging the aca accommodation in the nonprofit cases , like hobby lobby , are seeking statutory protection under rfra , not constitutional protections under the first amendment .

as a matter of statutory law , congress remains free to amend the language at its discretion of rfra regardless of any judicial interpretation .

in other words , congress may respond to a decision on the merits by clarifying the meaning of the statutory language itself , providing an explicit definition of substantial burden , or identifying a standard by which such burdens should be measured .

if congress took any such action , its amendment would supersede a judicial interpretation to the extent it conflicted with the court's decision .

given congress's primary authority in statutory law , there are a number of issues it may consider in the wake of a future decision on the meaning of substantial burden , including what impact the decision may have on a wide range of legislative issues .

because rfra applies to all federal actions , and because state religious freedom laws may rely on related opinions for guidance in interpreting their own similar laws , both federal and state issues may be affected .

rfra is a so - called "super statute," one that establishes legal norms that perform constitutional functions .

as discussed earlier in this report , it was enacted to augment the protection offered by the first amendment , and it consequently heightened the protection for religious objections beyond the protection of the free exercise clause .

it applies to any federal action — including any law enacted by congress , regulation promulgated by an agency , etc. — and can only be avoided if congress chooses to exempt a particular law from the application of rfra , which it has not done since rfra was enacted .

thus , an interpretation of the scope of applicability of rfra has potentially far - reaching implications .

as noted earlier , the court limited the application of rfra to protect against substantial burdens on religious exercise imposed only by the federal government .

in the wake of the city of boerne decision , congress enacted the religious land use and institutionalized persons act of 2000 ( rluipa ) .

rluipa conformed with the court's decision in city of boerne , limiting that protection to substantial burdens imposed by land - use provisions or on institutionalized persons .

thus , rluipa did not directly amend rfra , but instead is an analogous statute applied to a separate set of government actions .

rluipa's protections mirror those enacted in rfra .

although a separate statute , the context of rluipa's enactment in addition to its use of the same statutory scheme makes any interpretation of the meaning of rfra's terms relevant to the interpretation of the same language in rluipa .

thus , a decision defining these terms may be influential in future rluipa litigation as well .

zubik and the consolidated cases involve challenges to a federal action by organizations seeking protection under the federal rfra .

thus , any decision interpreting the meaning and scope of rfra's protections will apply only to federal law and would not extend directly to state actions .

however , as discussed earlier , a number of states have adopted state versions of rfra , many of which include language similar to the federal rfra that is at issue in the nonprofit challenges .

for any challenges asserted under state rfras , a court would not be bound to use whatever interpretation federal courts may adopt .

however , it may consider federal courts' interpretation persuasive , particularly for state rfras including language identical or similar to the federal rfra .

notably , a recent trend in state rfra legislation following the court's decision in hobby lobby has reflected a broader approach to religious freedom protections , though proposed laws have had mixed success .

a decision that broadens the recognition of substantial burdens under the federal rfra may provide support for broad interpretation of existing state rfras or efforts to enact explicitly broad protection for religious freedom by states considering new legislation .

because of the broad reach of rfra as it applies to all federal actions and because of the influence that the interpretation of the federal rfra may have on similar state protections , the potential impact of an ultimate decision may be far - reaching .

though not an exhaustive list , the following discussion highlights examples of legislative issues that frequently involve religious objections and could be affected by clarification of the meaning of substantial burden .

it should be noted that eligibility for rfra protection and identification of a substantial burden are threshold issues of rfra analysis .

that is , even if a religious objector satisfies these standards , a court still must find that the government lacked a compelling interest or failed to use the least restrictive means to achieve that interest before the objector may lawfully avoid compliance with the law in question .

like the contraceptive coverage cases , another issue of reproductive health — abortion — also frequently involves a number of questions related to religious freedom .

in one example of state regulation of abortion that has raised religious objections , california requires certain clinics that provide family planning or pregnancy - related services to notify its consumers of the availability of public programs providing abortion , contraception , and prenatal care for free or at low cost .

operators of such centers with religious objections to abortion have challenged this law as a violation of their constitutional rights , but a federal court denied their request for a preliminary injunction .

a broad ruling regarding recognition of burdens identified by claimants with religious objections to legal mandates may offer such centers the opportunity to challenge such requirements under rfra ( assuming the challenged mandate is subject to the federal rfra or a state equivalent ) .

for example , a crisis pregnancy center that is eligible for rfra protection — presumably a nonprofit religious organization or a closely held for - profit entity owned by individuals who operate the center according to their religious beliefs — could allege that posting such notice violates their religious beliefs .

like the claimants in the nonprofit challenges , such entities may view the posting itself as a mode of facilitating access to a procedure or service to which they hold sincere religious objections .

in recent years , particularly in light of the supreme court's recognition of a constitutional right for same - sex couples to marry in obergefell v. hodges , a number of individuals , organizations , and businesses with religious objections based on sexual orientation asserted rfra claims alleging that compliance with various civil rights laws would substantially burden their religious exercise .

while the court's decision in obergefell did not dictate the behavior of private parties , civil rights legislation enacted by federal , state , and local governments may regulate the behavior of private entities that operate public accommodations ( i.e. , entities that provide goods and services to the general public ) and those that provide housing , employment , or credit .

federal civil rights law does not provide express protection in these contexts based on sexual orientation , but some state and local governments have enacted such protection .

as a result , individuals , organizations , and businesses with religious objections to serving same - sex couples may seek legal protection under state religious freedom laws ( whether statutory or constitutional ) , claiming that the nondiscrimination laws are a substantial burden on their religious exercise subject to the limitations of applicable religious freedom provisions .

thus far , it is unclear how religious freedom protections and various civil rights provisions may be balanced or reconciled .

some of the most prominent challenges have been made in the context of business owners' religious objections to serving same - sex couples related to goods and services available for wedding celebrations .

these challenges generally have been unsuccessful , with administrative rulings and court decisions holding that goods and services must be offered on an equal basis to couples , regardless of sexual orientation .

the leading decisions have involved a case - specific range of circumstances ( eg , availability of heightened protection for religious freedom in the jurisdiction ; availability of the applicable rfra for actions of administrative agencies versus the legislature or courts ) , and thus do not indicate a conclusive analysis of potential claims of substantial burdens on religious exercise in the context of civil rights requirements .

notably , the court's decision in hobby lobby raised a number of questions regarding the extent to which rfra protections could be used to exempt businesses from statutory nondiscrimination mandates ( eg , employment ) .

the majority and dissenting opinions in hobby lobby debated the potential scope of the decision's effect , with the dissent expressing concern that the decision may protect businesses that engage in discriminatory practices .

however , the majority specifically responded to the concern that rfra might permit a business to engage in racially discriminatory hiring practices , writing that the "decision today provides no such shield .

the government has a compelling interest in providing an equal opportunity to participate in the workforce without regard to race , and prohibitions on racial discrimination are precisely tailored to achieve that critical goal. .

it may be noted that the court's statement did not address sexual orientation specifically , and that the decision emphasized the case - by - case basis of evaluating application of the heightened protection provided by rfra .

thus , although the decision implies that rfra protections would not supersede at least some civil rights protections ( eg , employment rights in the context of race discrimination ) , it is not clear how the issue would be decided on the merits of a particular legal challenge .

it is important to note that title vii of the civil rights act , the federal law prohibiting discrimination based on race , color , national origin , religion , or sex — includes an exemption for religious organizations to permit such organizations to consider religion in employment decisions .

that exemption , available to "religious corporation[s] , association[s] , educational institution[s] , or societ[ies]," generally has been interpreted to mean nonprofit entities .

hobby lobby arguably creates an opportunity for for - profit businesses to seek similar accommodation as a matter of protection afforded by rfra , even though they would not otherwise qualify for the explicit exemption adopted by congress .

furthermore , a broad interpretation of substantial burden may permit entities to seek broader protection under rfra than is currently available under title vii's exemption .

that is , such entities arguably may assert rfra to seek exemption from discrimination based on other categories , not only religion .

in sum , a broad interpretation of the meaning of substantial burden , or one that provides significant deference to the claimants' identification of the burden , likely would strengthen the ability of entities with religious beliefs that may conflict with nondiscrimination requirements to assert successful rfra claims for accommodation from those requirements .

recent reports about waivers granted by the u.s. department of education to religious colleges and universities to exempt the schools from title ix of the education amendments of 1972 highlight concerns about the potential scope of protection for religious objectors from nondiscrimination requirements in education programs .

title ix prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in any education program or activity that receives federal assistance .

a number of religious colleges have applied for waivers under an exemption available to such institutions with religious tenets that conflict with the nondiscrimination requirements .

concerns have been raised about the tension between public policy preventing discrimination ( particularly based on sexual orientation and gender identity ) and accommodating such institutions' religious beliefs .

a number of federal nondiscrimination laws include exemptions for religious objectors , and schools have typically been included as eligible for protection , whether under such exemptions or under rfra .

accordingly , while the court's decision in hobby lobby likely would not impact the analysis in challenges to title ix waivers , a decision on the nonprofit challenges may have implications .

if a school's waiver request were to be denied , the school may consider a rfra challenge , alleging that the prohibition on discrimination based on sex , including sexual orientation and gender identity , constituted a substantial burden on its operation .

a number of federal funding programs , particularly grants for social service providers , have expanded to permit religious providers to participate under programs including rules known as "charitable choice provisions. .

the religious organization receiving funding is permitted to "retain its independence" regarding its control over its religious exercise and beliefs .

such an organization cannot be required to change its form of internal governance or remove religious symbols from its facilities .

some programs also include explicit protections for beneficiaries who object to the religious character of a recipient organization .

the state must notify the beneficiary of an alternative provider that would be accessible to the beneficiary .

furthermore , religious providers are prohibited from discriminating against beneficiaries "on the basis of religion , a religious belief , or refusal to actively participate in a religious practice. .

thus , current provisions in existing statutory programs protect both the religious identity of the organization and the religious freedom of beneficiaries .

the balance of the rights of participating religious providers and potential program beneficiaries likely would be a matter of congressional discretion .

it may be noted that the parameters of the ban on discrimination against beneficiaries based on religion are unclear .

in some contexts , for example , under employment nondiscrimination statutes , courts have indicated that discrimination based on religion may include other forms of discrimination as long as the action relates to a religious tenet .

under this theory of interpretation , a religious organization that receives public funds may argue that extending its services to certain beneficiaries would infringe on its religious identity in violation of rfra .

in other words , for example , a religious organization that objects to certain sexual orientations may seek protection under rfra in order to limit its service to same - sex beneficiaries by claiming that such service is a matter of religious doctrine , and a requirement to serve such beneficiaries constitutes a substantial burden on religion that would require strict scrutiny under rfra .

in addition to the implications of the court's latest interpretation of rfra in the context of the aca , likely the most prominent legislation ever passed to govern various issues in health care law and policy , there are a number of other issues in health care that involve religious objections .

for example , all 50 states and the district of columbia require children to be vaccinated for certain illnesses and diseases before entering schools .

also as a matter of public health , individuals with highly contagious diseases have been subject to potential quarantine to avoid the spread of the illness .

some religious denominations believe that certain health care measures would violate their religious beliefs , and individuals may object to such policies as a matter of religious belief .

accordingly , many states have adopted exceptions for religious objections .

however , under a broad definition of substantial burden , the class of recognized objections to such matters could be expanded significantly .

members of some religious groups may object to having their photograph taken , as many identification laws require .

the teachings of several religious groups may prohibit their members from being photographed in general or from revealing some parts of the body .

identification laws that require individuals to be photographed or require individuals to be photographed without head coverings may infringe upon these individuals' religious exercise , leading to potential challenges regarding whether the individuals' religious objections must be accommodated under religious freedom protections such as rfra .

while many of these requirements are state laws that would depend on state religious freedom protections ( eg , driver's license requirements , voter id requirements ) , there are some federal requirements or related interests that could trigger a challenge under the federal rfra ( eg , passport requirements ) .

notably , the supreme court has considered the validity of state voter identification laws , and acknowledged issues related to religious objections , though it did not rule definitively on such issues .

some justices have criticized certain methods of accommodation of religious objections to photo identification requirements adopted at the state level as too great a burden on those individuals with objections .

