the eelv ( evolved expendable launch vehicle ) program stands at a crossroads today .

factors that prompted the initial eelv effort in 1994 are once again manifest — significant increases in launch costs , procurement concerns , and concerns about competition .

in addition , a long - standing undercurrent of concern over u.s. reliance on a russian rocket engine ( rd - 180 ) for critical national security space launches on one of the primary eelv rockets was exacerbated by the russian backlash over u.s. sanctions against russian actions in ukraine .

moreover , significant overall eelv program cost increases and unresolved questions over individual launch costs , along with legal challenges to the air force eelv program by spacex , have contributed to congress recently taking legislative action that has significantly affected the eelv program .

efforts by the obama administration and the air force to work with congress on changing the eelv strategy have been deemed insufficient by those in congress eager to proceed more quickly and definitively .

the eelv program was initiated by the air force in 1994 after years of concerns within the service and space launch community over increasing cost and decreasing confidence in the continued reliability of national access to space .

eelv was developed to provide the united states affordable , reliable , and assured access to space with two families of space launch vehicles .

overall the program succeeded in providing critical space lift capability to support department of defense ( dod ) and intelligence community missions , together known as national security space ( nss ) missions .

the eelv program eventually evolved modestly in response to changing circumstances , and the air force approved the current eelv acquisition strategy in november 2011 , further revising it in 2013 .

that strategy was designed to ( 1 ) sustain two major independent rocket - powered launch families to reduce the chance of launch interruptions and to ensure reliable access to space ; ( 2 ) license and stockpile the russian - made rd - 180 heavy - lift rocket engine , a critical component of the atlas v ; ( 3 ) pursue a block - buy commitment to a number of launches through the end of this decade to reduce launch costs ; and ( 4 ) increase competition to reduce overall launch costs .

the air force and others view the overall eelv acquisition strategy as having successfully reduced launch costs while demonstrating highly reliable access to space for dod and the intelligence community .

but others in congress and elsewhere have argued that the program remains far too costly and not nearly as competitive as it should be .

the eelv program currently consists of two families of launch vehicles , atlas v and delta iv ( both provided by united launch alliance [ula] of denver , co ) , with 14 different configurations to accommodate the launch of all nss ( and other spacecraft types ) to a variety of orbits .

eelv nss launches have supported the air force , navy , and national reconnaissance office ( nro ) .

more specifically , the atlas v has launched commercial , civil , and nss satellites into orbit , including commercial and military communications satellites ; lunar and other planetary orbiters and probes ; earth observation , military research , and weather satellites ; missile warning and nro reconnaissance satellites ; a tracking and data relay satellite ; and the x - 37b space plane ( a military orbital test vehicle ) .

the delta iv has launched commercial and military communications and weather satellites , and missile warning and nro satellites .

the atlas v and delta iv launch vehicles are produced by ula , which was formed in 2006 as a joint venture of the boeing company ( of chicago , il ) and lockheed martin ( of bethesda , md ) .

in addition to the launch vehicles themselves , the eelv system consists of an extensive array of support capabilities and infrastructure to permit safe operations of u.s. launch ranges .

ula operates five space launch complexes , two at cape canaveral air force station , fl ( space launch complex - 37 and space launch complex - 41 ) , and three at vandenberg air force base , ca ( space launch complex - 2 , space launch complex - 3f , and space launch complex - 6 ) .

a large number of key suppliers for the atlas v and the delta iv are spread throughout the country , while some are located overseas .

the eelv program is managed by the launch and range systems directorate of the space and missile systems center ( air force space command ) , los angeles air force base ( el segundo , ca ) .

spacex ( of hawthorne , ca ) , the primary new entrant in the nss launch community , is now certified to provide some nss space launches .

spacex plans to develop more capable launch capability in the falcon heavy to compete for some , if not all , of the largest national security space launch missions .

several interrelated factors now create considerable uncertainty over the air force's ability to continue with its current three - phase eelv acquisition strategy .

these include ongoing concerns over program and launch costs , u.s. national security vulnerability to a critical russian component in the eelv program ( the rd - 180 main engine ) , legal challenges to the acquisition strategy , and legislation whose effects could change the eelv program .

although there are important differences in how to get there , widespread support appears to exist across the space community and within congress for the nss requirement for robust competition and assured access to space .

the recurring theme since the start of the eelv program has been how best to pursue this requirement while driving down costs through competition and ensuring launch reliability and performance .

this remains true today as well .

efforts to transition away from the rd - 180 to a domestic u.s. alternative engine or launch vehicle are not without technical , program , or schedule risks .

a combination of factors over the next several years , as a worst - case scenario , could leave the united states in a situation where some of its national security space payloads will not have a certified launcher available .

these factors could include some or all of the following: no more available rd - 180s ; ula discontinues the delta launch vehicle ; ula has trouble certifying the vulcan launch vehicle ; spacex has trouble certifying the falcon heavy ; the ar - 1 has developmental trouble ; or the be - 4 has developmental trouble .

even with a smooth , on - schedule transition away from the rd - 180 to an alternative engine or launch vehicle , the performance and reliability record achieved with the rd - 180 to date would likely not be replicated until well beyond 2030 because the rd - 180 has had 68 consecutive successful civil , commercial , and nss launches since 2000 .

