on july 12 , 2016 , an arbitral tribunal constituted under the united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) is expected to issue a ruling , known as a final "award," in a case between the philippines and the people's republic of china ( prc or china ) .

in the case , the philippines , a u.s. ally , seeks primarily to clarify some of the two countries' potential maritime rights in the south china sea under unclos , the 1982 convention that establishes multilateral rules governing the rights of nations over the seas .

the united states is not party to the convention .

since the reagan administration , however , the united states has had a policy of operating in ways consistent with unclos .

the u.s. government says unclos "reflects customary international law with respect to traditional uses of the ocean. .

the philippines and china are both parties to unclos and accepted its compulsory dispute settlement provisions when they ratified the convention .

china , however , has declined to participate in the arbitral tribunal's proceedings .

through official statements outside the proceedings , including a december 2014 position paper , beijing has argued that the tribunal does not have legal jurisdiction to rule in the case .

the tribunal considered china's arguments and in october 2015 found that it had jurisdiction to rule on 7 of the philippines' 15 submissions .

the tribunal said it would reserve consideration of its jurisdiction to rule on the remaining 8 submissions until later in the case .

the case has been closely watched for the implications it may have for the tensions between the philippines and china over their maritime disputes in the south china sea , for the overlapping claims of china and other governments to maritime rights , for u.s. - china relations , and for international law more broadly .

for decades , the nations bordering the south china sea have asserted overlapping territorial claims and sovereign rights derived from those claims , with few cases of resolution to those disputes under unclos or through negotiation .

the tribunal's ruling will be legally binding only for the two parties to the dispute — the philippines and china .

u.s. officials have argued , however , that it could help clarify issues relevant to the claims of all the governments contesting territory in the sea — brunei , china , malaysia , the philippines , taiwan , and vietnam .

such clarification could help claimants restart conversations about how to manage the sea in ways that lessen the chances for maritime incidents , protect the sea's role as a conduit for as much as $5 trillion in annual commercial shipping , and allow for joint exploitation of fishing stocks and hydrocarbons .

china's officials , however , have said repeatedly that china will not accept the award , arguing that the tribunal has exceeded its legal authority by ruling in a case that , china says , indirectly addresses questions of sovereignty and sea boundary delimitations .

some observers argue that if china refuses to comply with the award , it could risk deepening regional tensions and harming the authority of unclos as an institution and of international law more broadly .

obama administration officials have made several statements supporting the philippines' right to bring the case and emphasizing that the tribunal's award will be binding on both parties .

in a press appearance with then - philippine president benigno aquino on april 28 , 2014 , president obama said: "today , we have reaffirmed the importance of resolving territorial disputes in the region peacefully , without intimidation or coercion .

and in that spirit , i told him that the united states supports his decision to pursue international arbitration concerning territorial disputes in the south china sea. .

meeting then - president aquino again on november 17 , 2015 , president obama reiterated that "disputes need to be resolved peacefully .

that's why the united states supports the philippines' decision to use arbitration under the u.n. convention on the law of the sea to peacefully and lawfully address differences. .

speaking at stanford university on april 21 , 2016 , daniel r. russel , assistant secretary of state for east asian and pacific affairs said: ... under the law of the sea treaty , the decision of the tribunal that's meeting now in the hague is binding without appeal on both parties — in this case , the philippines and china .

and it would be a devastating blow to china's image , its reputation , and the prospect of china adhering to the rule of law , if as many chinese officials have previewed , china were to simply reject a treaty obligation ; reject a determination by the tribunal.... [t]he rules over the water are going to be impacted by the decision , but most people think in a way that can be helpful , because it will narrow the scope of the disagreement and open the door to some diplomatic progress .

testifying before the house committee on foreign affairs on april 28 , 2016 , deputy secretary of state antony j. blinken said [t]he convention provides that its rulings are binding on the parties to the convention .

so we have worked very hard to establish across the region an understanding that this is an appropriate mechanism — arbitration to resolve these disputes — and that the ruling of the tribunal should be binding on the two parties .

we said to the chinese , if you're given satisfaction on any aspect of the decision we'll be the first to stand up and defend it but of course if the philippines is , you have to respect that .

china has a decision to make depending on how the ruling comes out .

it will either decide to abide by the ruling and that gives us a great opportunity i think to narrow the scope of areas that are in dispute in the south china sea .

that would be good to get countries to work cooperatively together for example — joint ventures on the exploitation of resources and to then work to resolve their disputes that remain peacefully .

that's one path .

the other path is it ignores the decision and then i think it risks doing terrible damage to its reputation , further alienating countries in the region and pushing them even closer to the united states .

china will have to decide depending on what the results of the arbitration are .

we're watching that very , very closely .

congress also has supported the philippines' right to seek to resolve its disputes with china through arbitration .

during the 113 th congress , the senate agreed to s.res .

412 , which described the arbitration in these terms: ... the republic of the philippines properly exercised its rights to peaceful settlement mechanisms with the filing of [an] arbitration case under article 287 and annex vii of the convention on the law of the sea in order to achieve a peaceful and durable solution to the dispute , and the united states hopes that all parties in any dispute ultimately abide by the rulings of internationally recognized dispute - settlement bodies .

in the 114 th congress , s.res .

183 ( schatz ) and s. 2865 ( cardin ) call on parties to implement the tribunal's ruling .

s.res .

370 ( cardin ) urges the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) to develop a common approach to reaffirm the ruling .

all three bills are pending in the senate .

the philippines' case consists of 15 submissions , all intended to fall within the tribunal's jurisdiction , which is interpretation and application of unclos , and not to touch on sovereignty issues , which are outside the tribunal's jurisdiction .

the 15 submissions cover four broad areas: the legality under unclos of china's ambiguous so - called nine - dash line claim in the south china sea ; the maritime entitlements generated under unclos by specific geographic features , most of them controlled by china ; the legality of china's alleged harassment of philippines vessels ; and china's alleged violations of an unclos provision requiring parties to protect the marine environment .

with its submissions in the first two areas , the philippines appears to be seeking to create an "outer bound" of the rights to which china might be entitled under unclos , without requesting that the tribunal rule on what government actually has sovereignty over specific features that china currently controls .

on june 29 , 2016 , a chinese foreign ministry spokesperson reiterated china's position that "the arbitral tribunal has no jurisdiction over the case and the relevant subject - matter , and that it should not have heard the case or rendered the award. .

on july 6 , 2016 , the same spokesperon stated the south china sea arbitration case initiated by the philippines is illegal , null and void from the outset .

china will never accept nor recognize whatever ruling the arbitral tribunal may produce .

and china does not accept any proposal or action by any country based on the ruling .

part xv of unclos allows any party to a dispute to invoke "compulsory procedures entailing binding decisions" for "any dispute concerning the interpretation or application" of the convention .

parties can choose from among four kinds of compulsory dispute settlement procedures , including an arbitral tribunal constituted under annex vii of the convention .

the philippines chose the latter for its dispute with china over their respective maritime entitlements in the south china sea , first notifying china of its intention to bring the case on january 22 , 2013 .

article 9 of annex vii states that , "absence of a party or failure of a party to defend its case shall not constitute a bar to the proceedings. .

the tribunal's jurisdiction has clear limits .

the convention does not provide for compulsory dispute settlement for issues of sovereignty .

in addition , in 2006 china exercised a right available to all unclos parties to exclude itself from compulsory dispute resolution procedures governing all categories of disputes listed in article 298 of the convention , including those concerning sea boundary delimitation , "historic bays or titles," military and law enforcement activities , and disputes before the u.n. security council .

china's justifications for rejecting the tribunal's ruling are contained in a lengthy december 2014 position paper .

they include: the "essence" of the case is the issue of territorial sovereignty , which is beyond the tribunal's jurisdiction .

beijing acknowledges that the philippines did not ask for a determination of sovereignty , but states that , "without determining the sovereignty over a maritime feature , it is impossible to decide whether maritime claims based on that feature are consistent with the convention. .

although the philippines submission does not explicitly seek a ruling on maritime delimitation , the case is "a request for maritime delimitation by the arbitral tribunal in disguise. .

as such , the issues in the case are covered by the declaration that china made in 2006 — exercising a right available to all parties to the convention — excluding itself from compulsory dispute resolution procedures in all categories of disputes listed in article 298 of the convention , including disputes over maritime delimitation .

in bilateral statements and in the 2002 asean - china declaration on the conduct of parties in the south china sea ( doc ) , china and the philippines agreed to settle their maritime disputes through negotiation .

beijing argues that those agreements have "the effect of excluding any means of third - party settlement. .

beijing has also pointed to article 300 of the convention on "good faith and abuse of rights. .

the article reads , "states parties shall fulfil in good faith the obligations assumed under this convention and shall exercise the rights , jurisdiction and freedoms recognized in this convention in a manner which would not constitute an abuse of right. .

china contends that the philippines' case amounts to an abuse of right .

in an october 29 , 2015 , award on jurisdiction , the arbitral tribunal addressed each of these issues .

it said it rejected china's contention that the case was actually about sovereignty or about the delimitation of a maritime boundary , or both .

it found instead that "each of the philippines' submissions reflect disputes between the two states concerning the interpretation or application of the convention. .

the tribunal ruled that prior agreements and joint statements by china and the philippines "do not preclude the philippines from seeking to resolve its dispute with china through the convention. .

the tribunal also held that "china's decision not to participate in these proceedings does not deprive the tribunal of jurisdiction and that the philippines' decision to commence arbitration unilaterally was not an abuse of the convention's dispute settlement procedures. .

the tribunal concluded that it had jurisdiction with respect to seven of the philippines' submissions , that it would need to consider its jurisdiction with respect to seven other submissions , based on its findings on the first seven , and that it required the philippines to clarify and narrow one of its submissions .

china's foreign ministry declared the award on jurisdiction "null and void," and said it had "no binding effect on china. .

critics of china's position point to two unclos provisions that appear to preclude china's argument that it has the right to continue to challenge the tribunal's jurisdiction and refuse to accept the tribunal's final award .

unclos's article 288 ( 4 ) states that , "in the event of a dispute as to whether a court or tribunal has jurisdiction , the matter shall be settled by decision of that court or tribunal. .

article 296 ( 1 ) of the convention says: "any decision rendered by a court or tribunal having jurisdiction under this section shall be final and shall be complied with by all the parties to the dispute. .

in anticipation of a final award from the arbitral tribunal , china in the first half of 2016 stepped up its criticism of the philippines for bringing the case and of the arbitral tribunal for finding that it had jurisdiction to rule on it .

in april 2016 , china's foreign minister wang yi accused the philippines of "either political arrogance or legal prejudice" in pursuing the case , and called the philippines' initiation of the proceedings "a distortion and abuse of the international arbitration mechanism. .

the arbitral tribunal has said that it will issue its final award in the case on july 12 , 2016 .

its award will be legally binding on both china and the philippines , although the tribunal has no enforcement powers .

after the award is issued , observers will be watching closely for the responses from china , the philippines , and the united states .

some analysts have expressed concern that china's response to the award , and actions by the united states and other countries in response to china's actions , could lead to a period of increased tensions and friction in the region .

if china rejects the tribunal's award , many may see that as a challenge to regional stability , to unclos as an institution , and to the credibility of international legal mechanisms to clarify and resolve disputes .

in the period leading up to the ruling , china has worked hard to line up support for its position on the arbitration case , claiming to have won support from "dozens" of countries and an array of international experts .

many analysts expect such diplomatic efforts to intensify after the award is issued .

according to the washington , dc - based center for strategic and international studies , as of june 15 , 2016 , 8 nations publicly supported china's position , 49 more had not publicly confirmed china's claim of their support , and 4 had publicly denied offering their support for china's position .

on july 5 , 2016 , china began holding military drills around the disputed paracel islands in the northern part of the south china sea , which are not part of the case between the philippines and china .

an editorial in china's official english - language newspaper , china daily , put the drills in the context of the philippines' and the united states' alleged efforts to use the tribunal's forthcoming award "to invalidate china's territorial claims in the south china sea" and "to reinforce their portrayal of [china] as an outcast from a rules - based international community. .

the editorial stated , "it is reasonable to interpret the planned drills as reflecting the country's preparedness for a long - term fight to safeguard its sovereignty. .

at the same time , another china daily article quoted unnamed sources as saying that china's response to the tribunal's award will "fully depend on what kind of actions the philippines and other countries will take based on the arbitration results. .

the paper quoted one unnamed source as saying , "there will be no incident at all if all related parties put aside the arbitration results," an apparent reference to china's hopes that the philippines might be persuaded to set aside the award and enter into bilateral negotiations with china over the two countries' disputes .

barring such an outcome , analysts see china having three broad options for how to manage its operations in the south china sea after the tribunal's ruling .

tacit compliance .

in theory , china could choose to comply tacitly with the award , or parts of it , while continuing to publicly reject it .

in the case of geographic features that the tribunal has determined to be low - tide elevations that do not generate a territorial sea , tacit compliance might involve ceasing efforts to drive away vessels and planes from the waters around those features .

tacit compliance might include halting potentially environmentally destructive land reclamation work on geographic features that china controls .

it might also include clarifying that the nine - dash line on china's maps does not imply that china is claiming sovereignty over the entire south china sea , but rather indicates a claim specifically to land features within the line and whatever maritime entitlements they generate under unclos .

status quo .

china could continue to behave as before .

it could continue , for example , to seek to drive away vessels and aircraft approaching what it deems to be territorial seas generated by each of the geographic features it controls .

it could continue to install civilian and military infrastructure on the artificial islands it has constructed in the spratly island chain , and to engage in further potentially environmentally damaging reclamation work .

china coast guard vessels could continue to seek to enforce china's administration over fisheries and undersea resources within the nine - dash line .

escalation .

china could choose to escalate the disputes by taking actions to assert what it believes to be its rights .

such escalation could take many forms .

some possibilities include: starting land reclamation at scarborough shoal , which has been under china's control since 2012 ; seizing control of second thomas shoal by removing the brp sierra madre , the philippine navy landing craft beached there since 1999 , and the philippine marines stationed on the vessel ; declaring an air defense identification zone ( adiz ) over parts or all of the south china sea ; establishing territorial baselines around the spratly island chain , similar to those china drew about the paracel islands in 1996 ; deploying surface - to - air missiles ( sams ) to some of the artificial islands china has constructed in the spratly island chain , particularly at fiery cross , mischief , and subi reefs ; increasing harassment of philippine vessels ; conducting additional military exercises in the south china sea ; or withdrawing from unclos .

the philippines' possible response to the tribunal's award has been complicated by a change in administration .

on june 30 , 2016 , the philippines swore in a new president , rodrigo duterte , to succeed president benigno aquino , whose administration initiated the arbitration proceedings .

on president duterte's inauguration day , the philippines department of foreign affairs issued a statement that ended , the philippines believes that the rule of law prescribes a just and peaceful means of resolving differences , which is why the philippines will fully respect the tribunal's award as an affirmation of the unclos and hopes that members of the international community and parties to the convention will do the same .

the position of president duterte himself has been less clear .

on the campaign trail , duterte raised questions about whether he would abide by the tribunal's ruling when he was quoted as saying , "if the tribunal would favor us , good , but if not , i would disagree. .

one week after his inauguration , however , he stated that the philippines would accept any ruling as "a country which honors ( its ) international commitment" to unclos .

duterte also reiterated his stance that he would be open to eventual bilateral negotiations with china on the countries' maritime disputes if efforts to address them in other fora did not bear fruit .

in leaked remarks to his first cabinet meeting as president , duterte said that he would view an award in the philippines' favor as "a moral victory," but said that the philippines would need to face "reality," an apparent suggestion that the philippines would not be able to force china to accept the tribunal's award .

he added , "god knows , i really don't want to declare any fighting with anybody and if we can have peace by just talking , i will be very happy. .

like the government of china , the obama administration has worked hard to line up international support for its position on the arbitration proceedings .

in april 2016 , the united states succeeded in including a call for implementation of the tribunal's ruling in a group of seven ( g7 ) foreign ministers statement .

post - ruling , according to japanese vice foreign minister shinsuke sugiyama , the united states and japan have already discussed working "to raise our voices in the international community individually , jointly , together with the group of seven industrialized nations and with the association of southeast asian nations. .

analysts have identified potential options for u.s. responses following the issuance of the award .

they might include , but are not necessarily limited to: reiterating calls for the governments of the member states of asean and the government of china to reach early conclusion of a meaningful code of conduct ( coc ) , providing agreed rules of the road for actions in the sea ; taking actions that demonstrate the u.s. position on international maritime rights , including conducting freedom of navigation operations ( fonops ) near features covered in the tribunal's award ; supporting pressure on china in unclos bodies by , for example , arguing to the international seabed authority that china's refusal to honor the tribunal's ruling should disqualify china from being able to proceed with its deep seabed mining applications for sites in the indian ocean ; or scheduling senate advice and consent on ratification of unclos .

the united states has signed unclos but not ratified it , so the united states is not currently a party to the convention .

