f or more than forty - five years , all three branches of government have struggled with how to interpret the meaning of "waters of the united states" in the clean water act .

in 1972 , congress eliminated the requirement that waters must be navigable in the traditional sense — meaning they are capable of being used by vessels in interstate commerce — in order to be subject to federal water pollution regulation .

rather than use traditional tests of navigability , the 1972 amendments to the federal water pollution control act , which came to be known as the clean water act , redefined "navigable waters" to include "the waters of the united states , including the territorial seas. .

disputes over the meaning of that phrase have been ongoing ever since the change .

some courts and commentators disagree on how the scope of federal jurisdictional waters changed over time as a result of interpretative approaches taken by the agencies responsible for administering the clean water act — the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) .

this debate resurfaced during the obama administration when the corps and epa issued a rule , known as the clean water rule , which substantially redefined "waters of the united states" in the agencies' regulations for the first time in more than two decades .

while some argued that the clean water rule constituted a major expansion of federal jurisdiction , others asserted that the agencies construed the term in a narrower fashion than in prior regulations .

a vocal critic of the clean water rule , president trump shifted the executive branch's policy toward the meaning of "waters of the united states. .

in february 2017 , president trump issued an executive order directing epa and the corps to review and revise or rescind the clean water rule .

the agencies currently are in the process of carrying out the executive order , and they unveiled proposed regulations redefining "waters of the united states" in december 2018 .

as in nearly all prior attempts to define this phrase , however , observers disagree on whether the latest proposed definition correctly calibrates the scope of federal water pollution regulation .

this report provides context for this debate by examining the history of major changes to the meaning of "waters of the united states" as expressed in federal regulations , legislation , agency guidance , and case law .

the clean water act is the principal law governing pollution of the nation's surface waters .

among other requirements , the act prohibits the unauthorized discharge of pollutants into "navigable waters," and requires persons wishing to discharge dredged or fill material into "navigable waters" to obtain a permit from the corps .

in its definition section , the act defines the term "navigable waters" to mean "waters of the united states , including its territorial seas. .

this single , jurisdiction - defining phrase applies to the entire law , including the national pollutant discharge elimination system ( npdes ) permit program ; permit requirements for disposal of dredged or fill material , known as the section 404 program ; water quality standards and measures to attain them ; oil spill liability and prevention ; and enforcement .

the clean water act itself does not expand further on the meaning of "waters of the united states. .

instead , the corps and epa have expounded on this phrase through agency guidance and regulations , which federal courts have struck down on various occasions as failing to satisfy statutory or constitutional requirements .

federal authority to regulate waters within the united states primarily derives from the commerce clause , which gives congress the power to "regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states .

 .

 .

. .

accordingly , federal laws and regulations regulating waters of the united states cannot cover matters that exceed that constitutional source of authority .

legal challenges to the corps' and epa's interpretation of "waters of the united states" — particularly those which were successful — often followed broader trends in interpreting the commerce clause .

for a period after its enactment in 1972 , courts generally interpreted the clean water act as having a wide jurisdictional reach , but , in recent decades , the supreme court has emphasized that "the grant of authority to congress under the commerce clause , though broad , is not unlimited. .

a time line of events in the evolution of the definition of "waters of the united states" is provided in the appendix , and major events are shown in figure 1 .

historically , federal laws regulating waterways , such as the rivers and harbors appropriations act of 1899 ( rivers and harbors act ) , exercised jurisdiction over "navigable water[s] of the united states[.] .

the supreme court interpreted this phrase to govern only waters that were "navigable - in - fact" — meaning that they were "used , or are susceptible of being used , .

 .

 .

as highways for commerce , over which trade and travel are or may be conducted in the customary modes of trade and travel on water. .

beginning with the federal water pollution control act of 1948 , congress began to use a different jurisdiction - defining phrase to regulate pollution of "interstate waters," which it defined as "all rivers , lakes , and other waters that flow across , or form a part of , a state's boundaries. .

congress amended that legislation in 1961 to expand federal jurisdiction from "interstate waters" to "interstate or navigable waters[.] .

the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972 , which came to be known as the clean water act , again amended the jurisdictional reach of federal water pollution legislation .

there , congress exercised jurisdiction over "navigable waters," but provided a new definition of that phrase , stating: "the term 'navigable waters' means the waters of the united states , including the territorial seas. .

this subtle definitional change proved to have tremendous consequences for the jurisdictional scope of the clean water act .

in debating the 1972 amendments that created the clean water act , some members of congress explained that they intended the revised definition to expand the law's jurisdiction beyond traditionally navigable or interstate waters .

the conference report states that the "conferees fully intend that the term 'navigable waters' be given the broadest possible constitutional interpretation unencumbered by agency determinations which have been made or may be made for administrative purposes. .

and during debate in the house on approving the conference report , one representative explained that the definition "clearly encompasses all water bodies , including streams and their tributaries , for water quality purposes. .

courts have frequently referred to the act's legislative history when interpreting its jurisdictional reach , but they have not always agreed on the import of this history .

the corps and epa share responsibility for administering the clean water act .

both agencies have administrative responsibilities under section 404 of the act , and epa administers most other clean water act - related programs in partnership with u.s. states .

because of this shared jurisdiction , both agencies create regulations defining the waters subject to their regulatory jurisdiction .

in the initial years following the enactment of the clean water act , their respective definitions differed significantly .

less than one year after the corps published its first regulations defining jurisdictional waters , the united states district court for the district of columbia struck them down as too narrow and inconsistent with the clean water act .

in natural resources defense council v. callaway , the court held that because "congress .

 .

 .

asserted federal jurisdiction over the nation's waters to the maximum extent permissible under the commerce clause of the constitution[,]" the definition could not be limited to "traditional tests of navigability[.] .

the court ordered the corps to produce new regulations that acknowledged "the full regulatory mandate" of the clean water act .

after the corps' 1975 and 1977 regulations , some members of congress introduced bills that sought to limit the clean water act's jurisdiction to traditional , navigable - in - fact waters , but the proposed limiting legislation never became law .

instead , congress amended the federal water pollution control act through the clean water act of 1977 , which did not alter the jurisdictional phrase "waters of the united states. .

the original version of the clean water act of 1977 introduced in the house would have limited the corps' jurisdiction , and an amendment proposed in the senate sought similar limitations .

but the original senate version , which generally retained the existing definition of "navigable waters," was adopted in conference and passed into law .

the clean water act of 1977 , as enacted , contained certain exemptions from section 404 permitting for "normal farming , silviculture , .

 .

 .

ranching[,]" and other activities .

in contrast to the agencies' attempt to align jurisdictional waters with what they interpreted to be the outer reaches of the commerce clause in the 1980s , a series of court cases beginning in the late 1990s caused the corps and epa to modify their interpretation of "waters of the united states. .

for much of the 20th century , the supreme court broadly construed the commerce clause to give congress discretion to regulate activities which "affect" interstate commerce , so long as its legislation was reasonably related to achieving its goals of regulating interstate commerce .

in the 1995 case of united states v. lopez , however , the supreme court struck down a federal statute for the first time in more than 50 years based purely on a finding that congress exceeded its powers under the commerce clause .

in lopez , the court held the commerce clause did not provide a constitutional basis for federal legislation criminalizing possession of a firearm in a school zone because the law neither regulated a commercial activity nor contained a requirement that the firearm possession be connected to interstate commerce .

the court revisited its prior commerce clause cases and sorted congress's commerce power into three categories: ( 1 ) regulation of channels of commerce , ( 2 ) regulation of instrumentalities of commerce , and ( 3 ) regulation of economic activities which not only affect but "substantially affect" interstate commerce .

lopez set the backdrop for a series of major opinions limiting federal jurisdiction under the clean water act .

the corps and epa issued the clean water rule in may 2015 in an effort to clarify the bounds of jurisdictional waters in the wake of swancc and rapanos .

the agencies relied on a synthesis of more than 1,200 published and peer - reviewed scientific reports and over 1 million comments on the proposed version of the rule .

the clean water rule contains the same three - tier structure from the agencies' 2008 joint guidance , identifying waters that ( 1 ) are categorically jurisdictional , ( 2 ) may be deemed jurisdictional on a case - by - case basis if they have a significant nexus with other jurisdictional waters , and ( 3 ) are categorically excluded from the clean water act's jurisdiction .

in an effort to reduce uncertainty about the scope of federal jurisdiction , the agencies sought to increase categorical jurisdictional determinations and reduce the number of waterbodies subject to the case - specific significant nexus test .

the trump administration opposes the clean water rule , and it is in the process of attempting to rescind the rule and replace it with new regulations elaborating on the meaning of "waters of the united states. .

the multitude of legal challenges related to "waters of the united states" has created a complex legal landscape for the 116th congress .

because both rules in the trump administration's rescind - and - replace process are still in proposed form , the obama administration's clean water rule remains the current regulation defining waters of the united states .

however , post - nam challenges to the clean water rule have proceeded at the u.s. district court level , and three federal district courts have entered preliminary injunctions barring application of the clean water rule during the pendency of the suits .

at the same time , these district courts have limited the scope of their injunction to the specific states that brought legal challenges to the clean water rule .

the ultimate result is that the clean water rule currently is enjoined in 28 states , but it is the current enforceable regulation in 22 states , the district of columbia , and u.s. territories .

while finalization of the trump administration's step one and step two proposals could bring greater uniformity to this fragmented legal landscape , those rules are also likely to engender new litigation .

the focus of future lawsuits , if filed , is likely to depend on the rulemaking process and content of the final rules .

but observers expect critics to challenge whether epa and the corps considered sufficient scientific data and provided an adequate rationale to depart from prior agency guidance and regulations that utilized justice kennedy's "significant nexus" test .

while critics of that test argue that it is too unpredictable for the average landowner to determine whether a waterbody is part of the "waters of the united states," opponents of the trump administration's policy contend that the step two proposal would also introduce new technical definitions that ordinary landowners would not be able to implement without hiring a specialist .

the debate over the jurisdictional reach of the clean water act implicates complex and overlapping concerns of environmental protection , statutory interpretation , federalism , and constitutional law .

while judicial interpretations of "waters of the united states" generally have followed broader trends in understanding of the scope of the commerce clause , the supreme court's inability to identify a unified rationale in rapanos has caused significant confusion and debate over the outer reaches of the clean water act in the following years .

both the obama administration ( in the clean water rule ) and the trump administration ( in its rescind and revise process ) have sought to provide clarity by promulgating new definitions of "waters of the united states" in epa and the corps' regulations .

but both administrations' efforts have faced criticism and legal challenges from certain stakeholders , creating a fragmented legal landscape for the 116th congress in which "waters of the united states" means different things in different parts of the nation .

because the "waters of the united states" debate hinges on the meaning of a statutory term , congress could provide greater clarity and uniformity by amending the clean water act to define its jurisdictional scope more clearly , but legislative proposals thus far have not been enacted .

