congressional interest in facilitating u.s. technological innovation led to the passage of p.l .

96-517 , amendments to the patent and trademark act .

this legislation is commonly referred to as the "bayh - dole act," after its two primary sponsors , former senators robert dole and birch bayh .

this 1980 legislation awards title to inventions that government contractors make with federal government support , if the contractor consists of a small business , a university , or other nonprofit institution .

a subsequent presidential memorandum extended this policy to all federal government contractors .

as a result , the contractor may obtain a patent on its invention , providing it with an exclusive right in the invention during the patent's term .

the legislation is intended to use patent ownership as an incentive for private sector development and commercialization of federally funded research and development ( r&d ) .

the federal government retains certain rights in inventions produced with its financial assistance under the bayh - dole act .

the government retains a "nonexclusive , nontransferable , irrevocable , paid - up license" for its own benefit .

the bayh - dole act also provides federal agencies with "march - in rights. .

march - in rights allow the government , in specified circumstances , to require the contractor or successors in title to the patent to grant a "nonexclusive , partially exclusive , or exclusive license" to a "responsible applicant or applicants. .

if the patent owner refuses to do so , the government may grant the license itself .

members of congress have recently taken note of the fact that march - in rights have never been exercised during the 35-year history of the bayh - dole act .

in particular , the national institutes of health ( nih ) has received six march - in petitions and has denied each one .

a 2016 exchange of correspondence between some members of congress and the department of health and human services has suggested a potential difference of views about the appropriate use of march - in rights .

some observers believe that march - in rights should be rarely , if ever invoked due to the significant investment the private sector investment may make to bring early - stage inventions into practical application .

these commentators further assert that the use of march - in rights would discourage private enterprise from investing in the commercial development of any invention funded in part by the government .

on the other hand , others believe that u.s. taxpayers should be protected from what they view as excessive profiteering on technologies developed with public funding .

they consider march - in rights to constitute a long - available , but entirely unused mechanism for combatting the high and growing cost of health care .

this report reviews the availability of march - in rights under the bayh - dole act .

it begins by providing a brief overview of the patent system and innovation policy .

the report then introduces the bayh - dole act .

the specific details of the march - in authority provided to federal agencies are reviewed next .

the report then considers past efforts to obtain march - in authorization from nih .

the report closes with an identification of potential issues for congressional consideration .

even prior to the bayh - dole act , the federal government considered the intellectual property implications of r&d projects financed by public funds .

in 1963 , the kennedy administration called for greater consistency in diverse agency practices regarding the disposition of rights to inventions made by government contractors .

this early "government patent policy" generally allowed the u.s. government to retain rights to inventions developed through government contracts .

however , the contractor could obtain title in specified circumstances .

for example: [w]here the purpose of the contract is to build upon existing knowledge or technology to develop information , products , processes , or methods for use by the government , and the work called for by the contract is in a field of technology in which the contractor has acquired technical competence ( demonstrated by factors such as know - how , experience , and patent position ) directly related to an area in which the contractor has an established nongovernmental commercial position , the contractor shall normally acquire the principal or exclusive rights throughout the world in and to any resulting inventions , subject to the government acquiring at least an irrevocable non - exclusive royalty free license throughout the world for governmental purposes .

in those situations , the 1963 policy retained significant government rights in privately held patents that resulted from publicly funded projects .

in a prelude to today's march - in rights , the 1963 policy further provided: where the principal or exclusive ( except as against the government ) rights to an invention are acquired by the contractor , the government shall have the right to require the granting of a license to an applicant royalty free or on terms that are reasonable in the circumstances to the extent that the invention is required for public use by governmental regulations or as may be necessary to fulfill health needs , or for other public purposes stipulated in the contract .

the 1980 enactment of the bayh - dole act altered the intellectual property landscape with respect to patents and government - sponsored r&d .

congress instead accepted the proposition that the lack of patent title discouraged private enterprise from advancing early - stage technologies into the marketplace .

for example , suppose that a university researcher identifies a promising chemical compound using funds provided by the national institutes of health ( nih ) .

some observers believed that under pre - bayh - dole act practices , a brand - name pharmaceutical company would be unlikely to undertake costly and risky clinical trials in order to convert that early - stage research into a drug approved by the food and drug administration .

absent patent protection , generic firms could quickly introduce competing products .

this view accepts that patents provide incentives not just for individuals to invent , but also to commercialize completed inventions .

under the bayh - dole act , each nonprofit organization ( including universities ) or small business is permitted to elect within a reasonable time to retain title to any "subject invention" made under federally funded r&d .

the institution must commit to commercialization of the invention within a predetermined , agreed upon , timeframe .

however , the government may keep title under "exceptional circumstances when it is determined by the agency that restriction or elimination of the right to retain title to any subject invention will better promote the policy and objectives of this chapter. .

additionally , the government may withhold title if the contractor "is not located in the united states or does not have a place of business located in the united states or is subject to the control of a foreign government" ; in situations associated with national security ; or when the work is related to the naval nuclear propulsion or weapons programs of the department of energy .

certain other rights are reserved for the government .

the government retains "a nonexclusive , nontransferable , irrevocable , paid - up license to practice or have practiced for or on behalf of the united states any subject invention throughout the world...." the government also retains "march - in rights" which enable the federal agency to require the contractor to license a third party to use the invention under certain circumstances .

this report discusses march - in rights at greater length below .

by its own terms , the bayh - dole act applies only to nonprofit organizations ( including universities ) and small businesses .

however , in a february 1983 memorandum concerning the vesting of title to inventions made under federal funding , then - president ronald reagan ordered all agencies to treat , as allowable by law , all contractors within the bayh - dole act framework regardless of their size .

this longstanding practice lacks a legislative basis , however .

the bayh - dole act authorizes the government to withhold public disclosure of information for a "reasonable time" until a patent application can be made .

licensing by any contractor retaining title under this act is restricted to companies that will manufacture substantially within the united states .

this requirement may be waived if domestic manufacture is not commercially feasible , or if the contractor or its successors made reasonable but ultimately unsuccessful efforts to license domestic manufacturers .

the secretary of commerce was provided the authority to issue regulations implementing the bayh - dole act .

to date , no bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress to address march - in rights under the bayh - dole act .

therefore , if congress deems the current situation to be acceptable , then no action need be taken .

other options include clarifications that further stipulate the circumstances under which march - in rights may be invoked , either by statutory amendment or the encouragement of regulatory refinements .

congress could , for example , define with greater clarity the precise circumstances under which a patented invention is deemed "available to the public on reasonable terms. .

congress could also define with greater specificity when march - in rights are needed to "alleviate health or safety needs," particularly with respect to inventions that might be perceived as too costly for many consumers to afford .

other options include transfer of oversight of administering march - in rights .

currently the bayh - dole act assigns the agency that provided funds that led to the patented invention responsibility for exercising these rights .

another entity might have distinct perspectives than the funding agency and might reach different conclusions on whether to exercise march - in rights .

transferring decisionmaking authority to a distinct entity might also eliminate any perceived conflicts of interest with respect to march - in rights .

former employees of federal agencies often wish to pursue careers within the private sector and may wish to maintain good relationships with those enterprises .

in addition , agency officials may themselves be named inventors on patents to which march - in rights apply .

these factors could conceivably lead to a perception of bias against the institution of march - in rights .

some commentators have also suggested that congress should establish a centralized database of inventions subject to the bayh - dole act .

such a record would potentially improve the ability of the public to track its r&d investments and observe the degree to which these investments have resulted in new products for the marketplace .

if a further level of monitoring were desirable , one possibility would be to require licensees of patents subject to the bayh - dole act to submit periodic reports disclosing both their efforts at introducing the patented inventions to the public and their pricing policies .

other commentators also have urged reconsideration of the statutory requirement that in certain cases all judicial appeals be exhausted before march - in authority may actually be exercised .

under current law , even though a federal agency has authorized march - in rights , they may at times not be used until the patent proprietor has taken his case as far as the supreme court of the united states .

as arti k. rai and rebecca s. eisenberg assert , "the tolerance for protracted delays inherent in the current process is at odds with the time - sensitive nature of the interests reflected in the substantive standard , such as achieving practical application of the invention 'within a reasonable time' and 'alleviat[ing] health or safety needs.' .

this possibility of delay could also possibly discourage march - in petitions in the first instance .

still other commentators have suggested that congress should take further steps to ensure that the best candidate receives licenses for patents subject to the bayh - dole act .

under current law , government contractors may choose to license their inventions to anyone .

such a system may not place these inventions in the most capable hands , either from the perspective of the contractor or of the public .

another option might be an open - bidding auction that might better ensure that patents on inventions developed through government funding are licensed to the most capable enterprise .

current dialogue over march - in rights involves a familiar policy debate in intellectual property law .

on the one hand , the patent laws are intended to promote the labors that lead to innovation .

critics of the use of march - in rights believe that diluting the patent incentive will discourage private investment and ultimately work against the aims of the bayh - dole act .

but others say that the patent laws are also intended to distribute the fruits of those labors to the public .

this goal is most visibly achieved when patents expire and previously proprietary technologies enter the public domain .

however , some observers believe that march - in rights provide an unused mechanism for discouraging excessive profiteering and providing the public an appropriate return on its r&d investments during a patent's term .

striking a balance between these competing views regarding the commercialization of federally funded research remains a matter of congressional judgment .

