for years , congress has expressed interest in hydropower — the generation of electricity from flowing water .

in particular , it has focused on the regulation and development of nonfederal hydropower , as well as on the environmental impacts of hydropower .

additionally , discussions have taken place between congress , the executive branch , and several stakeholder groups — including industry associations , state governments , and tribes , among others — about various issues with hydropower ( eg , the time to issue a license , resource agency conditions , whether hydropower should be considered renewable ) .

recently , both chambers of the 114 th congress passed energy bills containing hydropower provisions that could potentially transform hydropower regulation and development to an extent not observed by the industry in some time ( eg , by changing certain parts of the licensing process ) .

this report analyzes pertinent components of the hydropower provisions in the north american energy security and infrastructure act of 2016 ( s. 2012 , as engrossed in the house ; referred to herein as the house version ) and the energy policy modernization act of 2016 ( s. 2012 , as engrossed in the senate ; referred to herein as the senate version ) .

the report briefly describes some of the current statutory requirements related to certain provisions .

it does not provide a comprehensive examination of each hydropower provision , nor does it provide a comprehensive examination of how proponents or opponents regard individual provisions .

both the senate and the house versions of s. 2012 generally seek to modify regulation and development processes for nonfederal hydropower .

the regulation and development provisions in both bills broadly address three primary objectives: 1 ) establish a more explicit timeline for the regulation of nonfederal hydropower projects ( eg , issuing a project license or an extension ) ; 2 ) appoint more definitively the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) as the lead agency for nonfederal hydropower facility regulation ; and 3 ) require ferc — and other agencies — to maintain and make publicly available more robust data on hydropower projects .

additionally , both bills direct attention to modifying these processes for specific projects ( eg , extending the time period to start project construction ) .

differences in the bills involve how the nonfederal hydropower regulation and development processes would be modified , which are described in later sections of this report , and the specific projects referenced .

for instance , section 3001 of the senate version would allow a construction start date to be extended for eight years for any project , whereas the house version does not address the extension of a project construction start date .

further , the house version would require licenses and preliminary extensions for pumped storage projects , whereas the senate version does not include such a requirement .

the senate version and the house version would modify the regulation process for seven specific projects ( see table 1 ) .

the house version of s. 2012 explicitly addresses hydropower in eight sections under division a , subtitle b ( hydropower regulatory modernization ) and in six sections under division a , title viii ( extensions of time for various federal energy regulatory commission projects ) .

the majority of the sections under subtitle b , sections 1201 and 1203-1208 , focus on hydropower licensing , regulation , and development .

one section under subtitle b , section 1202 , centers on an extended construction time period for a specific project .

the six sections under title viii , sections 8001-8006 , focus on the construction timeline for specific projects or stipulate certain license criteria .

this portion of the report summarizes the contents of each section of the house version of s. 2012 that addresses hydropower .

where applicable , it also discusses comparable provisions of the senate version of s. 2012 .

the senate version of s. 2012 explicitly addresses hydropower in 11 sections — 4 of which are under title iii – supply , part i – hydroelectric ; 6 of which are under title x – natural resources , part v – hydroelectric projects ; and 1 of which is under title x – natural resources , part vi – pumped storage hydropower compensation .

seven of the 11 sections focus on the construction timeline for specific projects or stipulate certain license criteria .

two sections under title iii , sections 3001 and 3002 , focus on hydropower licensing improvements and incentives .

one section under title x , section 10345 , centers on termination of authority for the secretary of the interior .

another section under title x , section 10351 , focuses on compensation for pumped storage hydropower projects .

this portion of the report summarizes the contents of each of the 11 sections in the senate version of s. 2012 that address hydropower .

where applicable , it also discusses comparable provisions in the house version .

the senate and house versions of s. 2012 contain provisions that would significantly impact nonfederal hydropower .

chief among these provisions is the one that would make ferc the lead agency for federal authorizations — and the lead agency for issuing a hydropower license .

with this provision , congress would be signaling that it wants ferc to play a more prominent role and to be the gatekeeper for the licensing process .

it could be argued that ferc could misuse this leadership authority if the commission does not fully cooperate with the other involved agencies .

on the other hand , having ferc as the lead agency could shorten the licensing process by facilitating cooperation among the stakeholders .

further , both bills set timeframes for steps within the licensing process , perhaps as an attempt to make issuing a license timelier .

additionally , both bills have provisions that could be viewed as controversial .

in particular , those provisions pertaining to mandatory conditioning authority and the new hydropower licensing schedule have invited debate .

for instance , some states and environmental groups are concerned that the bills provide ferc with a unique authority to set the schedule for issuing a hydropower license .

some contend that a schedule set by ferc could make the other involved parties unable to contribute to the hydropower licensing process as they have in the past and could potentially weaken their contribution to the environmental review process of such projects .

however , the national hydropower association argues that the bills would make the licensing process more coherent and collaborative and would require regulators to make more timely decisions "without narrowing the authorities of federal and state resources agencies and indian tribes under existing federal environmental laws. .

another controversial provision could be section 3001 ( b ) ( 2 ) of s. 2012 , as engrossed in the senate , which significantly broadens the statutory definition for renewable energy for the federal purchase requirement to include all hydropower .

some could argue that there should be limits to what type of hydropower qualifies for the purchase requirement .

others could contend that hydropower itself is sufficient to qualify for the federal purchase requirement without any relation to new capacity .

