the fair housing act was enacted as title viii of the civil rights act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-284 ) .

as initially enacted , the fair housing act prohibited discrimination in the sale , rental , or financing of housing based on race , color , religion , and national origin .

in 1974 , congress added sex as a protected category ( the housing and community development act , p.l .

93-383 ) , and in 1988 it added familial status and handicap ( the fair housing amendments act , p.l .

100-430 ) .

the fair housing act also prohibits retaliation when individuals attempt to exercise their rights ( or assist others in exercising their rights ) under the law .

this report discusses the fair housing act from the perspective of the activities undertaken and programs administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) and its office of fair housing and equal opportunity ( fheo ) .

for information about legal aspects of the fair housing act , such as types of discrimination , exceptions to the law , and discussion of court precedent , see crs report 95-710 , the fair housing act ( fha ) : a legal overview .

hud and fheo play a role in enforcing the fair housing act by receiving , investigating , and making determinations regarding complaints of fair housing act violations .

fheo also oversees federal funding to state , local , and nonprofit organizations that investigate fair housing complaints based on federal , state , or local laws through the fair housing assistance program and fair housing initiatives program .

the fair housing act also requires that hud affirmatively further fair housing .

while not defined in statute , affirmatively furthering fair housing has been found by courts to mean doing more than simply refraining from discrimination , and working to end discrimination and segregation .

in july 2015 , hud released new regulations that govern how certain recipients of hud funding ( those receiving community planning and development formula grants and public housing authorities ) must affirmatively further fair housing .

however , as of the date of this report , hud had delayed implementation of new regulations .

additionally , hud and fheo have taken steps to protect against discrimination not explicitly directed against members of classes protected under the fair housing act — issuing regulations to prevent discrimination in hud programs based on sexual orientation and gender identity , and providing guidance to prevent discrimination that may arise from criminal background checks , nuisance ordinances , and failure to provide housing to those who do not speak english .

after a brief summary of the fair housing act , this report discusses each of these fair housing activities , as well as two other initiatives administered by fheo , limited english proficiency and section 3 , the latter of which provides economic opportunities for low - and very low - income persons .

the fair housing act protects specified groups from discrimination in obtaining and maintaining housing .

the act applies to the rental or sale of dwelling units with exceptions for single - family homes ( as long as the owner does not own more than three single - family homes ) and dwellings with up to four units where one is owner - occupied .

discrimination based on the following characteristics is prohibited under the act: race color religion — the statute provides an exemption for religious organizations to rent or sell property they own or operate to members of the same religion ( as long as membership is not restricted based on race , color , or national origin ) .

national origin sex — courts have found discrimination based on sex to include sexual harassment , and hud regulations establish standards for quid pro quo and hostile environment sexual harassment that violates the fair housing act .

however , sex does not expressly include sexual orientation .

note , however , that discrimination based on nonconformity with gender stereotypes may be covered by the fair housing act as discrimination based on sex .

for more information , see crs report 95-710 , the fair housing act ( fha ) : a legal overview , by david h. carpenter .

familial status — the statute defines familial status to mean parents or others having custody of one or more children under age 18 .

familial status discrimination does not apply to housing dedicated to older persons .

handicap — the statute defines handicap as having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities , having a record of such impairment , or being regarded as having such an impairment .

regulations provide lists of conditions that may constitute physical or mental impairments .

major life activities means "functions such as caring for one's self , performing manual tasks , walking , seeing , hearing , speaking , breathing , learning and working. .

note that states and localities may have fair housing laws with broader protections than those encompassed in the federal fair housing act , including such protected classes as age , sexual orientation , or source of income ( prohibiting discrimination against those relying on government subsidies to pay for housing ) .

the fair housing act protects individuals in the covered classes from discrimination in a range of activities involving housing .

some of the specific types of activities that are prohibited include the following: refusing to rent or sell , refusing to negotiate for a rental or sale , or otherwise making a dwelling unavailable based on protected class .

discriminating in the terms , conditions , or privileges of sale or rental or in the services and facilities provided in connection with a sale or rental .

making , printing , or publishing notices , statements , or advertisements that indicate preference , limitation , or discrimination in connection with a sale or rental based on protected class .

representing that a dwelling is not available for inspection , sale , or rental based on protected class .

inducing , for profit , someone to sell or rent based on the representation that members of a protected class are moving to the neighborhood ( sometimes referred to as blockbusting ) .

refusing to allow reasonable modifications or reasonable accommodations for persons with a disability .

reasonable modifications involve physical changes to the property while reasonable accommodations involve changes in rules , policies , practices , or services to accommodate disabilities .

discriminating in "residential real estate related transactions," including the provision of loans and selling , brokering , or appraising property .

retaliating ( i.e. , coercing , intimidating , threatening , or interfering ) against anyone attempting to exercise rights under the fair housing act .

hud , together with state and local fair housing agencies and private fair housing organizations , investigates fair housing complaints .

hud receives complaints from individuals who believe they have been subject to discrimination or are about to experience discrimination .

if the discrimination takes place in a state or locality with its own similar fair housing enforcement agency , sometimes referred to as a fair housing assistance program ( fhap ) agency , hud must refer the complaint to that agency .

 ( see the " fair housing assistance program ( fhap ) " section of this report for more information about state and local agencies. ) .

in addition , if a complaint involves a challenge to zoning or land use laws , then hud must refer the case to the department of justice ( doj ) .

hud also refers complaints with possible criminal violations or patterns or practices of discrimination to doj .

once an individual has filed a complaint with hud , or hud has filed a complaint on its own initiative , a notice is served on the party alleged to have discriminated .

that party , in turn , has the opportunity to file a response to the complaint .

hud investigates complaints to determine if there is reasonable cause to believe a discriminatory practice has occurred or is about to occur .

while an investigation is ongoing , hud may also engage in conciliation to try to reach an agreement between the parties .

conciliation requires voluntary participation of both parties .

relief can be sought both for the aggrieved party and for the public interest .

if parties do not reach an agreement , then hud determines whether there is reasonable cause to believe discrimination occurred or was about to occur .

no reasonable cause: if hud finds no reasonable cause to believe that discrimination occurred , then it dismisses the complaint .

while not part of the statutory process , hud may allow the person submitting the complaint to ask for reconsideration of the denial .

reasonable cause: if hud finds reasonable cause to believe that discrimination occurred , it issues a charge — a written statement of facts on which the determination of reasonable cause is based .

either party may request that the case be heard in court , but if neither party makes this election , then the case is heard before an administrative law judge .

if the case goes to federal court , then hud transfers the case to doj .

aggrieved parties may seek actual monetary damages .

the law also allows an administrative law judge to impose a civil penalty "to vindicate the public interest" ( amounts vary based on whether there have been previous infractions ) and to order injunctive relief .

if an individual withdraws a complaint , no longer cooperates , or cannot be reached for follow - up , then hud closes the complaint as an administrative closure .

in fy2016 , there were 1,366 complaints filed with hud .

of those , 2.5% led to hud issuing a charge , 35.8% were settled through conciliation , and 37.7% resulted in a finding of no reasonable cause .

the remainder of complaints either had an administrative closure ( where complainants did not continue to pursue their complaints ) , were withdrawn with a resolution , or were referred to doj .

for more information on complaints , see " hud and fhap agency complaint and enforcement data . .

hud oversees two programs that promote fair housing at the state and local level: the fair housing assistance program ( fhap ) and the fair housing initiatives program ( fhip ) .

fhap funds state and local fair housing agencies , and fhip funds eligible entities that largely include private nonprofit organizations .

these recipients in turn supplement hud's efforts to promote fair housing , detect discrimination , investigate complaints , and enforce the fair housing law .

the following subsections describe fhap and fhip and provide funding levels for the programs .

hud reports the number of fair housing complaints it receives as well as those received by fhap agencies .

in recent years , the number of complaints filed with both hud and fhap agencies has declined , from a high of 10,552 in fy2008 to 8,385 in fy2016 , the most recent year in which data are available .

during this time period , the number of fhap agencies decreased from 108 operating at the end of fy2008 to 85 at the end of fy2016 .

in addition , complaints received by private fair housing organizations ( those not receiving fhap funding ) , as reported by the national fair housing alliance , decreased slightly between 2008 and 2015 , with about 500 fewer requests in 2015 than the 20,173 reported in 2008 .

see figure 2 for hud and fhap agency complaints between fy2005 and fy2016 .

complaints filed with hud and fhap agencies rarely result in charges against housing providers .

in fact , in many cases there is a finding of no reasonable cause to pursue the complaint — 38% of complaints for hud and 51% for fhap agencies in fy2016 .

hud conciliated and settled 36% of cases in fy2016 , with fhap agencies doing so for 29% of cases .

only 3% of complaints to hud and 5% of those to fhap agencies resulted in a charge being filed in fy2016 .

approximately a quarter of complaints for hud were either administrative closures , meaning generally that complainants did not continue to pursue their complaints , or were withdrawn after some kind of resolution .

for fhap agencies , 15% of cases were either administrative closures or withdrawn with resolution .

see figure 3 for hud and fhap agency complaint dispositions in fy2016 .

recent years have brought a change in the types of complaints received by hud and fhap agencies .

approximately 10 years ago , in fy2005 , the percentages of complaints based on race and disability were nearly equal: 38% and 41% , respectively .

however , by fy2016 the percentage of complaints based on disability increased to 59% , and race declined to 26% .

 ( note that in calculating complaint percentages hud takes into account the fact that one case may allege multiple bases for discrimination .

as a result , the sum of percentages for all types of discrimination exceeds 100%. ) .

other protected categories — familial status , national origin , sex , religion , and color — have remained at about the same levels during the same time period .

hud also reports the number of complaints based on retaliation , which have increased from approximately 5% in fy2005 to 9% in fy2016 .

see figure 4 for complaints filed by protected class in fy2016 .

the high percentage of complaints based on disability may in part have to do with additional protections for people with disabilities .

unlike other protected statuses , the fair housing act imposes affirmative duties on housing providers to make "reasonable accommodations" for individuals with disabilities .

under the law , it is discriminatory to refuse to allow residents with disabilities to make physical changes to the premises , at their own expense , in order to afford them full enjoyment of the premises .

examples of reasonable accommodations include changes to a unit such as widening doorways , installing a ramp or grab bars , or lowering cabinets .

in addition , the law gives residents with disabilities the right to request "reasonable accommodations" in the rules , policies , practices , or services that may ordinarily apply to housing residents .

it is considered discrimination under the fair housing act to refuse to make a reasonable accommodation in order to give residents with disabilities an equal opportunity to use and enjoy their dwelling unit .

examples of reasonable accommodations include making parking spaces available to residents with disabilities or allowing assistance animals in a property that does not otherwise allow pets .

an accommodation is not considered reasonable if it imposes an undue financial or administrative burden , or if it fundamentally alters the nature of the housing provider's operations .

in fy2016 , the failure to make a reasonable accommodation was the second - most frequently raised issue in complaints , representing 40% of hud and fhap complaints raised in cases filed ( after discriminatory terms , conditions , privileges , services , and facilities in the rental or sale of property ) .

in recent years , hud has issued regulations and guidance to protect individuals from discrimination that may not be explicitly directed against protected classes under the fair housing act .

in one case , hud used its authority to prevent discrimination in the programs it administers by issuing regulations prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity .

hud has also released guidance to inform housing providers and localities about policies that may seem facially neutral but could have discriminatory effects in violation of the fair housing act .

these include policies regarding criminal background checks , local nuisance ordinances that prohibit certain behaviors , and treatment of people with limited english proficiency .

the following subsections describe hud's regulations regarding equal access to housing as well as several guidance documents hud released during 2016 .

in addition to prohibiting discrimination , the fair housing act , since its inception , has required hud and other federal agencies that administer programs related to housing and urban development to administer their programs in a way that affirmatively furthers fair housing .

what "affirmatively further fair housing" ( affh ) means is not defined in statute .

various courts , in decisions regarding hud's obligations , have concluded that it means more than refraining from discrimination .

for example , a federal court decision in 1973 interpreting the affh section of the fair housing act regarding residents of public housing stated action must be taken to fulfill , as much as possible , the goal of open , integrated residential housing patterns and to prevent the increase of segregation , in ghettos , of racial groups whose lack of opportunities the act was designed to combat .

a 1987 federal appellate court decision looked at the legislative history of the fair housing act , saying that the "law's supporters saw the ending of discrimination as a means toward truly opening the nation's housing stock to persons of every race and creed. .

and with that goal in mind , the court stated this broader goal suggests an intent that hud do more than simply not discriminate itself ; it reflects the desire to have hud use its grant programs to assist in ending discrimination and segregation , to the point where the supply of genuinely open housing increases .

in addition to hud , the affh requirement has also been applied , via statute , regulation , and competitive grants , to recipients of hud funding .

the requirement applies to communities , states , and insular areas that receive formula funds through the community development block grant ( cdbg ) , home investment partnerships , housing opportunities for persons with aids ( hopwa ) , and emergency solutions grants ( esg ) programs , as well as to public housing authorities ( phas ) that administer both public housing and section 8 programs .

applicants for hud's competitive grants are required to certify that they will affirmatively further fair housing as part of the grant application process .

in addition to administering fair housing programs and enforcing the law , hud's office of fair housing and equal opportunity ( fheo ) oversees the section 3 requirement and hud's compliance with limited english proficiency requirements .

section 3 requires certain recipients of hud funds to make attempts to hire and train low - income persons to work on projects for which the recipients receive federal funding .

limited english proficiency ( lep ) requirements are federal government - wide and are meant to ensure that lep individuals have access to federal programs .

section 3 of the housing and urban development act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-448 , as amended ) is meant to provide employment and training opportunities for low - and very low - income persons , particularly those residing in assisted housing .

the law applies to public and indian housing authorities in their use of operating and capital funds , and to grant recipients of hud housing and community development construction or rehabilitation funds that exceed $200,000 , or the recipients' contractors with contracts exceeding $100,000 .

public and indian housing authorities: the law requires that public and indian housing authorities and those they contract with "make their best efforts" to provide employment opportunities for low - and very low - income individuals in the projects that they undertake with hud funding .

housing authorities are to prioritize , in this order , individuals living in the housing for which funds are used , those living in other hud - assisted housing , participants in the department of labor program youthbuild , and those living in the metropolitan area where the funds are used .

in addition , housing authorities and their contractors are to make their best efforts to contract with businesses that provide economic opportunities for low - and very - low income individuals , using the same priorities for individuals who are employed by the businesses .

other hud funding recipients: for entities that receive other hud funding for housing construction or rehabilitation and community development projects , the hud secretary is to ensure that "to the greatest extent feasible" the fund recipients provide opportunities for training and employment related to the project to low - and very low - income residents in the metropolitan area .

priority is to be given to those residing in the service area of the project or neighborhood where it is located and to youthbuild participants .

the law also directs the secretary to ensure , to the greatest extent feasible , that recipients of funds for these projects contract with businesses that provide economic opportunities for low - and very low - income residents .

section 3 does not apply if housing authorities or other fund recipients do not need to employ additional people to undertake a project .

fund recipients can demonstrate compliance with the "greatest extent feasible" requirement by meeting numerical goals set out in the regulations , but meeting these numerical goals is not required .

when interim program regulations were last published for section 3 , in 1994 , the appendix to the regulations included examples of efforts section 3-covered entities could undertake for training and employment opportunities .

on march 27 , 2015 , hud released proposed section 3 regulations to replace the interim regulations published in 1994 .

among the changes in the proposed rule would be clarification of what it means to provide employment and training opportunities "to the greatest extent feasible. .

under the proposed rule , covered entities would either meet numerical goals or provide written justifications explaining what actions were taken and impediments encountered in trying to meet the goal .

fheo oversees hud's efforts to ensure that persons with limited english proficiency have access to hud programs .

title vi of the civil rights act prohibits discrimination in federally assisted programs on the basis of race , color , or national origin .

one aspect of this prohibition has been ensuring that lep individuals have access to federal programs ( lack of access may be considered discrimination based on national origin ) .

in 2000 , president clinton signed an executive order to require federal agencies to publish guidance for recipients of federal funding about ensuring that lep individuals have access to programs and services .

in 2007 , hud issued final guidance to recipients of hud funding about factors to consider in meeting the needs of lep clients .

hud's guidance applies to all recipients of funding , including state and local governments , phas , and for - profit and nonprofit housing providers , and also includes recipients that receive funds indirectly , such as subgrantees of state cdbg or home grants .

the guidance directs recipients "to take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to their programs and activities by lep persons. .

the guidance lays out four factors for recipients to consider in determining how to serve lep clients: ( 1 ) the number or proportion of lep clients likely to be served or encountered by the recipient , ( 2 ) how frequently eligible lep persons are encountered by the recipient , ( 3 ) the nature and importance of the program or service in people's lives , and ( 4 ) the recipient's resources and the cost of lep services .

depending on a recipient's analysis of these factors , it may opt to provide translation services on an as - needed basis by contracting with translation companies ; or , if lep clients are more frequent , it may decide to hire either a translator or bilingual staff .

recipients may also decide to have a wide number of documents translated or translate only the most critical documents .

enforcement of lep requirements occurs through such avenues as compliance reviews or investigating complaints .

congress set aside $400,000 for hud to translate materials as part of the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

110-161 ) and has continued to set aside funding since that time , ranging from $300,000 to $500,000 .

funding has been used to translate hud documents , provide translation services at hud events , provide phone translations for callers to hud , and acquire technology , among other services .

further , the campaign "hud speaks," launched in 2015 , is meant to communicate the availability of hud services to lep persons through posters , desk guides , and language cards where lep clients can indicate their native language .

the table below shows fhap and fhip funding from fy1996 to the present .

