in response to concerns about access to medical care at many department of veterans affairs ( va ) hospitals and clinics across the country in spring 2014 , congress passed the veterans access , choice , and accountability act of 2014 ( vacaa , p.l .

113-146 , as amended ) .

on august 7 , 2014 , president obama signed the bill into law .

since the vacaa was enacted , congress has amended the act several times: p.l .

113-175 , p.l .

113-235 , p.l .

114-19 , p.l .

114-41 , p.l .

115-26 , p.l .

115-46 , p.l .

115-96 , and p.l .

115-182 .

in addition , the va has issued implementation regulations and guidance on several occasions in response to the changes to vacaa and challenges encountered during implementation of the law .

table 1 provides major highlights pertaining to the veterans choice program ( vcp ) ―a new , temporary program authorized by section 101 of the vacaa that allows eligible veterans to receive medical care in the community .

on june 6 , 2018 , president donald trump signed the john s. mccain iii , daniel k. akaka , and samuel r. johnson va maintaining internal systems and strengthening integrated networks act of 2018 ( the va mission act of 2018 ) into law ( p.l .

115-182 ) .

section 101 of this act established a new permanent veterans community care program ( vccp ) that would replace vcp .

this new program is expected to be operational around june 6 , 2019 .

 ( the mission act of 2018 stipulates that vccp must be effective when the va determines that 75% of the amounts deposited in the veterans choice fund [vcf] have been exhausted , or when regulations are published by the va , which is no later than one year after the date of enactment of the va mission act — june 6 , 2019. ) .

this report provides details on how the vcp is being implemented .

it is meant to provide insight into the execution of the current vcp program that is still functioning until the new vccp program becomes operational sometime in june 2019 .

once an eligible veteran is authorized to receive necessary treatment , including follow - up appointments and ancillary and specialty medical services , under the vcp , a veteran may receive similar services that are offered through their personalized standard medical benefits package at a va facility .

va's standard medical benefits package includes ( but is not limited to ) inpatient and outpatient medical , surgical , and mental health care ; pharmaceuticals ; pregnancy and delivery services ; dental care ; and durable medical equipment , and prosthetic devices , among other things .

currently , 81 categories of medical services and procedures are authorized to be provided under vcp .

however , institutional long - term care and emergency care in non - va facilities are excluded from the vcp .

"it is important to note that the vcp does not provide guaranteed health care coverage or an unlimited medical benefit. .

these services are authorized and provided under separate statutory authorities outside the scope of vcp .

generally , all veterans have to be enrolled in the va health care system to receive care under the vcp .

once this initial criterion is met , a qualified veteran may choose to receive care through vcp .

veterans may become eligible for care under the vcp through one of four different pathways: 30-d ay w ait l ist ( wait - time eligible ) : a veteran is eligible for care through the vcp when he or she is informed , by a local va medical facility , that an appointment cannot be scheduled within 30 days of the clinically determined date of when the veteran's provider determines that he or she needs to be seen ( this category also includes care not offered at the veteran's primary va medical facility and a referral cannot be made to another va medical facility or federal facility ) , or within 30 days of the date of when the veteran wishes to be seen .

40 miles or m ore d i stance ( mileage eligible ) : a veteran is eligible for care through the vcp when he or she lives 40 miles or more from a va medical facility that has a full - time primary care physician .

40 m iles or l ess d istance ( mileage eligible ) : a veteran is eligible for care through the vcp when he or she resides in a location , other than one in guam , american samoa , or the republic of the philippines , and travels by air , boat , or ferry in order to seek care from his or her local va facility ; or incurs a traveling burden based on environmental factors , geographic challenges , or a medical condition .

state or t erritory without a f ull - s ervice va medical f acility: a veteran is eligible for care through the vcp when his or her residence is more than 20 miles from a va medical facility and located in either alaska , hawaii , new hampshire ( excluding veterans who live 20 miles from the white river junction vamc ) , or u.s. territory ( excluding puerto rico ) .

table 2 provides a breakdown of the unique number of veterans utilizing the vcp , by eligibility category , from november 2014 through august 28 , 2018 , unless otherwise noted .

a veteran who believes that he or she meets one of the eligibility criteria to receive care through the vcp is to have his or her eligibility status confirmed by local va staff .

a high - level overview of the eligibility process to access care through the vcp is illustrated in figure 1 .

local va facility staff members are to review clinical and administrative records of the veteran to determine the appropriate medical benefits package and clinical criterion .

confirmation of the veteran's eligibility status is generally determined within 10 business days from when the request for confirmation was submitted .

veterans who are found ineligible to participate in the vcp are to be given instructions , in their notification letters , on how to appeal the va's decision .

also see appendix a for a detailed high - level workflow of how care is obtained through vcp .

eligible veterans have two options for receiving health care services under the veterans choice program ( vcp ) .

first , veterans may choose to receive their medical care from a va provider .

a veteran who chooses this option is to receive an appointment with a va provider .

the veteran may be offered a va appointment that is more than 30 days out or at a facility that is more than 40 miles from the veteran's residence .

if an offered appointment does not accommodate the veteran's clinical needs , the local va staff may place the veteran on an electronic waiting list until an alternate appointment becomes available .

at any time , the veteran ( based on the availability of clinical appointments ) may choose to receive his or her medical services from a va community care provider .

the second option allows veterans to receive health care services from a va community care provider ( vcp provider ) who accepts eligible vcp veterans .

veterans who choose this option are to have their names and medical authorization information sent to a vcp provider of their choice .

at any time , veterans ( based on the availability of clinical appointments ) may choose to receive their medical services from a va provider .

under the vcp , several entities and providers are eligible to provide care and services .

these include , among others , federally qualified health centers , department of defense ( dod ) medical facilities , indian health service outpatient health facilities or facilities operated by a tribe or tribal organization , hospitals , physicians , and nonphysician practitioners or entities participating in the medicare or medicaid program , an aging and disability resource center , an area agency on aging , or a state agency or a center for independent living .

va employees are excluded from providing care or services under vcp , unless the provider is an employee of va , and is not acting within the scope of such employment while providing hospital care or medical services through the vcp .

generally , vcp providers "must maintain at least the same or similar credentials and licenses as those required of va's health care providers. .

the veterans choice program ( vcp ) is not a health insurance plan for veterans .

under the vcp , veterans are given the option of receiving care in their local communities instead of waiting for a va appointment and / or enduring traveling burdens to reach a va facility .

all veterans who are enrolled in the va health care system are to be mailed a vcp card .

the card lists relevant information about the vcp .

many veterans have attempted to use the vcp card as an insurance card .

the vcp card may not be used to pay for medical services performed outside of or within the va .

specifically , the vcp card does not replace veterans' identification cards , guarantee eligibility under the vcp , or provide health insurance - like benefits ( i.e. , the vcp , like all va health care , is not health insurance ) .

veterans who are enrolled in va health care do not pay premiums , deductibles , or coinsurances for their medical services .

however , they may be required to pay a fixed copayment amount ( for nonservice - connected disabilities or conditions ) as shown below .

when veterans receive care at a va facility , they do not pay copayments at the time of their medical appointments ; copayment rates are determined by the va after services are furnished — based on if the care was for a service - connected or nonservice - connected condition .

therefore , veterans' out - of - pocket costs under the vcp are the same as if they were receiving care and services from a va provider in a va facility — if a veteran does not pay any copayments at va health care facilities , the veteran will not have to pay any copayments under the vcp .

for example a veteran could pay $50 copayments for a specialty care visit and $15 for a primary care visit for a nonservice - connected disability or condition .

a veteran in priority groups 2 thru 8 could pay a copayment between $5 and $11 per 30-day or less supply of medication .

all veterans are exempt from paying copayments for services and medications that are related to a service - connected disability or condition .

the va defines other health insurance ( ohi ) as commercial insurance .

commercial insurance , often referred to as private insurance , is not funded by federal and state taxes .

this type of insurance is offered by companies such as blue cross and blue shield , aetna , cigna , and the kaiser foundation .

plans purchased through the state health exchanges are also considered as ohi .

in addition , veterans who purchase commercial insurance plans agree to cost - sharing responsibilities .

such cost - sharing obligations include copayments , deductibles , and coinsurance ( eg , 80 / 20 rule: 80% insurer responsibility / 20% patient responsibility ) .

due to various issues related to primary payment responsibility and veterans therefore experiencing adverse credit reporting to credit bureaus or debt collections by collections agencies , congress enacted p.l .

115-26 , which amended p.l .

113-146 and made va the primary payer for veterans with ohi who seek care for nonservice - connected conditions through the vcp .

this change went into effect on april 19 , 2017 .

the va would coordinate with a veteran's ohi and recover any costs , and bill the veteran for any copayments that the veteran would be responsible for similar to what they would have paid had they received care within a va medical facility ( see figure 3 ) .

community care providers or the tpas are no longer required to collect copays , cost - shares , or deductibles from veterans with ohi .

medicare , medicaid , or tricare are not considered ohi plans under the vcp .

guidance on rates for the delivery of care is outlined in table 4 .

as stated before , first , the veterans choice program providers are to receive their reimbursements from the tpa .

then the va is to reimburse the third - party administrator .

eligible va community care providers who decide to participate under the pc3 network ( rather than the choice network ) may incur reimbursement rates lower than those of medicare .

if these providers move to the choice network , they may negotiate for a similar rate as contracted under the pc3 network .

veterans and va community care providers may call the community care call center to discuss billing issues .

these issues range from the need to resolve a debt collection to inappropriately billed services .

appendix a .

veterans choice program ( vcp ) high - level work flow appendix b. va information pertaining to the end of the contract with health ne .

