federal programs intended to help poor and low - income people are of ongoing interest to congress .

the federal government spends billions of dollars annually on a wide range of low - income benefits and services and lawmakers routinely conduct oversight and consider legislation related to these programs .

deliberations typically focus on individual programs or their overarching authorizing laws .

however , members and staff also look at low - income policy broadly and have questions about low - income programs and spending in the aggregate .

for example , how much does the federal government spend altogether each year on programs specifically intended for low - income people ? .

how has this spending changed over time ? .

how is spending allocated among various categories of low - income benefits and services ? .

these questions may appear straightforward but their answers are complex .

this is the third in a series of crs reports that address these questions .

the first task — seemingly simple but in fact highly challenging — was to identify which federal activities can be characterized as "low - income" programs ; that is , programs that are not intended to be universal but that specifically target benefits or services toward low - income people or communities .

a second task was to identify a consistent and reliable source of spending data , so that dollar amounts for individual programs could be meaningfully combined and compared .

finally , programs were grouped into categories ( eg , health care , cash aid , food assistance , etc .

 ) , a relatively straightforward process for most programs but more complicated for those with multiple purposes .

appendix a explains how crs addressed these challenges .

this report focuses primarily on spending trends , both overall and by category .

the report includes some limited programmatic details ; however , previous versions provide more extensive information on the specifics of each program included in the spending totals .

the report begins with a discussion of aggregate trends in low - income spending from fy2008 through fy2015 .

it then looks at trends by category and in the 10 largest low - income programs ( which now comprise more than 80% of total low - income spending ) .

medicaid is the single largest program discussed in the report , and health care is the largest category ( due to the size of medicaid ) .

the report briefly discusses the dominance of health care and explains the decision not to include spending for premium credits and cost - sharing subsidies under the aca .

the report continues with a description of trends in spending for non - health low - income programs , both overall and by category .

a series of appendices explains the methodology used for the report ( appendix a ) , provides spending and limited information for each of the programs included ( appendix b ) , and identifies additional reports that might be of interest ( appendix c ) .

key findings appear in the summary , immediately before the table of contents .

the following sections discuss trends in federal low - income spending overall , by category , and for the 10 largest programs .

as noted above , "low - income" spending is defined here to include spending only for programs that are explicitly targeted on people or communities with low incomes .

in general , spending refers to obligations ( as explained in appendix a ) .

as the health care category has grown as a share of all low - income spending , a declining share has gone to the remaining categories of benefits and services: cash aid , food assistance , education , housing and development , social services , employment and training , and energy assistance .

because health care dominates low - income spending and masks trends in the other categories , the following sections discuss spending solely for non - health programs , overall and by category .

in nominal dollars , federal spending for low - income programs rose by half ( 51% ) over the eight - year period from fy2008 through fy2015 .

this growth was fueled initially by responses to the recession , as arra pumped additional money into the economy and high unemployment and declining incomes qualified more people for benefits .

the economy slowly improved and stimulus spending subsided ; however , overall spending levels did not return to pre - recession levels .

congress enacted the aca in 2010 , which authorized an expansion of medicaid and further drove up low - income spending in fy2014 and fy2015 .

health care is the largest category of low - income benefits ; it now accounts for more than half of such spending due to the disproportionate size of medicaid .

in its rate of growth , health care is second only to food assistance , which grew slightly faster than health care over the eight - year period .

spending for the other non - health categories also rose over the period but at a slower rate .

further , most of the increased spending in non - health categories occurred in the early years of the period in direct response to the recession .

food assistance is the only non - health category to have increased its share of low - income spending from fy2008 to fy2015 .

other categories either remained flat or declined as a share of spending .

these spending patterns do not reflect congressional decisions about the amount or composition of low - income spending that should occur in the aggregate in any given year .

programs included in these spending totals were created independently of one another , at different times and in response to different perceived policy problems .

their size is a function of their design and budgetary classification ( mandatory , including whether open - ended or capped , versus discretionary ) ; congressional budget and appropriations processes ; external influences affecting the cost of goods and services ; and numerous other economic , demographic , social , and political factors .

important distinctions among low - income programs are masked when looking at total spending .

for example , most low - income health spending occurs under medicaid , but the category also includes programs targeted on the specific needs of certain elderly individuals , veterans , women and children , indians , refugees , individuals living with hiv or aids , people living in medically underserved areas , and others .

moreover , medicaid itself is a multitude of programs , with each state operating its own program within federal parameters and providing both primary and acute health care , in addition to long - term services and supports , to a diverse population including children , pregnant women , adults , individuals with disabilities , and the elderly .

cash aid is the category that most resembles traditional perceptions of "welfare. .

this category includes cash assistance under tanf , which was the successor to the new deal - era program of aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) .

however , cash assistance under tanf is a relatively small program within this category ( $6.4 billion in fy2015 ) , which also includes the much larger eitc and actc ( $81 billion combined in fy2015 ) .

these two refundable tax credits are available only to people who are working and primarily benefit working families with children .

the cash aid category also includes ssi ( $62 billion in fy2015 ) , which is exclusively for low - income elderly and disabled individuals , and pensions for needy veterans .

while food assistance does not directly provide cash , snap subsidizes the purchase of food and arguably frees up income that would otherwise be needed for this basic necessity .

snap , like medicaid , is an open - ended entitlement to individuals , so that anyone eligible is served if they apply .

on the other hand , housing assistance — which also frees up income otherwise required for a necessity — is made up primarily of discretionary programs , such as section 8 and public housing , and serves a relatively small fraction of eligible households .

collectively , the programs in this report provide income support through cash or near - cash benefits , but also provide services ( eg , education , community development , social services , employment and training ) intended to improve the well - being and self - sufficiency of low - income people and communities .

some benefits are provided directly to individuals but many are delivered through state and local governments and private nonprofit organizations .

in addition to income eligibility criteria , some programs impose other requirements on beneficiaries , including rules regarding work or participation in training .

in summary , programs included in this report are extremely diverse in their purpose , design , and target population .

the report tells a story — that low - income spending has grown sharply in recent years and is dominated by spending for health care — but given the diversity among programs that serve low - income people , further generalizations require additional information and should be made with care .

appendix a .

methodology selection of low - income programs programs were selected for inclusion in this report series if they ( 1 ) have provisions that base an individual's eligibility or priority for service on a measure ( or proxy ) of low income ; ( 2 ) target resources in some way ( eg , through allocation formulas , variable matching rates ) using a measure ( or proxy ) of low income ; or ( 3 ) prioritize services to low - income segments of a larger target population .

no universal definition or specific dollar amount was used to define low income for purposes of this report .

however , most programs use a multiple of the federal poverty guidelines or other measures to target resources toward people and communities at the low end of the income distribution .

a few programs without an explicit low - income provision were included because either their target population is disproportionately poor or their purpose clearly indicates a presumption that participants will be low - income .

such programs that disproportionately serve low - income people include the indian health service , homeless assistance grants , indian education programs , title i migrant education , and indian human services .

programs with purposes that presume a low - income target population include adult basic education and the social services block grant .

federal student loan programs were initially considered for inclusion because they determine benefit levels through the same need - analysis system used for pell grants and several smaller postsecondary education programs .

however , this system results in students from relatively well - off families receiving assistance , as there is no absolute income ceiling on eligibility .

pell grants are structured in such a way that the majority of recipients are low - income and the lowest - income students receive the largest benefits .

student loan programs are not as specifically targeted and therefore are not included in the report .

deliberations about whether to include the additional child tax credit ( actc ) reached a different conclusion .

the regular child tax credit ( ctc ) is a nonrefundable credit and phases out at relatively high income levels .

the actc is a refundable credit that allows families with no or insufficient tax liability to get all or part of the benefit they would otherwise receive from the ctc .

because of the refundable nature and other design features of the actc , it serves predominantly lower - income families .

for example , for tax year 2013 , 89% of returns that claimed the actc were filed by families with adjusted gross income ( agi ) below $40,000 and 88% of the credit went to such families .

thus , the actc is included in the report .

as explained earlier in " are aca premium credits and subsidies "low - income" benefits ? .

" , premium credits and cost - sharing subsidies provided under the aca are not included in this report .

fy2014 is the first year in which spending occurred under these provisions and data are not yet available on the incomes of those who received the benefits .

individuals with incomes below 100% of the federal poverty guidelines are generally precluded from benefiting , and eligibility goes as high as 400% of poverty for the premium credits and 250% for cost - sharing subsidies .

as income data become available , the question of whether to include these obligations in future versions of the report will be revisited .

because the report includes only mandatory and discretionary spending programs , it does not include tax provisions except mandatory spending for the refundable portion of the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and the refundable actc .

two programs have been added since the previous report in this series was published in 2015 .

guardianship assistance under title iv - e of the social security act had seen spending since fy2010 ; however , obligations for that program did not reach that report's $100 million threshold for inclusion until fy2015 .

preschool development grants had been inadvertently overlooked in previous reports in the series , although spending under that program ( and its predecessor ) had exceeded the $100 million threshold since the program began in fy2011 .

preschool development grants have now been added to the spending totals in all relevant years .

categorization of programs most programs are easily assigned to broad categories , such as health care , cash aid , food assistance , or education .

a few , however , have multiple purposes or allowable activities .

for some of these programs , spending can be disaggregated into the relevant categories .

for example , using state reporting of actual expenditures , it is possible to estimate the amount of tanf obligations attributable to cash aid , social services , and employment and training .

other programs cannot be disaggregated and must be assigned to a single category .

for example , transitional cash and medical services for refugees was categorized as health care , and indian human services was categorized as social services although it also provides cash and housing assistance .

the social services category , in general , is not well - defined and some analysts might assign some programs — and therefore dollars — differently .

head start , for example , could be considered an education program because its purpose is to promote school readiness ; however , it supports a very broad range of activities ( including activities for children ages 0-3 in its early head start component ) that can best be characterized collectively as social services .

foster care and adoption assistance both give cash to families or other care providers , but income support is not these programs' purpose or sole use of funding .

foster care subsidizes maintenance payments and administrative activities ( including case planning ) on behalf of children who cannot remain safely at home , and adoption assistance helps facilitate the adoption of children who would otherwise lack permanent homes .

thus , these programs , as well as guardianship assistance , were categorized as social services and not cash aid .

likewise , maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting was included in social services , rather than health care , because of the broad range of its intended purposes .

selection of spending measure new obligations incurred in the indicated fiscal year were chosen as the measure of spending for this report , although for many programs readers may be more accustomed to seeing budget authority ( primarily appropriations ) or outlays .

these spending concepts are related .

congress and the president enact budget authority through appropriations measures or authorizing laws .

budget authority in turn allows federal agencies to incur obligations , through actions such as entering into contracts , employing personnel , and submitting purchase orders .

outlays represent the actual payment of these obligations , usually in the form of electronic transfers or checks issued by the treasury department .

obligations are used in this report because they are the most consistent measure available at the necessary level of detail for the majority of programs .

the source of obligations data is the u.s. budget appendix for the second fiscal year ( eg , fy2017 budget appendix for final fy2015 obligations , fy2016 budget appendix for final fy2014 obligations ) .

obligations were not available or not appropriate , for reasons explained below , for a small number of programs .

because obligations were not available at the necessary program level , appropriations were used for the following: transitional cash and medical services for refugees , breast / cervical cancer early detection , the title i migrant education program , preschool development grants , social services and targeted assistance for refugees , and foster grandparents .

for veterans' medical care , the u.s. budget appendix shows obligations for the entire program and not solely the income - tested component .

for the 2011 and 2015 reports in this series , crs calculated estimated obligations for priority group 5 veterans ( needy veterans without service - connected disabilities ) , using data from the department of veterans affairs ( va ) on obligations for priority groups 1-6 and 7-8 and the number of patients receiving care by individual priority group .

for this report , however , crs obtained data directly from the va on expenditures specifically for priority group 5 veterans .

the u.s. budget appendix also does not show obligations solely for the low - income subsidy portion of the medicare part d prescription drug program .

therefore , this report uses aggregate reimbursements for the low - income subsidy for the calendar year ( instead of fiscal year ) , available from the annual report of the medicare trustees .

as noted above , tanf obligations provided in the u.s. budget appendix were disaggregated into the categories of cash aid , social services , and employment and training based on states' reporting to the department of health and human services of their actual expenditures .

the u.s. budget appendix includes obligations for the section 502 single - family rural housing loan program in combination with other programs in an aggregate amount for the rural housing insurance fund account .

thus , loan subsidy budget authority ( also found in the u.s. budget appendix ) was used for the section 502 program in the 2015 report and this report .

in the 2011 report , loan subsidy outlays were used , adjusted for re - estimates provided in the federal credit supplement to the u.s. budget for the relevant years ; however , budget authority has since been chosen as a simpler and more consistent measure .

finally , this report uses obligations from the u.s. budget appendix for the actc in fy2009 to fy2015 .

however , for fy2008 actc obligations shown in the u.s. budget appendix also include an unspecified amount for a one - time $300 per child tax rebate , authorized by the economic stimulus act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-185 ) , that was not targeted on low - income families .

that figure , which overstates the amount spent for the actc alone , was used in the 2011 report with appropriate caveats .

for the 2015 report and this report , however , data from the internal revenue service statistics of income for tax year 2007 are used to provide a more accurate picture of the actc in fy2008 .

spending threshold programs are included in this report if they had obligations in any year from fy2008 through fy2015 of at least $100 million .

to simplify the analysis without significantly changing the overall picture , smaller programs were excluded , even if they met the low - income criteria .

a few programs had spending above the threshold in some years but not in others .

spending totals cited throughout this report include these programs only for the years in which their obligations equaled or exceeded $100 million .

in other words , each year's spending total is a snapshot of spending in that year for low - income programs that had obligations totaling at least $100 million in that year .

 ( see appendix table b - 2 for all spending amounts for all programs in each year. ) .

comparison with predecessor crs report series from 1979 to 2006 , crs issued a series of reports , typically every other year , called cash and noncash benefits for persons with limited income .

that series was conceived and produced ( except for the last edition in 2006 ) by [author name scrubbed] , specialist in social policy , who retired from crs in 2004 .

in 2011 , crs began a new series of reports intended to replace the cash and noncash series .

this report is the third in that series .

the new report series uses different methodologies to select and categorize programs and measure spending ; therefore , it cannot be considered an update of cash and noncash for various reasons .

for example , the older series did not include certain programs that are now included , such as the low - income subsidy under medicare part d , title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act , and community development block grants .

the older series also had no minimum spending threshold , so it included smaller programs that are not included here .

in addition , the older series included student loans , which are no longer included for reasons explained above .

several programs were also categorized differently in the previous series ( eg , head start was categorized as education , foster care and adoption assistance as cash aid , and homeless assistance grants as social services ) .

the older series used different measures of spending for different programs , while the new series uses obligations wherever possible .

the older series also provided estimates of state - local spending , which are not included here because a consistent and reliable source is not available .

finally , the older series traced spending back to 1968 , which is beyond the scope of the current series .

changes in programs and appropriations accounts over time make it virtually impossible to trace obligations backward with precision .

appendix b .

detailed program tables the following tables provide specific information about programs included in this report .

programs are organized by category and listed within categories according to their catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) number .

table b - 1 lists all programs included in the report and indicates the federal administering agency and cfda number for each program .

the table also identifies a more detailed crs report for each program , where available .

table b - 2 shows obligations ( or another measure of spending , as noted ) for each program from fy2008 through fy2015 .

the table also indicates each program's budgetary classification ( mandatory or discretionary ) .

table b - 3 identifies , for each program , the general target population and the concept ( s ) used to determine individual income eligibility and ( if relevant ) the concept used to target federal resources broadly based on need .

the table indicates the general concept used but not the specific application .

for example , the table might indicate that federal poverty guidelines ( fpg ) are used as a concept in determining income eligibility for a particular program but it does not indicate the specific percentage of fpg that is used .

likewise , the table might show that a program uses formula allocation factors to direct federal resources toward areas with the greatest need but it does not identify the specific factors or their weighting .

readers are referred to the crs reports listed in table b - 1 or agency websites for these details .

table b - 4 shows the type of federal assistance provided ( typically formula grants , competitive or discretionary grants , or direct benefits ) and the immediate recipients of this assistance .

as noted in the table , immediate recipient refers to the level of government or the organization that directly receives the federal grant or award .

many programs require that funds be further distributed ( by formula or other criteria ) to other units of government or organizations .

for example , federal grants may be awarded by formula to states , but states are then required to subaward these funds to local governments or other entities .

those subawards are not shown in the table .

the table also indicates whether a program has provisions for participation by u.s. territories or residents or organizations located within the territories .

the specific details of these provisions are not provided in the table ; readers are referred to statutory language or federal agency websites for this information .

both table b - 3 and table b - 4 were originally prepared for inclusion in the first of the current report series , which included more detailed discussions of the concepts presented .

see crs report r41625 , federal benefits and services for people with low income: programs , policy , and spending , fy2008-fy2009 .

appendix c. related reading the following reports provide cross - cutting information on federal low - income policy and programs .

see table b - 1 for links to crs reports on individual programs .

crs report r41625 , federal benefits and services for people with low income: programs , policy , and spending , fy2008-fy2009 , by [author name scrubbed] .

first in the current report series .

in addition to discussion of spending trends and fact sheets on each program , it includes a brief history of federal low - income policy , discussion of concepts used to define individual eligibility for benefits and services ( eg , federal poverty guidelines and others ) , discussion of mechanisms used to target resources on the basis of need ( eg , formula allocation factors and cost - sharing rules ) , discussion of the types of federal grants ( formula , competitive , direct benefits to individuals ) used to provide assistance , and related policies such as matching requirements .

crs report r43863 , federal benefits and services for people with low income: programs and spending , fy2008-fy2013 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

second in the current report series .

in addition to discussion of spending trends and fact sheets on each program , it includes a brief discussion of the budgetary classification of low - income programs ( discretionary versus mandatory ) , and analysis of spending under the 10 largest programs by population group ( aged , disabled , families with children with and without adult workers , and childless adult couples with and without workers ) .

crs report r44327 , need - tested benefits: estimated eligibility and benefit receipt by families and individuals , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

examines nine major programs in fy2012 and estimates the number of people who are eligible and who actually receive benefits , the types of families that are more likely to receive benefits , the amounts that families typically receive , whether families typically receive benefits under one or multiple programs , and the types of families that are likely to receive larger benefits .

crs report r44211 , poverty in the united states in 2014: in brief , by [author name scrubbed] .

presents detailed statistics on the incidence of poverty among various demographic groups and by geography , and compares measures of poverty under the official federal poverty guidelines and the "research supplemental poverty measure. .

crs report r43731 , poverty: major themes in past debates and current proposals , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

provides a short history of key federal policies enacted over the past century to address poverty , presents several overarching themes that have recurred in antipoverty policy debates over time , and highlights selected current proposals in the context of these themes .

government accountability office , federal low - income programs: multiple programs target diverse populations and needs , gao - 15-516 , july 30 , 2015 .

describes federal programs ( including tax expenditures ) targeted to people with low incomes ; identifies the number and selected household characteristics of people in poverty ; identifies the number , poverty status , and household characteristics of selected programs' recipients ; and examines research on how selected programs may affect incentives to work .

