the unemployment compensation ( uc ) program is constructed as a joint federal - state partnership providing temporary and partial wage replacement to involuntarily unemployed workers .

federal law sets broad guidelines regarding uc benefits and financing .

states administer uc benefits with u.s. department of labor ( dol ) oversight .

state laws establish the program's specifics , resulting in 53 different uc programs operating in the states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the virgin islands .

during periods of economic growth , the federal role in financing uc is small relative to the overall size of uc revenues and expenditures .

federal unemployment taxes are dedicated to pay for uc administration grants to the states and the federal share of the eb program , and to fund a federal account within the utf for state loans .

as shown in table 1 , federal unemployment tax revenue for fy2016 is projected to be $5.8 billion of the $46.7 billion in all unemployment taxes collected ( approximately 12% ) .

likewise , the projected $5.0 billion in federal spending on administration ( $4.2 billion ) , eb ( $0 ) , and benefits for former federal employees ( ucfe ) and former servicemembers ( ucx ) ( $0.8 billion combined ) is much smaller than the projected state spending on regular uc benefits ( $32.3 billion ) .

when economic recessions occur , the uc program is designed to stabilize the economy as federal unemployment expenditures increase through the eb program and additional administrative grants .

in addition , the federal government often has augmented the regular uc benefit with temporary unemployment benefit expansions .

thus , at the height of the recent recession , federal expenditures accounted for 60% of the $156 billion paid in total benefits ( about $93 billion ) .

all unemployment tax revenue and expenditures for benefits and administration flow through the u.s. treasury , and thus affect federal revenue , outlays , and the overall financial position ( deficit or surplus ) of the federal government .

however , as a practical matter , all uc and eb financial transactions occur within the trust fund .

both federal and state unemployment tax revenue as well as administrative and benefit expenditures within the utf are accounted for in the federal budget .

federal unemployment taxes are deposited into the utf .

the treasury invests all receipts in federal securities that bear interest .

similarly , state unemployment taxes are credited to each state's account within the utf , and the treasury invests all receipts in federal securities that bear interest .

the investment of state unemployment revenue in federal securities increases the federal debt .

when states pay uc benefits to unemployed individuals , the treasury redeems those securities held within that state's utf account .

thus , the payment of regular state uc benefits decreases the federal debt .

futa imposes a 6.0% gross federal unemployment tax rate on the first $7,000 of each worker's yearly earnings .

however , futa provides tax incentives to states , which may lower the net tax rate , if states meet federal uc program guidelines .

as to be expected , the federal unemployment tax has changed substantially since 1936 .

the appendix provides a comprehensive list of changes in the federal unemployment tax law that altered either the taxable wage base or the tax rate .

there have been many other changes within futa , including the expansion of covered work and specific uses of tax revenue , which are not explored in this report .

dol provides a chronology of major changes to uc law , accessible at http: / / workforcesecurity.doleta.gov / unemploy / pdf / chronfedlaws.pdf .

futa provides guidelines from which states construct uc benefits , coverage , and state financing .

as an incentive to comply with the framework , futa provides a lower net federal unemployment tax if state uc programs meet certain guidelines on what types of employment must be covered by the state uc programs and meet the state unemployment tax requirements set out under futa .

there remains significant state independence within these broad parameters .

states generally determine individual qualification requirements , disqualification provisions , eligibility , weekly benefit amounts , potential weeks of benefits , and the state tax structure used to finance all of the regular state uc benefits and half of the eb .

for most employers , futa requires that all positions be subject to the federal unemployment tax if an employer paid wages of at least $1,500 during any calendar quarter or employed at least one worker for at least one day of each of 20 weeks in the current or prior year .

the federal coverage requirements have expensive net tax implications for state employers if they are not met .

the 5.4% state tax credit on the federal unemployment tax is not allowed if a job is required to be covered under futa , but the state uc program does not cover that job .

states may cover additional types of employment that are not required to be covered by futa .

however , most states have chosen not to expand unemployment insurance coverage significantly .

the following employment generally is not covered by the unemployment insurance system: self - employment , work done by relatives , work of patients in hospitals , work by student interns , work by alien farmworkers , seasonal camp employment , and railroad workers ( who have a separate unemployment program ) .

there are exceptions to the broad futa coverage requirements .

certain nonprofit organizations ; state and local governments ; services provided while employed by federally recognized indian tribes ; certain agricultural labor ; and certain domestic service all have different thresholds for coverage .

nonprofit employers are subject to coverage requirements if the organization employs at least four workers for one day in each of 20 different weeks in the current or prior year .

state or local governments and indian tribes are subject to coverage requirements without regard to the number of employees .

agricultural employers are subject to coverage requirement if the employer paid cash wages of at least $20,000 for agricultural labor in any calendar quarter or employed 10 or more workers for at least one day in each of 20 different weeks in the current or prior year .

domestic service employers are subject to the coverage requirement if the employer paid cash wages of $1,000 or more for domestic service during any calendar quarter in the current or prior year .

contingent on state laws , certain nonprofit , state or local government organizations , and federally recognized indian tribes may opt to be a reimbursable employer in which the employing agency has the option to reimburse the uc program for benefits paid to their laid - off employees rather than pay state and federal unemployment taxes .

futa provides basic guidelines for state unemployment taxes .

states may opt to experience rate employers , tax employers that generate the most claimants at a rate of at least 5.4% , and have a taxable wage base of at least the first $7,000 of each employee's annual earnings .

if a state meets these minimum tax requirements , futa allows a state tax credit of up to 5.4% to be applied against federal unemployment taxes .

in addition , if a state experience rates its employers ( where employers who minimize uc claims have a lower state unemployment tax ) , futa provides an additional tax credit for state employers .

this credit ensures the employer who paid less than 5.4% in state taxes receives a full 5.4% state tax credit ( when combined with the state tax credit ) .

federal law allows states to experience rate their employers within their state unemployment tax schedule .

experience rating requires that states set up their tax systems such that employers generating the fewest claimants have the lowest tax rates .

the state unemployment tax rate of an employer is based on the amount of uc paid to its former employees .

in general , the more uc benefits paid to its former employees , the higher the tax rate of the employer — up to a cap established by state law .

the experience rating is intended to ensure an equitable distribution of uc program taxes among employers and to encourage a stable workforce .

all states use experience rating when determining an employer's state unemployment tax rate .

federal law remains silent on the lowest state unemployment tax rate that may be applied to employers .

indeed , federal law only sets a floor of 5.4% on the state's maximum unemployment tax rate to be applied to employers with proportionately the highest claims from former workers .

as a result of these few requirements , state unemployment tax rates have wide variation .

in tax year 2015 , several states ( iowa , montana , and south dakota ) applied a tax rate of 0% to employers with the fewest claims from former workers .

in comparison , the maximum state unemployment tax rates ranged from a lower bound of 5.4% ( the lowest allowed under federal law ) in florida , georgia , idaho , nebraska , nevada , oregon , and puerto rico to the highest ceiling of 11.13% in massachusetts .

federal law requires the taxable wage base on which the state unemployment tax is applied must be at least $7,000 per worker per year .

in january 2016 , state ceilings on taxable wages ranged from the $7,000 federal minimum ( arizona , arkansas , florida , and puerto rico ) to $44,000 ( washington state ) .

