in the years since the 2007-2009 financial crisis , congress has passed the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ; dodd - frank act ) , and financial regulators have made significant progress in implementing the legislation .

the dodd - frank act is a broad regulatory reform law that touches on many different aspects of the financial system .

housing finance reform , however , remains one of the major unresolved issues stemming from the financial crisis .

fannie mae and freddie mac , two government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) that have funded more than half of all mortgages originated in recent years , remain in a state of limbo since the crisis rocked the system and left an uncertain future in its wake .

because of their prominent role in the housing finance system , the future of the system in many ways depends on the future of the gses .

congress has debated housing finance reform at length and legislation making modest changes to the system has been enacted .

the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) , the regulator and conservator for the gses , has used its regulatory authority to lay the foundation for the future housing finance system .

the fhfa - directed restructuring of the system focuses on three main policy questions: 1. who will bear credit risk in the future ? .

2 .

how will mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) be issued ? .

and 3 .

what will the mbs look like once issued ? .

fhfa argues that the actions it is taking in answering these three questions do not lock the system into following a single track but "support various future paths under housing finance reform. .

some in congress , however , have raised concerns about whether fhfa's steps would sufficiently move the system beyond "the duopolistic tendencies of the past. .

the financial regulatory improvement act ( s. 1484 ) , which was reported by the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , would codify the actions taken by fhfa in some cases and alter fhfa's actions in others .

this report explains how fhfa has answered each of the three questions that are currently shaping the policy debate and analyzes issues that are of interest to congress for each of the three topics .

but , first , this report explains the gses' conservatorship and their role in the housing finance system .

as gses , fannie mae and freddie mac are private corporations with federal charters that contain special privileges , such as being exempt from certain state and local taxes , and special responsibilities to support affo rdable housing for low - and moderate - income households .

the gses do not originate mortgages .

instead they have two main lines of business .

first , through their credit guarantee businesses , the gses purchase conforming mortgages — mortgages that meet certain eligibility criteria based on size and creditworthiness — and pool the mortgages into mbs .

the mbs are sold to investors , with the gses guaranteeing that investors will receive timely payment of principal and interest on their mbs even if a borrower with a mortgage that is part of the mbs becomes delinquent .

the gse guarantee transfers the credit risk — the risk that a borrower would not repay the loan on time — from the investors to the gse .

to compensate the gses for their guarantee , the gses receive a guarantee fee from the lender ( who may pass the cost on to the borrower ) .

in the second main line of business , their portfolio investment business , the gses hold mortgages and mbs ( including gse mbs , ginnie mae mbs , and mbs sold by other private entities ) as investments in their portfolios .

the gses profit from the difference between the low rates at which they can borrow money to buy mortgage - related assets ( their close relationship to the government allows the gses to borrow at lower rates than other market participants ) and the higher rates at which they receive revenues from those assets .

in september 2008 , the gses agreed to be placed into conservatorship with fhfa because of extensive financial losses and concerns about their ability to provide support to the housing finance system during the economic downturn .

as conservator , fhfa has the powers of the management , board , and shareholders of the gses and works to "help restore confidence in fannie mae and freddie mac , enhance their capacity to fulfill their mission , and mitigate the systemic risk that contributed directly to instability in financial markets. .

when the gses entered into conservatorship , they also entered into an agreement with the department of the treasury in which treasury would provide financial support to the gses through the senior preferred stock purchase agreements .

since entering into conservatorship , the gses have received $187.4 billion in assistance to avoid triggering mandatory liquidation , which remains outstanding today , and have paid dividends of more than $240 billion to treasury .

currently , all profits accrue to the taxpayers , and all risks are borne by the taxpayers .

more than seven years into the conservatorship , the gses have operated under government control for longer than most expected .

the next three sections of this report explain three of the major steps that fhfa is taking as conservator to reform the housing finance system .

as described later in the report , some of these steps have been completed whereas others are still in progress .

fhfa argues that the actions it is taking "fulfill the legal requirements congress assigned fhfa as conservator and also prepare the foundation for a new , stronger housing finance system in the future. .

figures 1 and 2 below illustrate how the reforms will modify the system .

under the pre - fhfa reform system shown in figure 1 , fannie mae and freddie mac guarantee their mbs and , in doing so , absorb the credit risk .

they use their own technology system to securitize the mortgages and create their mbs .

each also issued their own mbs to investors .

as mentioned above , some of fhfa's reforms are still being implemented .

once those reforms are implemented , as illustrated in figure 2 , the gses will engage in credit risk transfers to share credit risk with private investors on some of their pools of mortgages .

the gses would aggregate the mortgages but then securitize them through the common securitization platform that they would both use .

rather than issue separate fannie mbs and freddie mbs , the gses would issue a single security .

the three policy issues explained above — risk - sharing transactions , the common securitization platform , and the single security — are part of fhfa's reform of the housing finance system .

fhfa faces limitations in terms of how much it can reform the system , as more expansive reforms may require legislative action .

the 114 th congress has not seen committee or floor action on broader reform legislation .

congress has , however , considered two proposals to , as supporters call it , "jumpstart" legislative action on gse reform .

as compensation for the support it has provided to the gses , treasury has received a significant ownership stake in fannie and freddie in the form of senior preferred stock .

it also has the right to purchase up to 79.9% of the common stock of each gse at a nominal price .

some argue that the best path forward for the housing finance system is for treasury to sell its stake and for fhfa to allow the gses to exit conservatorship .

this plan is often referred to as "recapitalize and release," and would allow the gses to rebuild their capital and return to sound financial footing before being released to private control .

those in favor of recapitalize and release argue that the existing reforms — including risk sharing , the common securitization platform , and the single security — in conjunction with other steps that fhfa could take are sufficient to address the shortcomings that previously resulted in the gses having to enter conservatorship and receive financial assistance from treasury .

an analysis of the arguments for and against the recapitalize and release plan is beyond the scope of this report .

many in congress opposed the idea of treasury selling its stake and allowing a return to the old system , as they believe such action could result in a reversion to the same problems that plagued the pre - crisis system .

to prevent this outcome , division o , section 702 of p.l .

114-113 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 , prohibits treasury from selling or otherwise transferring its shares of senior preferred stock in the gses until at least january 1 , 2018 , unless legislation has been enacted that would allow for the stock's sale or transfer .

it also includes a sense of congress that congress should pass and the president should sign into law legislation determining the future of fannie mae and freddie mac , and that notwithstanding the expiration of subsection ( b ) [on january 1 , 2018] , the secretary should not sell , transfer , relinquish , liquidate , divest , or otherwise dispose of any outstanding shares of senior preferred stock acquired pursuant to the senior preferred stock purchase agreement until such legislation is enacted .

in addition , treasury officials have stated that the administration has no intention of selling its shares in the absence of legislative enactment of comprehensive housing finance reform .

fhfa , for its part , has also not given any indication that it will allow the gses to exit their conservatorships in the near term , and exiting their conservatorships might not be economically feasible without treasury unwinding its ownership positions in the companies .

section 703 of s. 1484 contains a prohibition on the sale or transfer of the preferred shares that is similar to the restriction enacted as part of the 2016 consolidated appropriations law , except that it does not include the january 1 , 2018 , sunset .

in the gses' current state — profitable , primarily owned by the government , and in conservatorship — some see the gses' guarantee fees as a possible source of revenue that could offset unrelated federal spending or tax cuts .

the fees the gses charge for their guarantee of timely payment of principal and interest are compensation for the gses assuming the mbs's credit risk .

in 2011 , p.l .

112-78 , the temporary payroll tax cut continuation act of 2011 , extended the payroll tax cut , unemployment compensation , and certain health provisions , and it used guarantee fees as a way of partially offsetting the cost of the bill .

the gses were required to raise their guarantee fees by 10 basis points on average until october 1 , 2021 , and send the additional revenue raised by the higher guarantee fees to treasury .

since 2011 , guarantee fees have been considered as possible offsets for other types of spending .

for example , guarantee fees were included as a revenue source for the version of the highway bill that was passed by the senate on july 30 , 2015 , though the guarantee fee increase was not in the final version that became p.l .

114-94 .

besides p.l .

112-78 , no guarantee fee increases have been approved by congress .

the presence of the gses as a potential offset , some argue , provides congress with a disincentive to reform the gses because doing so may make it more politically difficult to draw on them as potential revenue sources .

to remove this obstacle , congress has sought to prohibit the use of guarantee fees as an offset .

for example , the budget resolution of fy2016 includes a scoring provision that prohibits the house and senate from counting as an offset any provision that increases , or extends , the increase of any guarantee fees of the gses .

section 702 of s. 1484 contains a similar provision .

it would prohibit the use of guarantee fees as an offset unless the guarantee fees are part of legislation that either instructs treasury to sell its senior preferred stock or reforms the secondary mortgage market .

