the national weather service ( nws ) , at the discretion of the secretary of commerce , has statutory authority for weather forecasting and for issuing storm warnings ( 15 u.s.c .

ยง313 ) .

the nws provides weather , water , and climate forecasts and warnings for the united states , its territories , adjacent waters , and ocean areas .

the 114 th congress has expressed its interest in improving forecasts and warnings to protect life and property in the united states from severe weather events through its role in oversight , appropriations , and the authorization of language regarding nws .

nws is one of several line offices within the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) .

in 2014 , nws restructured its organization structure , which is reflected in its annual congressional budget justifications since then .

this report includes tables that summarize appropriated funding for nws , and the programs within nws that generate forecasts and warnings , and the funding for nws in its restructured accounts since fy2014 .

the report also includes a table with a brief summary and analysis of various bills introduced in the 114 th congress that would have some bearing , directly or indirectly , on nws operations .

to date , none of the bills has been enacted .

both the house and the senate appropriations committees have reported fy2017 appropriations bills that would fund noaa , including nws , for fy2017 .

reports accompanying each appropriation bill contain language that may influence nws operations in fy2017 and beyond .

in addition , several bills were introduced in the 114 th congress that , if enacted , could affect nws .

some of the bills focus on single topics , such as increasing the number of doppler radar stations across the country .

other bills would address a broader array of programs within noaa and nws .

several bills may affect nws only indirectly , such as those that would authorize strategies to improve resilience to extreme weather events .

table 3 lists legislation introduced in the 114 th congress that may affect nws and briefly summarizes relevant provisions .

many different components and programs within noaa contribute to nws's mission of providing weather forecasts and warnings .

several of the bills listed in table 3 indicate congressional interest in some of those components and programs , such as the research programs within the office of oceans and atmospheric research at noaa , and in the challenge of improving the integration of research results into operational weather forecasting ( eg , h.r .

1561 , s. 1331 ) .

several of the bills are more narrowly focused , such as those that would require additional doppler radars to provide coverage for large population centers or state capitals ( eg , h.r .

3538 , h.r .

5089 , s. 2058 ) or those that would require additional personnel at nws forecast offices ( eg , s. 1573 ) .

noaa weather satellites are also critical components of the nws's core mission , and congress has been concerned about possible gaps in coverage and about the future of the weather satellite programs .

congress has expressed concern about the future of the weather satellite program in annual appropriations bills and accompanying reports and will likely continue to do so for the foreseeable future , as the budget for satellite acquisitions continues to be a major component of overall noaa annual spending .

furthermore , congress likely will continue to introduce legislation that would shape nws operations , directly or indirectly , in an overall effort to improve nws's ability to provide forecasts and warnings for protection of life and property in the united states .

