nearly 52% of british voters in the june 23 referendum on european union ( eu ) membership answered that the united kingdom ( uk ) should leave the eu .

among a complex pattern of supporters and opponents of brexit , the vote pitted prime minister david cameron , who led the campaign to remain , against many me mbers of his own conservative party , including in his cabinet .

prime minister cameron subsequently resigned and theresa may took over as the uk's new prime minister on july 13 , 2016 .

the vote was the culmination of a decades - long debate in the uk about the country's eu membership .

the uk joined the precursor to the modern eu in 1973 , but has long been considered one of the most "euroskeptic" members , having "opted out" of several major elements of european integration , such as the euro currency and the passport - free schengen zone .

one of the central arguments made by the leave campaign was that the eu had steadily eroded the uk's national sovereignty by shifting control over many areas of decisionmaking from parliament to brussels .

analysts also attribute the result to the prevalence of concerns about high levels of immigration to the uk , which the leave campaign linked to the eu requirement for the "free movement of people" among member states .

leave campaigners further argued that eu bureaucracy and regulations held back the uk's economy , and that in the long - term the country would be better off economically outside the eu .

much of the uncertainty that exists in the aftermath of a vote to leave the uk relates in some way to the uk's trade and economic arrangements and the corresponding legal and regulatory frameworks .

over the past three years , the uk economy has consistently grown in the 2% to 3% range .

according to the imf , the uk economy is slowly regaining performance levels it experienced prior to the 2008-2010 global financial and economic crises .

trade is equivalent to about 60% of the uk economy , in large part due to reduced trade barriers with the eu through the eu's single market .

the uk is also an important component of the eu economy .

with the uk , the eu's gdp is greater than that of all other individual economies , including the united states and china .

without the uk , however , eu gdp would rank behind that of the united states and china .

trade with the eu accounted for 44.6% of the uk's total exports of goods and services and 53.2% of its imports of goods and services in 2014 , as indicated in figure 1 .

according to the british treasury , the single market has facilitated the growth and development of a complex web of economic and financial ties between the uk and the eu .

these connections have assisted in the growth of the services sector in the uk , which accounts for about 80% of uk gdp , including service industries and complex manufacturing activities that rely on cross - border supply chains , largely with eu countries .

in part reflecting these extensive ties , the stock market value of uk bank equities fell by more than 10% immediately following the vote ; trading was briefly suspended on monday , june 27 , 2016 .

according to various analyses , brexit could have an immediate and long - term effect on the uk and eu economies .

in particular , financial markets reacted negatively to the referendum on the uk exit from the eu .

major stock indexes plunged in value in asia , europe , and on wall street .

within two weeks , however , most stock markets had recouped their initial losses , but uncertainty about long - term prospects for the british economy continues to feed through financial and economic linkages to developed and emerging economies .

in addition , central bankers in switzerland , japan , and europe reportedly raised concerns over the possibilities of financial market instability associated with the vote in favor of brexit .

group of seven finance ministers and central bankers , meeting in switzerland for pre - scheduled sessions , issued a statement indicating , "we affirm our assessment that the u.k. economy and financial sector remain resilient and are confident that the u.k. authorities are well - positioned to address the consequences of the referendum outcome. .

in addition , the federal reserve released a statement that read the federal reserve is carefully monitoring developments in global financial markets , in cooperation with other central banks , following the results of the u.k. referendum on membership in the european union .

the federal reserve is prepared to provide dollar liquidity through its existing swap lines with central banks , as necessary , to address pressures in global funding markets , which could have adverse implications for the u.s. economy .

following the announcement of the referendum , global financial markets responded in a number of ways: some equity markets fell by as much as 7% in value ( the dow jones industrial average fell by 600 points , or 3.5% ) , erasing nearly $3 trillion in equity value .

the british pound depreciated to its lowest level in more than 30 years ; while the dollar , the yen , and other major currencies appreciated sharply , as indicated in figure 2 .

on july 5 , 2016 , the pound dropped below $1.3 dollars per pound , down 13% since the brexit vote .

demand for u.s. treasury securities , which often serve as safe - haven investments during episodes of market instability , rose , pushing u.s. interest rates down .

some london - based american , european , and other foreign banks began reconsidering their uk presence due to concerns that britain outside the eu will jeopardize their eu 'passport" status that allows them to operate throughout the eu .

standard & poor's and fitch downgraded uk sovereign debt from aaa to aa , fitch downgraded bank of england debt , and moody's investor services downgraded its outlook on the uk's credit status from stable to negative .

in its statement , moody's indicated that "[o]ver the medium term , the uk's economic growth prospects will depend crucially on what trade agreement the uk government reaches with the eu as well as on the uk government's trade policies more generally. .

questions arose about the continued status of london as the largest global financial center and the prospects of increased risks to the global economy .

french president francois hollande told eu leaders that london should be stripped of its ability to clear derivatives and equities operations for eurozone countries .

despite the immediate reaction by financial markets , brexit is not expected to create a financial meltdown similar to the turmoil that followed the collapse of lehman brothers in 2008 .

by early july 2016 , most equity markets had recovered their losses and exchange rates had stabilized , albeit with the pound remaining below its pre - brexit levels .

the ftse 250 ( financial times stock exchange index of 250 small - to - medium - sized uk firms ) remained about 9.0% below its pre - brexit level .

markets may well remain volatile over the near term , however , reflecting lingering concerns including ( 1 ) the evolving political leadership crisis ; ( 2 ) uncertainties about the process for uk disengagement from the eu ; and ( 3 ) the short - and long - term economic effects .

these concerns are not necessarily discrete , but are potentially reinforcing .

for instance , a continuing political leadership crisis can affect short - run economic conditions to the extent the markets are uncertain about the ability of the uk government to conduct economic policy .

financial markets likely will be volatile over the near term as the uk and the eu sort through these issues .

much uncertainty also looms over the uk's trade and economic arrangements and the corresponding legal and regulatory frameworks .

trade is equivalent to about 60% of the uk economy , largely due to reduced trade barriers with the eu through the eu's single market .

the uk is the second largest eu economy after germany .

brexit is creating uncertainty in international financial markets , which is affecting the value of the british pound and uk business investment .

in response to these concerns , foreign investors reportedly have sold the pound in favor of other safe - haven currencies , such as the dollar , the yen , and the swiss franc .

concerns over brexit also may be steering some investment funds toward the united states , which puts additional upward pressure on the value of the dollar .

for the uk , a depreciated pound makes the uk's exports less expensive in relative terms , which traditionally is expected to boost exports .

similarly , an appreciation in the value of the dollar makes u.s. exports more expensive and imports cheaper .

whether the uk will experience an actual increase is questionable .

some analysts argue that the uk's exports consist of high - valued - added products and that demand for these products is not very responsive to price changes .

also , given the importance of eu trade for the uk , a slowdown in eu economic growth and continuing slow growth in emerging markets may offer little boost to uk exports .

over the long term , a higher valued dollar may reduce foreign demand , which eventually would ease upward pressure on the dollar .

in the interim , emerging economies and other countries are wary of a stronger dollar , because they fear it could have a negative contagion effect on their economies by drawing away much - needed capital .

uncertainties about the impact of brexit on international capital markets apparently were among a number of factors that led the federal reserve on june 18 , 2016 , to postpone raising u.s. prime interest rates .

federal reserve board chairman janet yellen indicated at that time that , "it [brexit] is a decision that could have consequences for economic and financial conditions in global financial markets .

if it does so , it could have consequences in turn for the u.s. economic outlook that would be a factor in deciding on the appropriate path of policy .

so , it is certainly one of the uncertainties that we discussed and that factored into today's decision. .

central banks have been muted in their response to brexit .

the bank of england ( boe ) followed up promises to financial markets to provide liquidity by injecting £3.1 billion ( about $4.1 billion ) into uk banks .

bank of england governor carney said a downturn for the british economy was on its way and that britain was already suffering from "economic post - traumatic stress disorder. .

there is speculation about whether and how quickly the boe would consider reducing interest rates or engaging in quantitative easing should market conditions require such actions .

on tuesday , july 5 , 2016 , the boe announced that it was suspending through at least june 2017 the countercyclical capital buffer of 0.5% on uk banks to provide them with additional resources to support loan activity for individuals and businesses .

the boe also identified five areas in which brexit would increase risks to the uk economy: 1. financing the uk's current account deficit ; 2. commercial real estate , which previous to the vote had experienced large foreign capital inflows ; 3. the high level of uk household indebtedness ; 4. subdued growth in the global economy , including the euro area that could be affected by a prolonged period of uncertainty ; and 5. fragilities in financial markets .

the federal reserve indicated that it was prepared to provide dollar liquidity through existing swap lines with other central banks , as necessary , to address pressures in global funding markets , which , it indicated , could have adverse implications for the u.s. economy .

the european central bank ( ecb ) reportedly is poised to engage in additional quantitative easing by buying sovereign and corporate bonds .

it has also reduced interest rates to provide low - cost funding to banks .

capital inflows and an appreciation in the yen have worked against expansionary monetary action by the bank of japan , to stimulate its economy and to avoid deflation .

the bank of mexico unexpectedly raised interest rates on june 30 , 2016 , to stem an appreciation in the peso .

although mexico has only a small trade relationship with britain and seemingly little to lose directly from brexit , the peso is reportedly the most liquid emerging market currency .

a brexit vote does not immediately affect the uk's terms of trade with the eu and other countries , but could in the future .

the status of uk trade relations going forward depends on the terms of the uk's negotiated withdrawal from the eu , as well as subsequent uk negotiations with the eu .

the process for exiting the eu will take some time to negotiate , and there is much uncertainty surrounding it .

thus , brexit's impact on uk trade relations is unclear .

in terms of trade negotiations , brexit likely would return authority to the uk to set its own external tariffs and its trade policy more broadly , an authority that currently resides with the eu .

while it is not known what course uk trade policy would take , the economic implications of this shift of trade policy back to the uk may be mixed .

it could be beneficial to the extent that the uk intends to lower tariffs below current eu rates .

it could , however , be detrimental if the uk loses access to the benefits of the eu single market and existing eu preferential trade agreements with other countries , making trade on less favorable terms for the uk .

brexit also raises issues about the status of ongoing eu trade negotiations , including current u.s. - eu negotiations to conclude a transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) free trade agreement ( fta ) .

according to recent analyses by the world bank , the global economy is slowly recovering from the 2008-2010 recession .

the economic performance of the united states is one of the few bright spots of the global economy ; the unemployment rate fell below 5% in june 2016 , and gdp growth is expected to continue in the 2% to 3% range .

uncertainties concerning the economic and financial impact of brexit began affecting movements in exchange rates prior to the results of the referendum , which , in turn , began affecting the global economy .

an appreciation in the value of safe - haven currencies , especially the dollar , can affect a broad range of economic activities .

the dollar serves as the de facto global reserve currency , which facilitates many international economic and financial activities .

for instance , the global banking system is based on dollars , which thus serve as an invoicing currency for many commodities , including oil and gas .

 ( as an example of the effects of appreciation on safe - haven currencies , the recent appreciation of the japanese yen is frustrating efforts by the bank of japan , which has been engaging in quantitative easing to stimulate economic growth and boost exports through a lower - valued yen. ) .

in its june 2016 assessment prior to the brexit vote , the world bank forecast global growth in 2016 at 2.4% , about equal to that experienced in 2015 , but 0.5% below its january 2016 forecast .

the assessment indicated that the global economy , although recovering slowly , faces a number of challenges , including uncertainty associated with brexit: weakness in the global economy has persisted and risks have become more pronounced .

the divergence in economic activity between commodity exporters and importers has widened .

these developments have been accompanied by heightened political uncertainties , concerns about the effectiveness of monetary policy stimulus in some advanced economies , the pace of monetary policy normalization in the united states , and policy makers' ability or willingness to use expansionary fiscal policy , if needed .

in addition , for oil importers , the sizeable positive price shock represented by falling prices has not translated into the large boost to growth initially expected .

some analysts expect the uncertainties created by brexit to have a negative impact on global markets beyond the immediate turmoil .

a protracted political leadership struggle could add to uncertainties over the uk's ability to take the necessary economic and financial measures to restore stability .

the simultaneous depreciation of the pound and appreciation of the dollar could add to economic pressures on both developed and emerging market economies .

various central banks , including the swiss national bank and the bank of japan , for instance , have intervened in foreign exchange markets to stall further appreciation in their respective currencies .

in addition , capital flight from emerging economies to safe - haven assets could further add to the economic challenges facing developed and emerging economies and potentially add negatively to global growth prospects .

for members of congress and other policymakers , the brexit vote likely represents a number of potentially difficult issues .

the global economic environment likely will remain somewhat more volatile as financial markets attempt to digest the impact of brexit vote on the uk and eu economies .

in addition , changes in the exchange value of various currencies , due to the brexit vote , could affect the global economy ; this could exceed the immediate effects of the pound's depreciation on the uk economy .

in particular , various central banks , including the federal reserve , likely will continue to monitor movements in exchange rates , capital flows , and interest rates and the effects these have on the economic performance of the u.s. economy as well as the broader global economy .

the brexit vote also confronts congress with questions about the future of u.s. - eu and u.s. - uk trade relations , including prospects for the potential t - tip agreement and any other trade agreements the united states may pursue with the uk going forward .

