the united states historically has led the global economic order that evolved after world war ii .

this economic order established multilateral economic institutions to advance rules - based commercial economic engagement , open markets , and transparent , nondiscriminatory treatment of all economic players .

in turn , these efforts supported overall domestic and global economic growth and the nation's broader strategic interests .

this agenda was broadly supported by successive congresses and administrations over seven decades .

congress plays a key role in u.s. trade policy by approving trade agreements , overseeing trade - oriented government agencies and adjustment assistance programs , and setting the terms for u.s. engagement with the global economy .

congress plays a major role in formulating and implementing u.s. trade policy through its legislative and oversight responsibilities .

under the u.s. constitution , congress has the authority to regulate foreign commerce , while the president has the authority to conduct foreign relations .

in 2015 , congress reauthorized trade promotion authority ( tpa ) through the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-26 ) , which ( 1 ) sets trade policy objectives for the president to negotiate in trade agreements ; ( 2 ) requires the president to engage with and keep congress abreast of negotiations ; and ( 3 ) provides for congressional consideration of implementing legislation on an expedited basis , eg , guaranteed consideration , up - or - down vote , no amendments , limited time period .

the united states concluded the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) among the united states and 11 other countries and negotiated the u.s. - european transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) .

the 12 tpp countries signed the agreement in february 2016 , but it required ratification by each country before it could enter into force .

in the united states , this requires implementing legislation by congress .

upon taking office , president trump withdrew the united states from the tpp and halted further negotiations on the t - tip , but may reengage in the tpp under different terms .

the remaining 11 partners to the tpp concluded , without u.s. participation , a revised tpp , now identified as the comprehensive and progressive agreement for trans - pacific partnership ( cptpp ) .

the trump administration is also attempting to revise the two largest existing u.s. ftas , through the ongoing renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , and modification talks regarding the u.s. - south korea ( korus ) fta .

for members of congress and others , international trade and trade agreements offer the prospect of improving national economic welfare , while also raising questions about the potential cost to the economy .

congress plays an important role in shaping and considering legislation to implement u.s. trade agreements .

other countries also are participating in , or currently negotiating , a variety of ftas .

these proposed trade agreements raise questions and concerns over the role of trade in a country's economy and how increased trade , or globalization more generally , affects its employment , the distribution of income , and its standard of living .

for some observers , these negotiations hold the potential to open markets further and establish new trade rules and disciplines , and they may reenergize the world trade organization ( wto ) , whose broad doha round negotiations have been stalled for over a decade .

for members of congress and others , however , international trade and trade agreements offer not only the prospect of improved national economic welfare , but also the potential for lost jobs in some sectors .

this report focuses on a number of major issues concerning the role of trade and trade agreements in the economy and issues that are particular to ftas , including the role of trade in the economy and the macroeconomic forces that drive the trade deficit ; the impact of trade on employment and the adjustment costs experienced by firms and workers ; estimates of the number of jobs in the economy that are supported by trade and economic models used to estimate the impact of ftas on employment ; the impact of ftas on foreign investment and employment ; and the relationship between trade and the distribution of income .

discussions of trade broadly and trade agreements in particular often focus on potential effects on economic growth , the distribution of income , and employment gains or losses .

most economists argue that liberalized trade results in both economic costs and benefits , but that the long - run net effect on the economy as a whole is positive .

they contend that the economy as a whole operates more efficiently as a result of competition through international trade and that consumers benefit by having available a wider variety of goods and services at varying levels of quality and price than would be possible in an economy closed to international trade .

they also contend that trade may have a long - term positive dynamic effect on an economy and enhance production and employment .

according to the world bank , liberalizing trade and foreign investment have reduced the number of people in the world living in extreme poverty ( under $1 per day ) by half , or 600 million , over the past 25 years , transforming the global economy .

the united states international trade commission ( itc ) released a study in june 2016 on the economic impact of trade agreements on the united states , based on the 14 trade agreements the united states has signed with 20 countries .

the report concluded that these trade agreements increased u.s. aggregate trade by about 3% and u.s. real gdp and u.s. employment by , respectively , less than 1% , or $32.2 billion , and 159.3 thousand fulltime equivalent employees .

in response to the report , however , representative sander levin indicated in a statement: ....the itc fails to adequately and innovatively address the real economic impact of previous u.s. free trade agreements .

the itc claims a small increase in gdp based on traditional economic models .

the itc fails to address the costs associated with workers losing their jobs or factories leaving communities as a result of trade agreements .

those transition costs are largely ignored in this report .

they focus on the long - term benefit of lower tariffs in other countries and cheap imports coming into the united states , failing to capture the impact – which they may call short term – which can have a dramatic impact on jobs in america .

most economists also argue that macroeconomic forces within an economy are the dominant factors that shape trade and foreign investment relationships .

in particular , the prominent role of these macroeconomic forces complicates efforts to disentangle the distinct impact that trade has on the economy .

according to standard economic theory , macroeconomic conditions within an economy determine capital flows , which in turn affect exchange rates and the overall size of the trade deficit .

in addition , economic theory holds that trade agreements between countries alter trade relationships and thus the composition of the trade deficit , but have little impact on the trade deficit's overall size .

changes at the microeconomic level of the economy , such as new technologies , also can affect particular industries or sectors of the economy in ways that are unrelated to international trade .

in addition , changes in currency exchange rates , productivity , economic policies , and the business cycle can affect the overall performance of the economy in ways that may outweigh the effects of trade agreements , given the already open nature of the u.s. economy .

for instance , the decline in the value of the peso in late 1994 , followed by a financial crisis in mexico and severe economic recession , had a major impact on u.s. - mexico trade , arguably greater than anything anticipated by the completion of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

more open markets globally and other changes have subjected a larger portion of the domestic workforce to international competition .

according to the international monetary fund ( imf ) , the effective global labor market quadrupled over the past two decades through the opening of china , india , and the former east european bloc countries .

in particular , the entry of china into the global economy is an unprecedented development given the size of the chinese economy and the speed with which it became a major participant in the global economy .

the global economy experienced this transformation initially through a rapid increase in trade of goods and services that were produced through labor - intensive processes .

it also occurred secondarily , through a major disruption in global commodity markets as china's economy experienced slower growth and it began shifting its economy away from dependence on exports to an economy focused more on domestic consumption .

according to the imf , the internationalization of labor contributed to rising labor compensation in the advanced economies by increasing productivity and output , while emerging market economies benefited from rising wages .

increased exports from labor - intensive developing economies would be expected to push down wages , adjusted for productivity , for relatively unskilled workers in developed economies , thereby reducing labor's share of income .

at the same time , most economists argue that workers in developed economies are better off if the net effects of increased trade and productivity on the economy are positive .

rising employment and wages in developing economies would increase living standards in those economies and increase demand for imports from developed economies , which would place upward pressure on wages and employment .

the imf concludes that globalization is only one of several factors that have acted to reduce the share of income accruing to labor in advanced economies and that technological change likely has played a larger role in affecting the distribution of income in the economy , especially for workers in lower - skilled sectors .

another development that has upended global trade and capital and labor markets is the impact of the digital revolution .

in particular , the digital revolution , as a form of technological advancement , is a new variant of the long - term trend of labor - saving technologies that improve productivity and provide opportunities for labor to shift from labor - intensive activities to more knowledge - intensive activities .

according to one economist , the new technologies , termed labor - linking , are transforming the global job landscape by linking labor with demand in faraway places and creating opportunities for small and medium - sized firms to participate in the global economy .

in describing this new technology , this economist writes: what this new technology has done is to make it possible for nations that are not yet rich and industrialized , such as the low - income economies and lower middle - income economies , to connect workers with corporations in industrialized nations .

if these nations are moderately well - organized and have basic infrastructure such as power and digital connectivity , their workers can do well by working for companies and customers in rich and upper - middle - income nations .

this in turn is creating new competition for workers in rich and some middle - income countries , dragging their salaries down and exacerbating unemployment .

in brief , while the rise of labor - saving technology is tending to curb labor demand all over the world , some emerging economies and developing economies are able to offset the decline by taking advantage of labor - linking technologies .

the effects that trade and trade agreements such as the tpp have on economic growth and employment are often among the most controversial issues .

economic theory concludes that the economy as a whole benefits over the long run from a more open trade environment and greater competition , because such an environment pushes an economy to use its resources more efficiently .

standard economic theory also recognizes that some workers and producers in the economy may experience a disproportionate share of the short - term adjustment costs that are associated with shifts in resources stemming from greater international competition .

although the attendant adjustment costs for businesses and labor are difficult to measure , some estimates suggest they may be significant over the short run and can entail dislocations for some segments of the labor force , for some companies , and for some communities .

closed plants can result in depressed commercial and residential property values and lost tax revenues , with effects on local schools , local public infrastructure , and local community viability .

many research organizations , academics , and others are analyzing the impact of trade on employment .

a group of 10 international organizations , including the asian development bank , the international labor organization , the world bank , the organization of american states ( oas ) , organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , world trade organization ( wto ) , and the united nations conference on trade and development ( unctad ) , among others , joined together to form the international collaborative initiative on trade and employment ( icite ) to analyze the relationship between trade and employment .

a study published by icite surveyed the economic literature on trade and employment and restated the general position that over the long run higher levels of international trade are associated with positive rates of economic growth , rising wages , and higher levels of employment .

similarly , higher levels of economic growth are associated with higher levels of international trade , which complicates efforts to disentangle cause and effect relationships between economic growth and trade .

the study also concluded that countries that experienced greater trade liberalization also experienced higher levels of investment , higher levels of productivity , and improvements in both physical and human capital .

in addition , the study indicated that the positive correlation between trade and economic growth seems to be predicated on companion policies that countries adopted , including policies to create a positive investment climate and labor market as well as social protection systems that support trade liberalization .

the study concluded that forces within the economy that support trade competitiveness , primarily shifts in capital and labor to more internationally competitive sectors with higher productivity , also may result in frictional unemployment and income losses for displaced workers in the short run .

according to the authors , for those countries that experience greater income inequality , factors other than trade are likely to be more important .

the authors concluded that ....working conditions in developing countries , contrary to the assertions of some , have not deteriorated with trade openness .

indeed the positive effect of trade on investment and incomes carries with it important implications for reduced child labor , workplace injuries , and informality , while offering new opportunities for female entrepreneurs .

however , trade , as with changes in technology , does entail reallocation of resources , so policies that help workers to move more quickly into new , higher productivity jobs can help attenuate human costs of normal job transitions and unemployment arising from economic shocks as well as lay the foundations for more rapid growth .

in addition , the authors concluded ....trade liberalization may ( sooner or later ) be a necessary but not a sufficient condition for attaining more rapid growth .

whether countries realize the potential gains from trade liberalization depends heavily on companion policies and the general economic environment .

these supportive policies — stable macroeconomic policies , adequate property rights , effective regulation , and well - designed public investments — can determine the difference between a trade reform that helps catapult trend growth to a higher level or one that produces little .

various measures are used to estimate the role and impact of trade in the economy and of trade on employment .

one such measure developed by the department of commerce's international trade administration ( ita ) provides a unique estimate of the number of jobs in the u.s. economy that currently are supported directly and indirectly , not created , by exports .

these estimates use available historical u.s. input - output data and projections in years when the input - output data are not updated .

the 2007 benchmark input - output table was substantially revised and updated in february 2014 .

the benchmark input - output tables are revised every five years .

the ita bases its approach on three economic relationships: ( 1 ) average relationships between the value of goods and services in the economy relative to the average number of jobs that are required to produce that output for each industry ; ( 2 ) the value of inputs used in their production ; and ( 3 ) the value of transportation and other marketing services required to bring goods and services to buyers .

the agency does not develop a similar methodology to estimate the number of jobs related to imports , or any job gains or losses that may be due to imports .

in its 2017 update , ita estimated that u.s. exports of goods and services in 2016 supported 10.7 million jobs — 6.3 million in the goods producing sector and 4.4 million in the services sector , as indicated in figure 2 .

ita adjusted its methodology in 2011 to differentiate between changes in the prices of exports and changes in labor productivity .

this methodology uses export price levels and a proxy estimator of u.s. export labor productivity to estimate the real value of u.s. exports ( rather than the nominal value of exports reported in official sources ) that support a given number of jobs as determined through input / output analysis and adjusted for changes in productivity .

in contrast to ita's estimates of the number of jobs in the economy currently supported by exports , some economists and others use various trade models to forecast the number of jobs that may be affected by ftas .

most economists argue , however , that estimates of employment gains or losses represent a partial accounting of the total economic effects of ftas and , therefore , are not representative of the overall impact of ftas on the economy .

in general , various economic models and approaches used to provide differing estimates of the magnitude of changes in u.s. employment that could arise from an fta reflect different assumptions and conditions .

both proponents and opponents of ftas cite results of these studies to support their respective positions .

the various models and approaches have strengths and weaknesses , although not always in equal proportions , and they vary in the degree to which they reflect economic reality and are highly sensitive to the assumptions that are used .

trade models are different from macroeconomic models used to forecast gdp , employment , wages , taxes , and investment in the economy .

trade models are not structured to allow them to directly estimate changes in the number of job gains or losses in the economy that may arise from a trade agreement .

instead , trade models estimate changes in employment between sectors of the economy given certain baseline assumptions about changes in prices of traded goods and gdp .

the models are hampered by data limitations and other theoretical and practical issues that make it difficult to derive precise estimates of the impact of a particular trade agreement on the economy .

in response , some groups use various methods and proxy estimators to assess the potential impact of trade agreements on jobs , producing a wide range of estimates .

some groups argue that in certain cases ftas negatively affect employment in the united states , worsen the nation's trade deficit , and reduce wages for u.s. workers .

most economists acknowledge that international trade and ftas can entail some negative effects , particularly job losses and lower wages , with the effects falling more heavily on some workers and some firms , but they also argue that the overall net effect is positive .

generally , the costs and benefits associated with ftas do not accrue to the economy at the same speed ; costs to the economy in the form of job losses are felt in the initial stages of the agreement , while benefits to the economy accrue over time .

in addition , while research is ongoing , many economists conclude that there is little evidence indicating that trade liberalization , or international trade more broadly , is a major factor affecting income distribution , whether in the united states or in other economies , developed or developing .

 ( see the section on " international trade and income inequality " in this report. ) .

in comparison to the limited amount of data on nontariff barriers to trade in goods and services and the difficulties involved in translating nontariff barriers into tariff equivalents , the relative availability of data on trade in goods and tariff rates has tended to drive the policy dialogue concerning the impact that cuts in tariffs will have on employment , wages , and output in the economy .

the rapid digitalization of the global economy , however , is reshaping global trade , as well as broader global value chains .

as a result of these developments , global trade patterns arguably are being shaped more by nontariff activities than they are by traditional cuts in tariffs , due to successive rounds of trade negotiations that have lowered average tariff rates .

perhaps more importantly , the digital revolution is affecting the economy in unpredictable ways that are complicating efforts to collect data and to forecast the impact of the phenomenon in ways that capture their impact in trade models , thereby challenging the relevance of traditional trade models and some of the more common measures that often are used to assess the performance of trade agreements .

as one study concluded , "globalization is being accelerated by flows of data that embody ideas , information , and innovation. .

faced with pressure on jobs and wages from international trade , governments are tempted at times to protect domestic producers or vulnerable segments of the workforce .

such actions , however , have broader implications for the economy as a whole .

faced with these price pressures , firms can respond by upgrading their own production processes and improving their productivity .

in lieu of making such structural changes , firms can also outsource production , fold , or attempt to alter the trade environment .

such attempts can include ( 1 ) negotiating with other producers to set a global price that is consistent with their own production costs , essentially creating a cartel price ; ( 2 ) lobbying governments to raise the price of imported goods to match the domestic price through tariffs or nontariff measures , or some other form of a tax on imports ; or ( 3 ) lobbying for subsidies to compensate domestic producers for the difference between the domestic and the international price .

while the economic impact of these specific policies differs , they may impose costs on the economy as a whole by affecting the allocation of capital and labor .

in almost all cases , efforts to protect a segment of the economy from international competition involve costs that are dispersed throughout the economy .

another important area where opponents and proponents of trade agreements disagree is over the impact that such agreements have on employment as a result of shifts in foreign investment .

some opponents of trade agreements contend that trade agreements have led directly to job losses in the united states by encouraging u.s. multinational companies to outsource jobs to other countries .

they also argue that such agreements encourage some u.s. firms to close plants in the united states and shift production and jobs to their affiliates abroad .

indeed , selected anecdotal evidence suggests that there are instances in which some firms may have shifted part of their operations abroad , but the evidence to date suggests that these instances represent isolated activities more than a general pattern of behavior .

instead , some economists argue that the relationship between domestic production , foreign investment , and trade has become complicated through the growth of global value chains in which value is added through production activities in many different locations .

this is sometimes referred to as "trade in tasks" as opposed to the traditional "trade in goods. .

as indicated in figure 10 , in 2005 ( the latest date for such data ) all developed economies were engaging to various degrees in offshore manufacturing , according to the oecd .

for the oecd countries as a whole , about 25% of total manufacturing activities on average were taking place through offshore production relationships .

at 7% of manufacturing activity occurring offshore , the united states ranked fourth from last among the oecd countries , while hungary , at a 36% share , ranked first .

in cases where u.s. firms have increased their investment abroad , it is not possible to determine whether they shifted their operations from the united states to another location specifically to replace domestic u.s. production with production abroad to export back to the united states , or to serve the local or regional foreign market .

intra - firm trade , or exports and imports between u.s. parent companies and their foreign affiliates , accounted for 29% and 34% of total u.s. exports and imports , respectively , in 2012 .

over the past decade , however , intra - firm trade , both exports and imports , has declined as a share of total u.s. trade , reflecting in part the growing share of trade between u.s. parent companies and firms with which they are affiliated through nonequity relationships , that is , global value chains .

the bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) collects and publishes an extensive amount of data on u.s. parent companies and their foreign affiliates .

these data , however , are not collected to capture the outsourcing phenomenon .

indeed , since the late 1990s , no u.s. government entity has collected comprehensive data specifically to capture the closing of a production facility in the united states and the offsetting opening of a facility abroad .

in addition to the traditional equity - based direct investment , there is an increase in various types of nonequity investments through global value chains .

these nonequity relationships reflect a new phase in economic globalization in which multinational corporations and workers build interdependent networks of operations .

these nonequity forms of ownership include partial ownership , joint ventures , contract manufacturing , logistics management , franchising and licensing , and other forms of contractual relationships through which firms coordinate and control the activities of partner firms .

evidence to date suggests that such forms of control are shaping global trade patterns in such industries as automotive components , consumer electronics , apparel , hotels , and information technology and business process services .

some opponents of trade agreements contend that international trade , trade agreements , and globalization more broadly have been important factors contributing to the growing inequality in wealth and income within countries .

they argue that international trade favors high - skilled activities and workers .

despite intense focus in the academic literature , there is no clear consensus on the direct impact of trade and trade agreements on income inequality .

while trade and trade agreements may have a short - run impact on income inequality in some cases and in some sectors of the economy , over the long term , the distribution of income is determined by a range of other factors within the economy , with trade generally judged to be less important .

much of the current controversy in the academic literature over trade and income inequality is not a disagreement over the impact of trade agreements on income inequality in developed economies like the united states , where trade is less important than other factors , but in developing countries , where trade can have a greater effect on income distribution .

some economists emphasized the importance of other factors in affecting the distribution of income .

for example , one study concludes that the effect of globalization on inequality depends on many factors , several of which are country - and time - specific , including: a country's trade protection pattern prior to liberalization ; the particular form of liberalization and sectors it affected ; the flexibility of domestic markets in adjusting to changes in the economic environment , in particular the degree of within - country labor and capital mobility ; and the existence of other concurrent trends ( eg , skill - biased technological change ) that may have interacted with or even partially been induced by globalization .

given that different countries experienced globalization in different ways and at different times , it is hardly surprising that the relevant mechanisms through which inequality was affected are case specific .

congress faces a number of difficult issues as it considers the trump administration's approach to trade policy , including a possible reconsideration of its opposition to the tpp agreement , potential t - tip , renegotiation of nafta and the u.s. - south korea fta , and the use of tariffs .

both the tpp and the t - tip comprise , or could comprise , a set of measures that could open major markets to increased u.s. exports and establish new trade rules and disciplines .

the agreements could lead to major reforms in the developing economies of the participating countries .

of particular concern is the number of jobs that could be affected — positively and negatively — by the two agreements .

various groups have used trade models to offer their predictions about the employment effects of the agreements with differing and , at times , conflicting results , arising primarily from the number and kinds of assumptions they make .

the different estimates of the employment effects of trade agreements highlight the limitations of the models themselves and the data they use .

congress may decide to try to improve the predictive capability of current trade models ; congress could redirect or add resources to improve the forecasting ability of current models .

congress could also contract with private entities to develop new models .

congress may also consider conducting oversight of the current state of u.s. data on trade and trade - related employment to determine what actions , if any , may be taken to improve such data and the costs and benefits involved in doing so .

such efforts could provide ( 1 ) greater insights into the dynamic adjustments that would occur as the result of a given trade agreement ; ( 2 ) improved estimates of the number of jobs currently related to international trade ; ( 3 ) improved assessments of the impact of trade agreements on particular sectors in the economy ; and ( 4 ) a more informed assessment of the potential long - run impact of a trade agreement on the economy as a whole and on particular sectors within the economy .

given the constant churning that occurs in u.s. labor markets , most economists likely would conclude that labor markets are sufficiently fluid to minimize the long - term impact of any adjustment costs that could arise from a trade agreement .

economists recognize , however , that the adjustment costs associated with trade agreements and other types of market transformations can be highly concentrated on some workers , firms , and communities .

recent research also indicates that impediments may inhibit the adjustment process in some local labor markets , resulting in prolonged periods of unemployment or underemployment for some workers .

congress may choose to consider reviewing the effectiveness of current efforts to assist workers and firms in adjusting to changes in product and labor markets and how best to address impediments in these markets .

at times , members of congress are concerned about the impact a particular fta could have on employment and production within their states .

trade data by state are often quoted , but admittedly are unreliable .

some trade data are especially difficult to allocate by state because they represent data attributed to the port from which the goods or materials were exported or they represent bulk items sent to a warehouse and repackaged .

given the increased attention that is being placed on global supply chains and international trade , congress could explore and assess how trade data are allocated to individual states and determine the costs and benefits of improving the way trade data are collected to improve the reliability of state - level data .

