trafficking in persons , or human trafficking , refers to the subjection of men , women , and children to compelled service for the purposes of exploitation .

examples of human trafficking include trafficking for commercial sexual exploitation , including child sexual exploitation ; forced labor , including bonded labor , involuntary domestic servitude , and forced child labor ; and the unlawful recruitment and use of child soldiers .

reports suggest that human trafficking is a global phenomenon , victimizing millions of people and contributing to a multi - billion dollar criminal industry .

it is a centuries - old problem that , despite international efforts , continues to occur in virtually every country in the world .

on june 30 , 2016 , the state department released its latest edition of the flagship annual u.s. publication on international human trafficking , the trafficking in persons ( tip ) report , discussed further in the " state department reporting requirements " section below .

briefly , the tip report categorized 185 countries , including the united states , into four tiers , based on their respective governments' level of effort to address human trafficking: tier 1 ( best ) , tier 2 , tier 2 watch list , and tier 3 ( worst ) .

an additional three countries were designated as "special cases" without a tier ranking because of political instability and the inability to obtain relevant government information .

only tier 1 countries , approximately 19.5% of the countries assessed , were fully compliant with u.s. - established minimum standards to eliminate severe forms of human trafficking ; the rest were considered noncompliant and varied in terms of their level of effort to improve .

among the least compliant were the 27 countries identified as tier 3 in the 2016 tip report , including 8 that had previously been tier 2 watch list: burma , djibouti , haiti , papua new guinea , sudan , suriname , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan .

as required by law , tier 3 countries are subjected to selected foreign assistance restrictions , unless the president determines that continuing to provide aid is in the u.s. national interest .

the nongovernmental organization walk free foundation also provided a global evaluation of human trafficking trends in its 2016 global slavery index report .

the 2016 global slavery index report estimated that some 45.8 million ( up from 35.8 million estimated in 2014 ) individuals worldwide were exploited through human trafficking , forced labor , debt bondage , forced or servile marriage , or commercial sexual exploitation .

in contrast to the tip report , which categorizes countries solely on the basis of government efforts , the global slavery index also seeks to provide country - by - country estimates of people experiencing conditions tantamount to modern slavery .

for example , the 2016 global slavery index reported the following: countries with the greatest prevalence of their population subjected to "modern slavery" included north korea ( for comparison , the state department listed north korea as tier 3 in the 2016 tip report ) , uzbekistan ( tier 3 ) , cambodia ( tier 2 ) , india ( tier 2 ) , and qatar ( tier 2 watch list ) .

countries with the highest absolute numbers of people subjected to modern slavery , according to the 2016 global slavery index , included india ( tier 2 in the 2016 tip report ) , china ( tier 2 watch list ) , pakistan ( tier 2 watch list ) , bangladesh ( tier 2 ) , and uzbekistan ( tier 3 ) .

countries taking the least action to address human trafficking included north korea ( tier 3 in the 2016 tip report ) , iran ( tier 3 ) , eritrea ( tier 3 ) , equatorial guinea ( tier 3 ) , papua new guinea ( tier 3 ) , guinea ( tier 2 watch list ) , the democratic republic of the congo ( drc , tier 2 watch list ) , and south sudan ( tier 3 ) .

several other older , but nevertheless widely referenced global reports on human trafficking include a 2014 report prepared by the united nations office on drugs and crime ( unodc ) and two reports prepared by the international labor organization ( ilo ) .

surveying u.n. member countries , unodc reported in 2014 that , between 2010 and 2012 , 124 countries had identified trafficking victims representing 152 nationalities .

the unodc report cautioned that its estimates were minimum figures , as it is generally recognized that the actual scope and prevalence of human trafficking is far higher than officially reported .

the unodc report also revealed that trafficking operations were seemingly as diverse as they were widespread , ranging from individuals exploiting their partners or employees to highly sophisticated transnational criminal syndicates involving a large number of victims .

in 2012 , the ilo estimated that some 20.9 million men , women , and children were subjected to forced labor , including trafficking , debt bondage , and slavery - like conditions .

in 2014 , the ilo followed up with an analysis of the financial value of forced labor and related trafficking on the international economy , estimating that it generated $150 billion in illegal profits annually .

according to the ilo , two - thirds of this total amount stemmed from commercial sexual exploitation , while the rest resulted from forced labor .

key forced labor sectors included the construction , manufacturing , and utilities industries ( generating some $34 billion in annual illicit income ) , followed by agriculture ( $9 billion ) and domestic work ( $8 billion ) .

the u.s. government , including congress , has played a leading role in international efforts to combat human trafficking , particularly through the enactment of the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( tvpa , division a of p.l .

106-386 ) and its subsequent amendments and reauthorizations ( tvpras of 2003 , 2005 , 2008 , and 2013 ) .

other related legislation has included the child soldiers prevention act of 2008 ( cspa of 2008 , title iv of p.l .

110-457 ) and title xvii of the national defense authorization act , fiscal year 2013 ( "end trafficking in government contracting," p.l .

112-239 ) .

in the 114 th congress , trade and customs legislation addressed human trafficking , including the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 ( title i of p.l .

114-26 ) and the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-125 ) .

other legislation on international aspects of human trafficking have also been enacted , including appropriations , the international megan's law to prevent child exploitation and other sexual crimes through advanced notification of traveling sex offenders ( p.l .

114-119 ) ; and other country - specific statutes .

see appendix for further review of legislation in the 114 th congress .

in addition , recent administrations have taken several steps to enhance u.s. responses to international human trafficking .

prior to enactment of the tvpa , in 1999 , president bill clinton issued executive order 13126 on the "prohibition of acquisition of products produced by forced or indentured child labor. .

in 2002 , president george w. bush issued national security presidential directive 22 on "combating trafficking in persons. .

in 2012 , president barack obama issued executive order 13627 on "strengthening protections against trafficking in persons in federal contracts. .

in remarks at the clinton global initiative in september 2012 , president obama described the fight against human trafficking as "one of the great human rights causes of our time" and emphasized the importance of the u.s. government in leading such efforts .

the u.s. department of state leads federal efforts to combat human trafficking .

the secretary of state chairs the president's interagency task force ( pitf ) on trafficking in persons , and the director of the state department's office to monitor and combat trafficking in persons ( j / tip ) chairs the senior policy operating group ( spog ) , a working - level interagency entity that coordinates the u.s. government's response to human trafficking .

j / tip also administers an international anti - trafficking grants program and annually prepares , with department - wide input , the congressionally mandated tip report .

pursuant to the tvpa , as amended , the state department has annually reported on government responses to human trafficking in its tip report since 2001 .

as briefly outlined in the introduction , countries covered in the tip report , including the united sates , receive one of four possible ranking designations: tier 1 ( best ) , tier 2 , tier 2 watch list , and tier 3 ( worst ) .

only tier 1 countries are fully compliant with the tvpa's minimum standards ( see text box below ) , while the rest are noncompliant and vary in terms of the level of effort their governments have exhibited to improve .

also published in conjunction with the annual tip report is a list of countries involved in recruiting and using child soldiers .

countries designated as tier 3 or identified as recruiting or using child soldiers may , in turn , be subject to restrictions on certain types of u.s. foreign assistance .

the annual t ip report is due each year to congress on june 1 .

to assess anti - trafficking progress among a subset of higher risk countries , known as the special watch list , the tvpa requires the state department to issue each february an interim assessment .

a discussion of the 2016 interim assessment and tip report follows .

as congress continues to evaluate u.s. efforts to address human trafficking internationally , foreign assistance funding will remain a central focus .

as required by the tvpa , as amended , countries that receive a tier 3 ranking in the tip report are ineligible to receive nonhumanitarian , nontrade - related aid in the following fiscal year .

in addition , pursuant to the cspa , countries identified in the tip report as having recruited or used child soldiers are additionally restricted from receiving certain u.s. security assistance in the following fiscal year .

both provisions authorize the president to waive restrictions on aid in cases where the continuation of aid would promote u.s. national interests that supersede anti - trafficking policy goals .

for fy2017 , the president is expected to decide in the fall which restrictions will be made .

fy2016 funding to address human trafficking internationally is governed by the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) , in which congress provided for not less than $72 million in state department and foreign assistance efforts to combat human trafficking internationally .

this amount included $12 million to support j / tip personnel and administrative costs out of the diplomatic and consular programs ( d&cp ) account .

it also allocated $60 million in foreign assistance funding to address human trafficking out of the development assistance ( da ) account ( $9.8 million ) , the economic support fund ( esf ) account ( $11.2 million ) , and the international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) account ( $39 million ) .

among the anti - human trafficking programs funded with u.s. foreign assistance is a j / tip - administered international grant program , through which j / tip awarded more than $18 million in grants and cooperative agreements in fy2015 to ngo and international organizations .

in addition , the j / tip office manages efforts to establish child protection compact ( cpc ) partnerships , the first of which was agreed to with the government of ghana in june 2015 ; in october 2015 , the j / tip office announced grants totaling $5 million in support of the cpc partnership with ghana .

as part of the fy2016 appropriations , p.l .

114-113 also specifically committed funding to address human trafficking in guatemala ( $5 million ) and child trafficking through child protection compacts ( $5 million in incle funds ) .

the act further specified that not less than $4 million ( in incle funds ) may be appropriated for dna forensic technology programs to combat human trafficking in central america .

if the end modern slavery initiative act of 2015 ( s. 553 , as reported to the senate ) is enacted , p.l .

114-113 would provide , in addition to the $60 million appropriated in foreign assistance for anti - trafficking purposes , $25 million , made available out of the da and incle accounts .

this additional funding would support grants to reduce the prevalence of modern slavery globally .

the grants would be administered by s. 553 's newly envisioned independent , nonprofit corporation to be known as the end modern slavery initiative foundation .

p.l .

114-113 included several additional provisions related to international human trafficking , including reporting requirements on the obligation and expenditure of counter - trafficking funds and a prohibition in burma on the use of funds for military training and operations involving child soldiers .

in addition , the act required that training of foreign security forces and justice - sector officials address issues related to the prevention of response to gender - based violence and human trafficking .

it also limited the obligation of some funds for central america until the secretary of state certifies and reports that the governments of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras are taking effective steps to combat human smuggling and trafficking .

in february 2016 , the state department released its congressional budget justification for state , foreign operations , and related programs in fy2017 , requesting $7.4 million to fund j / tip out of the d&cp account and an additional $48.7 million in foreign operations programming .

the following list provides an overview of bills in the 114 th congress that pertain , at least in part , to international dimensions of trafficking in persons .

enacted legislation h.r .

515 .

international megan's law to prevent child exploitation and other sexual crimes through advanced notification of traveling sex offenders — became p.l .

114-119 .

h.r .

644 .

trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 — became p.l .

114-125 .

see in particular provisions amending the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 and the tariff act of 1930 and the conference report ( h.rept .

114-376 ) .

h.r .

757 .

north korea sanctions and policy enhancement act of 2016 — became p.l .

114-122 .

see in particular provisions on forced labor and trafficking of north korean citizens and house foreign affairs committee report ( h.rept .

114-392 ) .

h.r .

2029 .

consolidated appropriations act , 2016 — became p.l .

114-113 .

see division k , the department of state , foreign operations , and related appropriations act , 2016 ; see also s. 1725 and h.r .

2772 , both entitled department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2016 , and respectively reported out of committee ( s.rept .

114-79 and h.rept .

114-154 ) .

h.r .

2146 .

defending public safety employees' retirement act — became p.l .

114-26 .

see title i , the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 ; see also s. 995 , the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 , which was reported out of the senate committee on finance ( s.rept .

114-42 ) .

passed either the house or senate h.r .

350 .

human trafficking prevention , intervention , and recovery act of 2015 — passed the house ; pertaining to the activities of the president's interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking as they relate to child trafficking in the united states .

h.r .

357 .

human trafficking prevention act — passed the house ; pertaining to federal government training on human trafficking .

h.r .

400 .

trafficking prevention in foreign affairs contracting act — passed the house ; pertaining to anti - human trafficking requirements for federal contractors .

h.r .

514 .

human trafficking prioritization act — passed the house ; pertaining to the bureaucratic status of the j / tip office within the state department .

h.r .

3694 .

strategy to oppose predatory organ trafficking act — passed the house ; pertaining to u.s. policy responses to the trafficking in human organs .

s. 1635 .

department of state operations authorization and embassy security act , fiscal year 2016 — passed the senate ; pertaining to state department responsibilities to combat human trafficking .

s. 2943 .

national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 — passed the senate ; pertaining to , among other provisions , authority for the secretary of state to award grants seeking to reduce the prevalence of human trafficking in foreign countries .

other pending bills h.r .

57 .

equal rights and access for the women of south sudan act — pertaining to the scope of foreign assistance provided to south sudan , including trafficking prevention and trafficker prosecution .

h.r .

191 .

repeal executive amnesty act of 2015 — pertaining to , among other issues , unaccompanied alien children ( with bearing on the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2008 ) .

h.r .

500 .

survivors of human trafficking empowerment act — pertaining to the establishment of a u.s .

advisory council on human trafficking .

h.r .

611 .

sex trafficking demand reduction act — pertaining to the minimum standards for the elimination of severe forms of trafficking in persons and government policies on the purchase of commercial sex .

h.r .

1149 .

protection of children act of 2015 — pertaining to unaccompanied alien children that has bearing on the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2008 .

h.r .

1340 .

international violence against women act of 2015 — pertaining generally to foreign policy on violence against women , which has bearing on human trafficking policy .

h.r .

1782 .

cuba human rights act of 2015 — pertaining to u.s. policy with respect to cuba , including as related to combating human trafficking .

h.r .

2140 .

vietnam human rights act of 2015 — pertaining to conditions , including some related to human trafficking , on foreign assistance to vietnam .

h.r .

2621 .

china human rights protection act of 2015 — pertaining to , among other issues , human trafficking in china .

h.r .

2772 .

department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2016 — pertaining to state department foreign assistance provisions to combat human trafficking .

h.r .

2798 .

strengthening refugee resettlement act — pertaining generally to refugee policies that has bearing on some trafficking victims with t - visas .

h.r .

3226 .

business supply chain transparency on trafficking and slavery act of 2015 — pertaining to the disclosure of company efforts to prevent trafficking in their global supply chains .

h.r .

4720 .

expedited family reunification act of 2016 — pertaining to unaccompanied alien children ( with bearing on the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2008 ) .

h.r .

5332 .

women , peace , and security act of 2016 — pertaining to , among other issues , state department training requirements on human trafficking .

h.r .

5912 .

department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2017 — pertaining to state department foreign assistance provisions to combat human trafficking .

s. 224 .

women , peace and security act of 2015 — pertaining to , among other issues , state department training requirements on human trafficking .

s. 553 .

end modern slavery initiative act of 2015 — pertaining to the establishment of an end modern slavery initiative foundation to support international efforts to address human trafficking .

s. 713 .

international violence against women act of 2015 — pertaining generally to foreign policy on violence against women , which has bearing on human trafficking policy .

s. 1627 .

human rights accountability act of 2015 — pertaining to state department reporting requirement responsibilities on human rights , including human trafficking .

s. 1876 .

a bill to rename the office to monitor and combat trafficking of the department of state the bureau to monitor and combat trafficking in persons and to provide for an assistant secretary to head such bureau , and for other purposes — pertaining to the bureaucratic status of the j / tip office within the state department .

s. 1968 .

business supply chain transparency on trafficking and slavery act of 2015 — pertaining to the disclosure of company efforts to prevent trafficking in their global supply chains .

s. 2144 .

north korea sanctions and policy enhancement act of 2015 — pertaining to u.s. policy with respect to north korea , including as related to forced labor and trafficking of north korean citizens .

s. 2632 .

vietnam human rights act of 2016 — pertaining to conditions , including some related to human trafficking , on foreign assistance to vietnam .

s. 2937 .

department of state authorization act , fiscal year 2017 — pertaining to state department responsibilities to combat human trafficking .

