the carl d. perkins career and technical education act of 2006 ( perkins iv ; p.l .

109-270 ) is the most recent federal law supporting career and technical education ( cte ) services offered within the states at the secondary and postsecondary education levels .

cte , which has historically been known as vocational education , comprises organized educational activities that provide individuals with the knowledge and skills needed to prepare for the labor market in general and for careers in current or emerging professions in particular .

traditionally , cte has also included preparation of students for roles outside the paid labor market .

the stated purpose of perkins iv is to support the development of career and technical , as well as academic , skills among secondary and postsecondary education students enrolled in cte programs .

perkins iv was authorized by statute through fy2012 and was automatically extended through fy2013 by the general education provisions act ( gepa ) .

most recently , perkins iv was funded at $1.1 billion for fy2016 .

as of april 2016 , the house has had one hearing on reauthorization of perkins iv in the 114 th congress .

it was held by the subcommittee on early childhood , elementary , and secondary education of the education and the workforce committee on october 27 , 2015 , and entitled "improving career and technical education to help students succeed in the workforce. .

this report is divided into four major sections .

the first section provides an overview of career and technical education , including student participation levels .

this is followed by a brief legislative history of the federal government's involvement in cte .

the third section discusses perkins iv in detail , including an overview of appropriations levels and state performance .

the final section summarizes some of the more significant findings from the national assessment of career and technical education , which was completed in 2015 .

for the purposes of perkins iv , cte includes organized educational activities that impart technical or occupational skills at the secondary and postsecondary levels and lead to an industry - recognized credential , a certificate , or an associate's degree .

cte courses are usually distinguished from courses in the liberal arts by being more directly tied to specific professions or occupational fields .

cte programs in a wide variety of occupations are offered at both the secondary and postsecondary levels of education .

practitioners of cte have organized its occupations into career clusters and career pathways in order to help students understand potential sequences of academic and cte courses they need to take in order to be best prepared for specific careers .

figure 1 shows the different career clusters and student participation in those clusters at the secondary and postsecondary levels .

the federal government has a long history of supporting workforce development , including cte .

at the secondary level , the historical goals of federal legislation included providing relevant skills for students in order to keep them enrolled in high schools , as well as attracting and retaining qualified cte teachers with real - world professional experience .

cte at the postsecondary level has historically been aimed at providing students in sub - baccalaureate programs with skills relevant to the requirements of specific occupations or careers , and providing an alternative to a postsecondary education with a focus on liberal arts .

the carl d. perkins career and technical education act of 2006 ( perkins iv ; p.l .

109-270 ) was signed into law by president george w. bush on august 12 , 2006 .

the act was authorized through fy2012 , which ended on september 30 , 2012 .

the authorization was extended through fy2013 under the general education provisions act , although the act continues to receive appropriations in fy2016 .

while maintaining the overall structure of its predecessors , perkins iv introduced the following major changes: the act was renamed "career and technical," replacing "vocational and technical," education ; separate core indicators of performance for the basic state grants ( bsg ) program were introduced for the secondary and postsecondary levels , requiring grantees to meet at least 90% of their adjusted levels of performance on each core indicator ; state improvement plans were required if the 90% target is not met on the bsg adjusted level of performance for at least one core indicator ; cte provisions were explicitly linked with the academic standards required under the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as authorized by the no child left behind act ( p.l .

107-110 ) ; each state was required to develop and describe programs of study , or suggested nonduplicative sequences of secondary and postsecondary courses that lead to an industry recognized credential ; each local bsg grantee was required to offer at least one state - recognized program of study ; and states were able to consolidate funding under the tech prep program with their basic state grants funding .

perkins iv contains five separate authorizations of funds: basic state grants , national programs , tribally controlled postsecondary career and technical institutions ( tcpctip ) , occupational and employment information , and tech prep .

the authorized appropriations level in perkins iv for each of these activities is such sums as may be necessary for each of fy2007-fy2012 .

as shown in table 1 , total appropriations for perkins iv have gradually decreased from a high of $1.304 billion in fy2007 to a low of $1.080 billion in fy2013 , before rebounding slightly to $1.133 billion for fy2014 and fy2015 .

the basic state grants receive two separate appropriation amounts: an appropriation for the current fiscal year ( funds that are to be obligated during fy2015 are appropriated in the fy2015 appropriations act ) ; and an advance appropriation for the subsequent fiscal year ( eg , appropriated funds that are to be obligated in fy2015 are appropriated in the fy2014 appropriations act ) .

the tech prep program was funded at around $100 million through fy2010 , but it has not been funded since .

the occupational and employment information program has not been funded under perkins iv .

 table 2 shows state performance on the core indicators of performance for py2011-2012 .

for the secondary education level core indicators of performance , 24 states met or exceeded 90% of their adjusted performance levels for all indicators .

this means that 31 states needed to submit program improvement plans for the following program year for at least one secondary core indicator of performance .

states were most successful on the core indicator for student graduation rates , with all 55 states that reported data achieving at least 90% of their adjusted performance levels , and 49% meeting or exceeding 100% of their adjusted performance levels on that indicator .

states were least successful on nontraditional completion .

forty - two states reached 90% of their nontraditional completion adjusted performance levels .

at the postsecondary education level , 28 states met or exceeded 90% of their adjusted performance levels for all indicators , meaning that 27 states had to submit program improvement plans .

all 55 states reached 90% of their adjusted performance levels for the technical skill attainment core indicator .

states were least successful on the postsecondary core indicator for credential , certificate , or degree attainment , with only 41 states attaining 90% of their adjusted performance levels on that indicator .

section 114 ( d ) ( 2 ) of perkins iv authorized funds to conduct an independent evaluation and assessment of cte programs under the act .

results of this study were published by the department of education in 2014 as the national assessment of career and technical education ( nacte ) .

this section of the report provides a concise summary of some nacte findings about the state of cte in the united states and the implementation of perkins iv .

several of these findings have received considerable attention in the cte researcher and practitioner communities .

federal appropriations for perkins iv have fallen since the 2006 reauthorization .

adjusting for inflation , total perkins funding declined by 24% from fy2007 to fy2014 .

declines in allocations for individual states have ranged from 6% to 30% .

in py2008-2009 , the most common uses of perkins funds reported by local providers were purchasing equipment and providing career guidance and academic counseling to students .

when surveyed about the implementation of programs of study ( pos ) in perkins iv , nearly half of all state secondary and postsecondary cte directors ( 23 of each ) reported in py2008-2009 that cte teachers and faculty did not have a good understanding of pos , suggesting that the pos concept was unclear to the instructors of cte .

flexibility in the perkins iv definitions of core indicators of performance and the resulting variety of definitions used by the states precludes the ability to use performance data reported by the states for valid comparison of performance between states or for aggregating data across states to examine national progress and trends in cte over time .

the percentage of high school graduates completing four - year college preparatory coursework nearly doubled from 1990 to 2009 , and cte students showed larger increases than did non - cte students .

this trend can be interpreted to indicate that participating in cte programs can increase students' chances of completing college preparatory coursework .

however , this may reflect changes in who participated in cte rather than the impact of cte .

college - going and completion rates varied considerably by cte concentration field , as did continuation in the same cte field at the postsecondary level .

for example , as of 2006 , college - attendance rates for 2004 high school graduates , examined by cte concentration field , ranged from 84% for cte students who had concentrated in computer and information sciences to 52% for concentrators in repair and transportation .

appendix a .

basic state grants allocation formula this appendix provides a detailed description of the formula used for allocating perkins iv basic state grant funds to the states after set - asides for the outlying areas , the native american cte program , and the native hawaiian cte program have been reserved .

initial allocation after reservations for outlying areas and the native american and native hawaiian cte programs , basic state grants funds are award ed to the 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands .

the base formula for state allocations was historically designed to target funds toward states with higher proportions of aged 15 to 19 .

states with lower per capita incomes are also targeted by the initial allocation formula .

the base formula depends on three population groups in each state: persons aged 15 to 19 , 20 to 24 , and 25 to 65 .

each of these populations is then weighted in the calculation of initial allocations .

the largest weight ( 0.5 ) is assigned to the 15 to 19 age group .

the 20 to 24 age group is weighted 0.2 , while the 25 to 65 age group is weighted 0.15 .

note that these weights differ from those stated in the body of the report , because this section provides a higher level of detail about the formula calculations .

the second factor for calculating the initial allocation is the state's allotment ratio .

this is calculated by dividing a state's per capita income ( pci ) by the national average pci .

that quotient is then multiplied by 0.5 and subtracted from 1 .

this calculation results in higher allotment ratio values for states with low pcis and lower allotment ratio values for states with high pcis .

no state may have an allotment ratio higher than 0.6 or lower than 0.4 .

allotment ratios for states with higher or lower calculated ratios are set to either 0.6 or 0.4 , respectively .

each state's initial allocation is then calculated by adding four quantities based on weighted populations in the three age groups and allotment ratios .

the first three components of the sum are calculated by multiplying a state's allotment ratio by its population in the given age group , and then dividing the result by the sum of all such products across all the states .

that number is then multiplied by the weight corresponding to the particular age group: where 0.5 is the weight factor associated with the 15 to 19 population group .

correspondingly , the allocations associated with the 20 to 24 and 25 to 65 population groups are calculated as follows: where 0.2 is the weight factor associated with the age 20 to 24 population group , and where 0.15 is the weight factor associated with the 25 to 65 population group .

the fourth component of a state's initial allocation , allocationprop in the above formula , is calculated as that state's proportion of the total funding determined by the sum of the first three formulas .

this last component is given a weight of 0.15 .

as a result , allocationprop is calculated as follows: to recap , the largest proportion ( 50% ) of each state's initial allocation under the basic state grants formula is assigned based on the number of persons aged 15 to 19 , which is the traditional target population for cte programs .

the inclusion of pci in the formula helps states with lower pcis receive a greater share of available funds .

thus , states with lower pcis and higher numbers of persons aged 15 to 19 will get the highest initial allocations .

perkins iv has two different formulas for adjusting state initial allocations .

the determination of which formula is used is based on how the total amount of funding available for state grants compares with the amount available in fy2006 , which was $1,115,902,206 .

formula for funding at fy2006 level or lower under perkins iv , there are actually two formulas that are authorized for use in making state grant allocations .

the first formula applies if the total amount of funding available for basic state grants is equal to or less than the amount that was available in fy2006 .

this formula has been used to calculate state allocations each year from fy2007 to fy2016 .

under this formula , the initial state allocations can be altered to ensure that each state's allocation meets certain minimum state grant provisions .

there are three separate possible minimum grant conditions calculated for each state: 1 .

0.5% of the total allocated to states ; 2 .

150% of a state's prior - year grant ; 3 .

150% of a state's population aged 15 to 65 multiplied by the national average per pupil payment ( nappp ) .

the nappp is calculated by dividing the total amount allocated to all states by the total national population of persons aged 15 to 65 .

the smallest of these three possible minimum grant amounts is then compared with the state's fy1998 allocation .

the larger of these two amounts is then considered the state's minimum grant amount .

if a state's initial allocation is lower than its minimum grant amount , that state's allocation is increased to equal its minimum grant amount .

for any state whose initial allocation exceeds its minimum grant amount , its initial allocation is ratably reduced to ensure that all states have met their minimum grant amounts .

if the resulting allocations put some of the states whose allocations were ratably reduced below their minimum grant amounts , then additional ratable reductions can take place until every state has met its minimum grant amount .

figure a - 1 summarizes the process of determining state allocations when appropriations are at the fy2006 level or lower .

formula for funding at higher than fy2006 level a different formula for state allocations of perkins iv basic state grants funds applies when total appropriations are greater than those from fy2006 .

under that formula , initial allocations are calculated in the same way as in the formula described in the previous section of this report .

once initial allocations are calculated , state grants are adjusted using only one of the three possible minimum grant rules: the state minimum grant equal to 0.5% of total allocations .

additionally , a special rule is introduced for the distribution of "new money," which is defined as the amount by which the current year's funding available to states exceeds the total funding available to states in fy2006 .

the formula for state allocations when total funding exceeds fy2006 levels would allot up to one - third of the new money to bring states with allocations below 0.5% of total allocations up to the 0.5% level .

the new money would be allotted in such a way that states that are furthest below the 0.5% mark would receive proportionately larger shares of the new money than states that are closer to , but still below , the 0.5% minimum .

as a result , none of the states with initial allocations below 0.5% of the total could end up with final allocations above 0.5% .

if total appropriations are sufficiently high , then each state should be able to reach the 0.5% minimum allocation .

the remaining funds — at least two - thirds of the new money and the funds left over from bringing the smaller states up to the 0.5% minimum — would be allocated to the remaining states in proportion to their initial allocations , except that no state , including those at or below the 0.5% minimum , would receive a grant less than its fy1998 allocation .

appendix b .

basic state grants allocation tabl .

