increased terrorist activity by groups like boko haram in nigeria has raised the international profile of african - based islamist terrorist groups , but violent extremism is not a new phenomenon on the continent .

in the 19 th century , local insurgent leaders fought to establish islamic states in areas that are now in nigeria , guinea / mali , and sudan .

in the 1990s , algeria fought a decade - long war against islamist insurgents after the military canceled election results favoring an islamist political movement , resulting in as many as 200,000 deaths .

also in the 1990s , sudan hosted foreign extremists , including osama bin laden , after an islamist regime came to power there in a coup .

al qaeda's bombings of the u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania in 1998 and subsequent attacks demonstrated the group's reach and ability to recruit from muslim communities in sub - saharan africa .

extremist groups in algeria and somalia later affiliated with al qaeda .

religiously inspired terrorism in africa is not limited to sunni islamist groups .

one of africa's oldest active terrorist groups is the lord's resistance army ( lra ) in central africa — unlike many of the violent extremist groups operating on the continent today , it originated out of a messianic , localized interpretation of christianity and traditional beliefs .

foreign fighter flows from the continent , primarily from north africa — first to afghanistan and the balkans , then to iraq , and now to syria , iraq , and libya — have long been of international concern .

while a majority of these fighters have come from the maghreb ( algeria , tunisia , morocco , libya , and mauritania ) , smaller numbers have come from somalia , sudan , and kenya , among other countries .

foreign fighter flows to somalia , including from the united states and other western countries , have reportedly decreased since 2012 but remain a security challenge .

u.s. federal prosecutors have brought several u.s. citizens to trial for seeking to join the somali al qaeda - linked group al shabaab .

the pace of high - profile extremist attacks on the continent has intensified in recent years .

terrorist incidents have ranged from mass casualty bombings , deadly sieges , and attacks on international facilities , to kidnappings , assassinations , and public executions .

most of the victims have been african , but several u.s. citizens have also been killed in such attacks .

assaults on prominent soft targets such as the westgate mall in kenya and hotels and restaurants frequented by foreigners appear to be on the rise , heightening concerns among foreign governments about the security of their citizens traveling or working in africa .

suicide bombings have become an increasingly common tactic , most notably for boko haram , which frequently uses women and children as attackers .

a somali - american man became the first known american suicide bomber in 2008 , in somalia for al shabaab .

 ( several other u.s. citizens who joined al shabaab have also reportedly died in somalia. ) .

in february 2016 , al shabaab demonstrated its ability to conceal a bomb in a laptop computer that was detonated by a suicide bomber onboard a somali airliner .

 ( it detonated before the plane reached cruising altitude and thus did not destroy the aircraft. ) .

in 2015 , u.s. director of national intelligence ( dni ) james clapper reported to congress that "sunni violent extremists are gaining momentum and the number of sunni violent extremist groups , members , and safe havens is greater than at any other point in history. .

he reiterated that message in 2016 .

u.s. officials warn of growing fragmentation within the "terrorism landscape," made up of an increasingly diverse array of groups in africa , asia , and the middle east .

africa , described by clapper in 2014 as "a hothouse for the emergence of extremist and rebel groups," has drawn increasing attention as groups in nigeria and somalia have expanded their reach and lethality , and as new north african groups have emerged .

some africa - based extremists have affiliated with al qaeda or the islamic state ( is , aka isis or isil ) , but many appear to operate autonomously .

transnational groups appear to see opportunity in africa — the cover of dabiq , the islamic state's english - language magazine , proclaimed in 2015: "shari'a will rule africa. .

in the 2015 assessment of the dni , most sunni violent extremist groups "place a higher priority on local concerns than on attacking the so - called far enemy — the united states and the west. .

nevertheless , some african groups have attacked western interests in africa , and u.s. officials view some groups , like al shabaab , as potentially capable of inspiring or carrying out attacks in the united states , despite a primarily regional focus .

there has been comparatively greater international focus on violent islamist extremism occurring in , and emanating from , the middle east , south asia , and north africa , but in recent years the death toll from violent islamist terrorist attacks in sub - saharan africa has rivaled that of other regions .

this report seeks to provide some context for current terrorism trends in sub - saharan africa and a discussion of some key issues for congress .

in addition to various country - specific responses to terrorist threats on the continent , african countries have established several multinational mechanisms to address certain regional extremist threats , including amisom , the regional cooperation initiative for the elimination of the lord's resistance army ( rci - lra ) , an au - led military intervention in mali in late 2012 ( subsequently re - hatted as a u.n. operation ) , a multinational joint operations center in southern algeria known as the cemoc , the lake chad basin commission's multinational joint task force ( mnjtf ) to counter boko haram , and a separate , nascent effort to create a joint military force among five west african countries known as the "g - 5 sahel. .

eleven countries participate in the au - backed nouakchott process on the enhancement of security cooperation and the operationalization of the african peace and security architecture ( apsa ) in the sahelo - saharan region .

the au's african center for the study and research on terrorism ( acsrt ) in algiers , which is led by an au special representative for counterterrorism coordination , provides a forum for centralizing information on terrorist activity and supporting african counterterrorism strategies .

these initiatives reflect recognition of the need for greater cooperation among affected states , although participating countries' capacities vary , sometimes significantly , as does the degree of political will for increased coordination .

overall , african - led responses to terrorist threats remain constrained by limited resources , institutional weaknesses , conflicting political agendas , corruption , sensitivities over domestic sovereignty , regional rivalries , and uneven engagement among affected states .

these challenges have undermined various continental efforts , including the au's protocol on the prevention and combating of terrorism , which did not enter into force until 2014 , a decade after its adoption ( several key countries , including kenya , nigeria , and somalia , have yet to ratify it ) .

also in 2014 , the african union's peace and security council issued a framework for preventing and combating terrorism and violent extremism in africa , building on previous decisions taken by the au to enhance cooperation and coordination against these threats and calling for a range of specific actions by au member states and the au commission .

as of january 2016 , only nine countries had signed the au's 2014 convention on cross border cooperation , and only one — niger — had ratified it .

other au efforts include a model anti - terrorism law , which provides a blueprint for domestic legislation in line with au policy .

according to the africa - based institute for security studies , only roughly one - third of african countries have counterterrorism legislation that comports with the au recommendations , however , raising questions about the extent to which some governments rank the threat a high priority .

various donor initiatives , including multi - donor trust funds and regional or bilateral assistance , aim to address african resource and capacity constraints .

the european union's african peace facility ( apf ) , for example , provides funding for amisom salaries and certain operational costs .

the eu has also provided support for regional security responses in mali and against the lra .

 ( the eu has provided more than €2 billion for such initiatives through the apf since 2004 , including roughly $300 million in 2015. ) .

the eu also fields military and police training missions in mali , niger , and somalia .

some countries , including the united kingdom ( uk ) , france , the united states , turkey , morocco , and algeria , provide training and equipment bilaterally to african partners to support counterterrorism efforts .

the uk , for example , announced its intention in december 2015 to deploy up to 300 military personnel to build nigeria's capacity to counter boko haram , augmenting its existing intelligence , training , and advisory support to the country .

turkey , a key donor to somalia , has signaled its intention to establish a military training center there .

and france , which launched operation serval in mali in 2013 , deploying more than 4,000 french forces to repulse islamist insurgents , transitioned to a new operation , barkhane , in mid - 2014 , under which some 3,500 french forces work with african counterparts to address jihadist threats across the sahel region ( see figure 1 ) .

the african union , the united nations , and various donors are engaged in discussions to enhance the sustainability of african - led peace support operations , including those with a potential counterterrorism component .

 ( the u.n. support office in somalia is unique in its mandate to provide support to a regional operation ; to date , the security council has been reluctant to consider support through assessed u.n. contributions for other african - led missions. ) .

au member states have notionally committed to gradually covering 25% of the au peace and security budget ( largely funded by donors ) by 2020 , but financing details remain unclear .

donor deliberations on u.n. support for future security council - authorized au missions continue .

the united states engages in a range of efforts , both military and civilian , to prevent and deter terrorism and to strengthen security and stability in africa .

the obama administration's 2015 national security strategy identifies "violent extremists fighting governments in somalia , nigeria , and across the sahel" — along with other ongoing conflicts in africa — as "threats to innocent civilians , regional stability , and our national security. .

consistent with the administration's national strategy for counterterrorism , its strategy for sub - saharan africa ( issued in 2012 ) indicates a goal of "disrupting , dismantling , and eventually defeating al - qa'ida and its affiliates and adherents in africa," in part by strengthening the capacity of "civilian bodies to provide security for their citizens and counter violent extremism through more effective governance , development , and law enforcement efforts. .

deepening security partnerships and building african military capacities is a separate , related aim under the same objective of advancing peace and security .

as the president described in his 2014 foreign policy speech at west point , while "not eliminat[ing] the need to take direct action when necessary to protect ourselves," building partner capacity has been a growing key theme in his administration's counterterrorism strategy .

in its fy2017 budget request , the administration indicates that its regional counterterrorism partnership efforts in africa seek to deny terrorists safe havens , operational bases , and recruitment opportunities .

given current trends , congressional attention to violent islamist extremism in africa appears likely to continue , along with debate over the best way to confront the phenomenon .

congress may weigh the relative merits of various tools through which it can help shape u.s. counterterrorism policies and efforts in africa , such as the appropriation of foreign aid resources , including for programs to build security capacities , to counter violent extremist propaganda and financing , to stabilize and rebuild liberated areas , or to promote more accountable and inclusive governance .

congress may also seek to prioritize through legislation certain activities over others and may examine benchmarks or metrics for success in counterterrorism efforts , including through the possible enactment of new or altered reporting requirements or through other oversight activities .

consideration of geographic or temporal limits on or expansions of the legal authority to use military force may also factor into future congressional deliberations .

appendix a .

foreign terrorist organizations in africa appendix b .

terrorist group profile .

