in 2002 , the medical device user fee and modernization act ( mdufma , also called mdufa i ) gave the food and drug administration ( fda ) the authority to collect fees from the medical device industry .

user fees and annual discretionary appropriations from congress fund the review of medical devices by the fda .

medical devices are a wide range of products that are used to diagnose , treat , monitor , or prevent a disease or condition in a patient .

fda describes medical devices as ranging "from simple tongue depressors and bedpans to complex programmable pacemakers with micro - chip technology and laser surgical devices. .

medical devices also include in vitro diagnostic products , reagents , test kits , and certain electronic radiation - emitting products with medical applications , such as diagnostic ultrasound products , x - ray machines , and medical lasers .

manufacturers of moderate and high risk medical devices must obtain fda approval or clearance before marketing their device in the united states .

the center for devices and radiological health ( cdrh ) has primary responsibility within fda for medical device premarket review .

the primary purpose of user fees is to support the fda's medical device premarket review program and to help reduce the time it takes the agency to review and make decisions on marketing applications .

between 1983 and 2002 , multiple government reports indicated that fda had insufficient resources for its medical devices premarket review program .

lengthy review times affect the industry , which waits to market its products , and patients , who wait to use these products .

the user fee law provides revenue for fda .

in exchange for the fees , fda and industry negotiate performance goals for the premarket review of medical devices .

the medical device user fee program was modeled after the prescription drug user fee act ( pdufa ) .

like the prescription drug and animal drug user fee programs , the medical device user fee program has been authorized in five - year increments .

fda's medical device user fee authorities were last reauthorized through september 30 , 2017 , by the medical device user fee amendments of 2012 ( mdufa iii ) .

mdufa iii was enacted as title ii of food and drug administration safety and innovation act ( fdasia , p.l .

112-144 ) , which became law on july 9 , 2012 .

fdasia also reauthorized pdufa , created new user fee programs for generic and biosimilar drug approvals , and modified fda authority to regulate medical products .

because of the importance of user fees to fda's budget , pdufa and mdufa are considered to be "must pass" legislation , and congress has in the past included language to address a range of other concerns .

for example , mdufa iii included provisions about the extent to which fda can delegate activities to third parties ( inspections and the review of premarket notifications ) ; the establishment of registration requirements ( timing and electronic submission ) ; a unique device identification system ; and reporting requirements for devices linked to serious injuries or deaths .

this report describes current law regarding medical device user fees and the impact of mdufa on fda review time of various medical device applications and the agency's medical device program budget .

appendix a and appendix b provide historical details on the evolution of fees and performance goals from mdufa i through mdufa iii .

appendix c provides a list of acronyms used in this report .

the medical device amendments of 1976 ( p.l .

94-295 ) was the first major legislation passed to address the premarket review of medical devices .

congress first authorized user fees to support the fda's medical device premarket review program in 2002 , 10 years after congress had provided the authority for prescription drug user fees via pdufa .

for prescription drugs , the manufacturer must pay a fee for each new drug application ( nda ) that is submitted to fda for premarket review .

in contrast , most medical devices listed with fda are exempt from premarket review and do not pay a user fee ( see figure 1 ) .

of the unique devices that are listed by manufacturers with fda in fy2016 , about 63% were exempt from premarket review ; the remainder entered the market via the 510 ( k ) process ( 35% ) , the premarket approval ( pma ) process ( 1% ) , or via other means , such as the humanitarian device exemption ( see " fda premarket review of medical devices " and " exemptions and discounted fees " ) .

premarket review and payment of the associated fee is required for about a third of the medical devices listed with fda .

the amount of time it takes fda to reach a review decision to clear a 510 ( k ) notification or approve a pma application is a measure of how well the agency is meeting the goals defined in the mdufa agreement between fda and the medical device industry .

the time it takes to review a medical device — total review time — is composed of the time fda handles the application — fda time — plus the amount of time the device sponsor or submitter takes to respond to requests by fda for additional information about the device .

figure 2 shows that the total amount of time a device is in the 510 ( k ) review process has decreased from a peak in fy2010 .

the amount of time a 510 ( k ) submission spends in fda's hands has remained fairly stable ; time in the submitter's hands peaked in fy2010 and has slowly declined .

fda reviewers frequently need to ask for additional information — called an ai letter — from 510 ( k ) device sponsors due to the incomplete or poor quality of the original submission .

in fy2010 , 77% of 510 ( k ) sponsors received an ai letter on the first fda review cycle .

in fy2016 , 76% received an ai letter on the first fda review cycle .

according to fda , these quality issues have involved "the device description , meaning the sponsor either did not provide sufficient information about the device to determine what it was developed to do , or the device description was inconsistent throughout the submission. .

the device sponsor may not provide a complete response to the ai letter , in which case the fda will send a second ai letter .

in fy2010 , 35% of 510 ( k ) s received an ai letter in the second fda review cycle .

in fy2016 , 6% received an ai letter in the second fda review cycle .

the ai letter allows the device sponsor the opportunity to respond and although this increases time to final decision , it allows the submission the opportunity for the product to be cleared .

the alternative is for fda to reject the 510 ( k ) submission .

figure 3 provides information on the amount of time fda spends reviewing pmas .

it shows that the average total days for pma application review has been decreasing since fy2009 ( except for a single year spike in fy2013 ) .

however , for pmas and 510 ( k ) s , the final two to three cohort years are still open and average review time will increase ; this will impact whether the shared goals shown in table 1 are met .

fda reviewers frequently need to ask for additional information — called an ai letter — from pma device sponsors due to the incomplete or poor quality of the original pma application .

in fy2010 , 86% of pma sponsors received an ai letter on the first fda review cycle .

in fy2016 , 87% received an ai letter on the first fda review cycle .

figure 4 and table 2 present the total amount spent on the fda mdufa program for fy2005 through fy2015 .

figure 4 shows the contribution of medical device user fees collected from industry , as well as appropriations provided by congress .

table 2 also provides dollar amounts and percentages derived from the two sources .

all user fees ( as enacted ) account for 42% of fda's total fy2016 program level .

user fees are an increasing proportion of fda's device - related budget .

in fy2005 , medical device user fees accounted for 15% of the mdufa program total costs , compared with 35% in fy2015 as shown in figure 4 and table 2 .

in contrast , user fees covered 71% of pdufa program total costs in fy2015 .

the fda provides information on the amount of mdufa fees collected each fiscal year and how the fees are spent in an annual financial report .

mdufa ii added ffdca section 738a , which outlines the reauthorization process .

ffdca section 738a directs the fda to develop a reauthorization proposal for the following five fiscal years in consultation with specified congressional committees , scientific and academic experts , health care professionals , patient and consumer advocacy groups , and the regulated industry .

prior to negotiations with industry , fda is required to request public input , hold a public meeting , provide a 30-day comment period , and publish public comments on the agency's website .

during negotiations with industry , fda must hold monthly discussions with patient and consumer advocacy groups to receive their suggestions and discuss their views on the reauthorization .

after negotiations with industry are completed , fda is required to present the recommendations to certain congressional committees , publish the recommendations in the federal register , provide a 30-day public comment period , hold another public meeting to receive views from stakeholders , and revise the recommendations as necessary .

minutes of all negotiation meetings between fda and industry are required to be posted on the fda website .

for mdufa iv , fda held an initial public meeting on july 13 , 2015 .

the negotiation process between fda and industry began on september 9 , 2015 ; minutes of all 13 meetings with industry are available on the fda website .

according to fda , the mdufa iv negotiations involved the same four industry trade associations that participated in the mdufa iii negotiations: the advanced medical technology association ( advamed ) , the medical device manufacturers association ( mdma ) , the medical imaging and technology alliance ( mita ) , and the american clinical laboratory association ( acla ) .

monthly meetings with nonindustry stakeholders , such as health care professional associations and patient and consumer advocacy groups , began on september 15 , 2015 , and minutes of all 11 meetings are also posted on the fda website .

according to fda , regular participants at these meetings included the national health council , pew charitable trusts , the american college of cardiology , the national alliance on mental illness , fastercures , the national organization for rare disorders , the alliance for aging research , jdrf ( formerly the juvenile diabetes research foundation ) , and the national center for health research .

fda stated that these groups were primarily interested in establishing nest and further incorporation of patient's perspectives into the fda medical device review process .

on august 22 , 2016 , fda announced that it had reached an agreement in principle with the medical device industry and laboratory community on proposed recommendations for the reauthorization of the medical device user fee program .

under the draft agreement , fda would be authorized to collect $999.5 million in user fees plus inflation adjustments over the five - year period , fy2018 through fy2022 .

the amount is a 68% increase over the previous mdufa iii agreement , which was $595 million .

in addition to supporting the premarket review of medical devices , the "funding will also improve the collection of real - world evidence from different sources across the medical device lifecycle , such as registries , electronic health records , and other digital sources. .

user fee revenues collected under mdufa iv would be used to support the national evaluation system for health technology ( nest ) .

the mdufa iv package is posted on the fda website and consists of proposed changes to statutory language and an agreement on fda performance goals and procedures .

a public meeting to discuss the recommendations for reauthorization of mdufa was held on november 2 , 2016 ; materials from this meeting are posted on fda's website .

appendix a .

medical device user fees appendix b. mdufa iii performance goals appendix c. acronyms used in this repor .

