the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) is the main source of federal funding dedicated primarily to child care subsidies for low - income working families .

the term "ccdf" is not found in statute .

instead , it was coined by the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) in regulations issued after the 1996 welfare reform law made major changes to federal child care programs .

the term serves as a useful catch - all when discussing the complex financing structure currently underlying federal funding for child care .

the ccdf encompasses several funding streams , including federal discretionary child care funds authorized by the child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) act , federal mandatory child care funds authorized by section 418 of the social security act ( sometimes referred to as the child care entitlement to states ( cces ) ) , state maintenance - of - effort ( moe ) and matching funds associated with the child care entitlement to states , and federal funds transferred to the ccdf from states' temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grants .

mandatory and discretionary ccdf funds are appropriated separately and are allocated to states using different formulas .

although these funds are allocated to states in different ways , federal law generally directs states to spend these dollars according to the same ccdbg act rules .

tanf funds transferred to the ccdf are also subject to ccdbg act rules .

states spent roughly $8.6 billion from these combined federal and state funding streams in fy2012 , the most recent year for which data are fully available .

separate from the ccdf , statute allows states to spend federal tanf funds and state tanf moe on child care services directly within state tanf programs .

however , these "tanf - direct" child care expenditures are not subject to ccdbg act rules .

in fy2012 , states spent roughly $2.8 billion in tanf - direct child care programs , when counting expenditures of federal tanf funds and certain state tanf moe funds .

this means that tanf - direct child care spending ( federal and state ) bolstered total spending on child care by 33% in fy2012 .

because of this broad universe of funding streams , federal appropriations are not necessarily the best measure of total spending on child care .

instead , appropriations to the ccdf represent the minimum level of federal investment in child care .

the ccdf ( through the cces ) also sets minimum expectations regarding state investments in child care .

tanf statute then gives states the flexibility to augment ccdf appropriations with additional funds , either via transfers to the ccdf or with tanf - direct child care spending .

as a result , ccdf appropriations tell only part of the child care story .

this report attempts to provide a more complete picture by reviewing trends in total child care spending from the ccdf and tanf since fy2000 .

it briefly describes the legislative evolution of these funding streams , with particular emphasis on the welfare reform law of 1996 .

this law largely established the current federal landscape , setting up a formal infrastructure for child care programs through the ccdf , while giving states the option to provide additional child care investments with tanf funds .

in doing this , the 1996 law set up an interesting dynamic: the federal government determines basic program rules and minimum spending levels for the ccdf , while state governments determine whether tanf funds will be spent on child care and , if so , what basic program rules will apply .

following this discussion , the report presents detailed historical expenditure data across funding streams , as well as data on children served ( where possible ) .

the report concludes with some brief observations about what these spending trends may mean for the current child care landscape , with particular consideration given to the substantial nature of tanf contributions to total child care spending , as well as implications of the ccdbg reauthorization law enacted in november 2014 .

readers should note that it is beyond the scope of this report to examine spending on child care from other federal programs or tax provisions ( eg , the child and dependent care tax credit ) .

for a broader discussion of federal funding streams that may be used to support child care and early education , see crs report r40212 , early childhood care and education programs: background and funding .

this section presents highlights of key trends in ccdf and tanf child care spending over the period of fy2000-fy2012 .

note that ccdf expenditure data in this report ( including estimated tanf transfers ) are tracked against the year in which they were initially awarded or allocated .

for instance , "fy2012 expenditures" are funds that were allocated to states in fy2012 and spent during fy2012-fy2014 .

by contrast , data for tanf - direct child care ( federal and state ) reflect total spending in a given year , regardless of the year in which the funds were first made available .

total spending: over the course of this period , total combined ccdf and tanf spending on child care ( federal and state ) increased in nominal dollars from $10.2 billion in fy2000 to $11.4 billion in fy2012 , an increase of $1.2 billion ( +12% ) .

however , when adjusting for inflation ( i.e. , using constant or real dollars ) , total spending declined over this same period , from $13.7 billion in fy2000 to $11.4 billion in fy2012 , a decrease of $2.3 billion ( - 17% ) .

historic al peak: combined ccdf and tanf spending on child care ( federal and state ) peaked in fy2009 , regardless of whether dollars are adjusted for inflation .

spending for that year totaled $14.0 billion in nominal dollars and nearly $15.0 billion in constant dollars .

this historical peak was primarily driven by the influx of $2.0 billion in additional discretionary appropriations from the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) .

federal vs. state share: federal spending accounted for roughly 70% of all expenditures over this period , with state contributions making up the remaining roughly 30% .

ccdf expenditures accounted for the majority of federal spending in all years , with tanf - direct federal child care accounting for between 10% and 15% .

ccdf vs. tanf - direct: spending from the ccdf ( federal and state , including tanf transfers ) accounted for about 75% of all expenditures on child care during this period .

tanf - direct child care spending ( federal and state ) accounted for the remaining 25% .

notably , these tanf - direct dollars are not subject to ccdbg act rules .

tanf contributions: total federal and state spending on child care originating in tanf programs represented more than one - third ( between 36% and 48% ) of all child care expenditures for each of fy2000 to fy2012 .

these totals include tanf transfers , which are subject to ccdbg act rules and are generally treated as discretionary ccdf expenditures .

tanf transfers peaked at the beginning of this period , representing 68% of discretionary ccdf expenditures and 30% of all ccdf expenditures for fy2000 .

since then , tanf transfers have generally declined .

in fy2012 , tanf transfers of $1.4 billion accounted for 39% of discretionary ccdf expenditures and 16% of all ccdf expenditures for that year .

children served: data are not collected on the number of children served by tanf - direct child care , so the total number of children served by these combined funding streams is not known .

however , data are collected on children served by the ccdf .

these data show that the number of children served in an average month by the ccdf has experienced fluctuations but has generally been on the decline since fy2006 .

over the course of fy2000-fy2012 , the caseload peaked at roughly 1.8 million children served in an average month in fy2001 and dropped to a low of roughly 1.5 million in fy2012 , a decrease of almost 359,000 children ( - 20% ) .

the ccdf — and its relationship to tanf — is better understood by tracing its evolution from the federal supports for child care that existed prior to 1996 , when the welfare reform law ( p.l .

104-193 ) simultaneously repealed , created , and consolidated federal child care programs ( see figure  1 ) .

this report presents expenditure data from multiple child care funding streams within the ccdf and tanf .

this section briefly reviews key concepts related to these various funding streams .

figure 2 provides a quick reference point for how they fit together .

note that expenditure data in this report represent spending by states and the district of columbia ; spending by tribes , tribal organizations , territories , or hhs , where applicable , is excluded .

for this reason , expenditure totals in this report may not match other sources , which may include expenditures by non - state entities .

before looking at trend data , it is helpful to briefly review the composition of child care expenditures in fy2012 , the most recent year for which full data are available ( see figure 3 ) .

in fy2012 , child care spending ( federal and state ) totaled $11.4 billion .

as figure 3 demonstrates , three - quarters of fy2012 expenditures occurred through the ccdf ( $8.6 billion ) , with tanf - direct child care accounting for remaining expenditures ( $2.8 billion ) .

the figure shows that the discretionary portion of the ccdf accounted for the largest single share of all child care spending ( $3.5 billion ) , but this is because discretionary ccdf expenditures include dollars transferred to the ccdf from tanf .

in fact , tanf transfers of $1.4 billion accounted for roughly 39% of all discretionary ccdf expenditures in fy2012 .

 ( notably , of the years examined for this report , tanf transfers were at their lowest in fy2010 and fy2012 .

at their height in fy2000 , tanf transfers totaled $2.3 billion and accounted for 68% of that year's discretionary ccdf expenditures. ) .

figure 3 also shows that federal dollars accounted for the majority of expenditures in fy2012 .

fully two - thirds of child care spending in that year came from federal sources ( $7.6 billion ) , with remaining expenditures coming from state funding streams ( $3.8 billion ) .

figure 4 illustrates how the composition of child care spending in fy2012 compares with spending across the entire window examined for this report .

this figure shows spending in constant dollars ( i.e. , adjusted for inflation ) , by funding stream , for each of fy2000-fy2012 .

in the aggregate , the figure shows that inflation has generally outpaced child care spending .

in addition , it shows that the mandatory ccdf and its accompanying state contributions have generally been fairly stable funding streams , with more fluctuations evident in the discretionary ccdf ( partly due to declining tanf transfers ) and tanf - direct spending .

these various trends are discussed in greater detail in subsequent sections of this report .

the following sections examine trends in child care spending over the course of fy2000-fy2012 .

the section on overall spending trends looks at expenditures from all sources , including tanf - direct child care programs .

this is followed by a section looking at spending patterns within the ccdf only ( i.e. , it excludes tanf - direct spending ) .

while the ccdbg act is the primary federal law governing state child care programs for low - income working families , discretionary ccdbg appropriations are by no means the primary source of child care expenditures .

state child care programs are also supported by federal funds appropriated to the cces and tanf ( and accompanying state contributions , where applicable ) .

the majority of federal dollars spent on state child care programs are subject to ccdbg act rules , including funds appropriated to the ccdbg and the cces , as well as tanf transfers .

however , states have spent more than a billion federal dollars annually in tanf - direct child care programs , which are not subject to ccdbg act rules ( tanf - direct spending accounts for more than $2.3 billion annually when including tanf state excess moe ) .

this concluding section of the report reviews the current authorization status of these various child care funding streams .

it places recent spending trends in the context of the 1996 reforms , while also considering what these trends may mean for the implementation of the 2014 ccdbg reauthorization law .

the spending trends reviewed in the previous sections demonstrate the importance of multiple funding streams in supporting state child care programs for low - income families .

these funding streams rely on three separate federal funding authorizations: discretionary ccdf funds authorized by the ccdbg act , mandatory ccdf funds authorized by section 418 of the social security act ( also known as the cces ) , and tanf block grants authorized by section 403 of the social security act .

while the ccdbg act was recently reauthorized through fy2020 by the ccdbg act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-186 ) , neither the cces nor tanf has been reauthorized in many years .

in fact , it has been more than 10 years since major changes were made to either program , as part of the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ; dra ) .

the dra did not change the funding level for the basic tanf block grant , but it did increase mandatory child care funding by $1 billion over five years , directly appropriating ( or "pre - appropriating" ) a total of $2.917 billion for each of fy2006 to fy2010 .

since then , level funding for tanf and the cces has generally been provided through a series of short - and medium - term extensions , the most recent of which ( p.l .

114-113 ) provided funding through september 30 , 2016 .

the temporary nature of the tanf and cces extensions is particularly notable , given that federal and state funds associated with tanf and the cces have combined to account for between 72% and 89% of federal and state child care spending in every year reviewed for this report .

funds originating in tanf and the cces also account for the majority of federal spending — typically more than 70% of annual federal spending ( with the exception of fy2009 due to arra ) .

the ccdbg act also went many years without being reauthorized .

the ccdbg act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-186 ) is the first time this law has been reauthorized since 1996 .

the 2014 reauthorization law substantially amended the previous ccdbg act , with particular emphasis on strengthening requirements related to health and safety , licensing , enforcement , and quality of care .

for instance , under the reauthorized ccdbg act states must establish and enforce minimum health and safety standards covering multiple topics , such as the prevention and control of infectious diseases , building and premises safety , first aid , and emergency preparedness ; all providers receiving ccdf funds must complete pre - service and ongoing training on health and safety topics ; states must set age - specific group size limits and child - to - provider ratios ; states must conduct pre - licensure and annual unannounced licensing inspections for all licensed ccdf providers , as well as annual inspections for unlicensed ( or "license - exempt" ) ccdf providers ; states must establish qualifications and training for licensing inspectors and set inspector - to - provider ratios ; states must conduct criminal background checks on applicable child care providers and staff members ; and minimum state spending on general quality improvement activities will increase incrementally from 4% of ccdf spending under prior law to 9% by fy2020 , plus states must spend an additional 3% on quality improvement activities for infants and toddlers .

under current law , the new requirements in the ccdbg act generally apply to mandatory ccdf funds provided by the cces , as well as tanf funds transferred to the ccdf .

however , they do not apply to tanf funds spent on child care directly within state tanf programs .

reforms to child care programs in 1996 were , in part , designed to create a single , unified child care program ( albeit supported by multiple funding streams ) : the ccdf .

expenditure data show that the ccdf has , indeed , been the primary source of child care spending over the entire period reviewed for this report , accounting for roughly three - quarters of total spending in each year .

however , states have spent at least $2.3 billion ( federal and state ) annually on tanf - direct child care .

because these tanf - direct expenditures occur outside the ccdf , they are not subject to the rules guiding how ccdf funds are spent .

this means , for instance , that tanf - direct funds may be spent on child care services that do not meet minimum health and safety standards required by the ccdf .

beyond expenditures , no data are collected on tanf - direct child care programs or the children and families they serve .

as a consequence , it is not possible to say anything definitive about who is being served or the type of care they are receiving .

this raises questions about whether there is a different standard of care across programs — and , if so , whether such differences are desirable under federal policy .

with this in mind , the obama administration's fy2017 president's budget submission included a proposal to apply ccdbg act health and safety standards to tanf - direct child care , noting that this would "ensure that all children receiving child care assistance benefit from the same protections regardless of the program providing the funding. .

while the administration's proposal would apply ccdf health and safety standards to tanf - direct child care programs , it does not specifically address the possibility of applying ccdf - comparable reporting or categorical spending requirements to tanf - direct child care programs .

under law , federal funds appropriated to the ccdf ( as well as required state contributions ) must be spent on child care or child care - related activities .

this is not the case for tanf grants , which may be used for a wide array of benefits and services , ranging from cash assistance to child welfare services .

it is up to states whether or not to direct any tanf funds toward child care .

over the years , tanf contributions to child care have been significant .

child care spending ( federal and state ) originating in tanf programs has accounted for more than one - third of all child care expenditures in each year examined for this report .

on the one hand , this may beg the question of whether the ccdf is adequately funded .

on the other hand , it may suggest that the current system is well - designed to give states the flexibility to support the programs and services they deem most important — particularly given that not all states are using federal tanf dollars to provide child care services .

a closer look at child care expenditure data shows that federal tanf - related contributions have generally been declining over the period examined for this report .

for instance , the share of all federal child care expenditures originating in tanf programs dropped from more than half ( 52% ) in fy2000 to just over one - third ( 34% ) in fy2012 .

 ( the majority of this drop is due to reductions in tanf transfers to the ccdf. ) .

in addition , the number of states choosing to spend none of their federal tanf funds on child care services ( either via transfers or tanf - direct ) has tripled from three states in fy2000 to nine states in fy2012 .

the number of states choosing to use both tanf options ( i.e. , transfer funds to the ccdf and provide tanf - direct child care services with federal funds ) has declined by more than 40% from 29 in fy2000 to 17 in fy2012 .

this raises questions about the stability of tanf - related child care funding in the long term , and the relative value of a stable funding stream over state flexibility ( or vice versa ) .

while it is not clear what is driving state decisions with respect to tanf - related child care spending , it must be remembered that tanf grants have generally remained flat ( in nominal dollars ) since the block grant was first established in 1996 .

when adjusting for inflation , these grants have declined in value by more than 30% .

as a consequence , states may find it increasingly difficult to maintain funding levels for the various benefits and services initially supported by tanf programs .

in 2014 , the ccdbg act was reauthorized for the first time since 1996 .

the reauthorization law made a number of changes to federal child care policies within the ccdf ( keeping in mind that ccdbg act rules generally apply to spending of all ccdf - based funding streams ) .

in the aftermath of reauthorization , many states will need to increase ccdf spending on quality improvement activities to meet new categorical spending requirements .

in addition , states may need to spend more on oversight activities , such as monitoring , inspections , and consumer education .

a full review of ccdf categorical spending patterns is beyond the scope of this report .

nevertheless , it seems likely that ( barring increased financial resources ) states may find it difficult to maintain the number of children served by the ccdf while also devoting the necessary funds toward implementing new ccdbg act requirements .

in fact , administrative data show that the average monthly number of children served by the ccdf has been declining for years , presumably due in part to the rising costs of child care and the decreasing value of ccdf dollars , once adjusted for inflation .

it is not clear what effect , if any , the ccdbg reauthorization law will have on state decisions about how or whether to support child care programs with tanf dollars .

it is possible states may increase tanf transfers to the ccdf to help implement the 2014 reauthorization law .

this would represent a reversal of current trends , as there has been a fairly steady decline in both the total amount transferred to the ccdf from tanf each year and the number of states making such transfers .

alternately , it is possible states may choose to focus more on tanf - direct child care programs , which are not currently subject to ccdbg act requirements .

the number of states providing federal tanf - direct child care has remained relatively stable , though total federal tanf - direct spending has generally been declining over the years reviewed for this report .

it is also possible that the 2014 ccdbg reauthorization law will have no discernable effect on tanf spending patterns , as child care remains one of many possible uses for these block grants .

