c hief justice marshall of the u.s. supreme court defined a presidential pardon as "an act of grace , proceeding from the power entrusted with the execution of laws , which exempts the individual , on whom it is bestowed , from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has committed. .

indeed , the president's power to pardon is descended from authority that had been vested in english kings since at least the eighth century , and has been described as a power "exercised from time immemorial by the executive of that nation whose language is our language and to whose judicial institutions ours bear a close resemblance. .

the exercise of executive clemency is an extraordinary remedy , as several thousand petitions are submitted each year to the president and few are granted .

this report briefly reviews the historical underpinnings of the text of the pardon clause of the u.s. constitution before delving into the types of pardons the clemency power includes , when pardons may be issued , and how pardons are granted .

the remainder of the report analyzes the effect of a presidential pardon on collateral consequences , which are generally considered the post - sentence civil penalties or disqualifications that flow from a federal conviction .

because full presidential pardons are not often granted , also discussed in the report are some alternative ways in which a former federal felon may have his or her civil rights restored and certain legal disabilities removed absent a pardon .

lastly , the report covers what role , if any , congress may play in defining the scope of the pardon power and its effect on collateral consequences .

article ii , section 2 , clause 1 of the constitution provides the following: "the president … shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offences against the united states , except in cases of impeachment. .

the language of the clause explicitly sets forth the limits of the federal pardon power .

first , the pardon power is limited to "offences against the united states," which prevents the president from intruding upon state criminal or civil proceedings .

second , the pardon power does not extend to "cases of impeachment," which prevents the president from interfering with congress's power to impeach .

the establishment of the pardon power in the constitution was derived from english custom and the view of the framers that "there may be instances where , though a man offends against the letter of the law … peculiar circumstances in his case may entitle him to mercy. .

moreover , this power was properly vested in the president , according to alexander hamilton , as "it is not to be doubted that a single man of prudence and good sense , is better fitted , in delicate conjunctures , to balance the motives , which may plead for and against the remission of the punishment , than any numerous body whatever. .

in determining that the president should exercise the pardon power , the framers further decided that minimal limitations should be placed on the power .

for instance , the framers rejected a proposal that the senate have consent power over pardons , as well as edmund randolph's amendment that treason should be excepted from the pardon power .

the supreme court in the 19 th century had an expansive view of the nature and effect of a pardon .

in ex parte garland , the court , when considering the effect of a full pardon , stated the following: a pardon reaches both the punishment prescribed for the offence and the guilt of the offender ; and when the pardon is full , it releases the punishment and blots out of existence the guilt , so that in the eye of the law the offender is as innocent as if he had never committed the offence .

if granted before conviction , it prevents any of the penalties and disabilities consequent upon conviction from attaching ; if granted after conviction , it removes the penalties and disabilities , and restores him to all civil rights ; it makes him , as it were , a new man , and gives him a new credit and capacity .

despite this broad view , the court stated that a pardon "does not restore offices forfeited , or property or interests vested in others in consequences of the conviction and judgment. .

the court in knote v. united states reiterated that a pardon " releases the offender from all disabilities [i]mposed by the offence , and restores to him all his civil rights .

in contemplation of law , it so far blots out the offence , that afterwards it cannot be imputed to him to prevent the assertion of his legal rights. .

since garland and knote , courts have consistently opined that a full par don restores basic civil rights such as the right to vote , serve on juries , and the right to work in certain professions .

in other words , a pardon should generally remove any collateral consequences that may legally attach to a person as a result of the commission or conviction of the pardoned offense .

however , as discussed below , the recipient of a pardon may still be unable to exercise certain rights or engage in certain activities , depending on the qualifications imposed under state or federal law .

this may be due , in part , to the fact that the court , in the 20 th century , appears to have backed away from its position in garland , that a pardon wip es away the existence of guilt .

in 1915 , the court , in burdick v. united states , affirmed that the full pardon , had the petitioner accepted , would have "absolv[ed] him from the consequences of every such criminal act. .

in allowing the petitioner to refuse the pardon and instead assert his constitutional right against self - incrimination , the burdick court had acknowledged that a "confession of guilt [is] implied in the acceptance of a pardon. .

similarly , in carlesi v. new york , the court concluded that a presidential pardon for a federal offense did not prevent the state from considering the pardoned offense under a state statute that permits enhanced sentencing upon the commission of a second offense .

the carlesi court reasoned that the state's action "was not in any degree a punishment for the prior crime," and that the state's action could not be constitutionally void because it did not "destroy[] or circumscrib[e] the effect" of a presidential pardon .

in 1974 , the court decided schick v. reed , in which it affirmed the president's authority to commute a sentence upon the condition that the prisoner not be paroled .

the court emphasized the president's plenary authority under the pardon power to reduce or alter a penalty , but the court did not address whether such power includes erasing the underlying guilt or the conviction itself .

at least one scholar has opined that these cases , from the early 20 th century to the present , demonstrate the court's implicit shift away from its broad declaration in garland regarding the effect of a pardon , now "suggest[ing] that a pardon does not wipe away all guilt from its recipient. .

notably , schick examined the commutation of a sentence , in which it may have been unnecessary for the court to discuss whether the altered sentence erased the recipient's underlying guilt , as it may have been clear that the commutation did not .

given that many petitions for presidential pardons are denied , this section briefly discusses expungements and other avenues by which federal felons could potentially have some civil rights , affected by their federal criminal convictions restored absent a pardon .

the court has consistently held that the president's pardon power may not be circumscribed by congress .

in garland , the court held that the pardon power "is not subject to legislative control .

congress can neither limit the effect of his pardon , nor exclude from its exercise any class of offenders .

the benign prerogative of mercy reposed in him cannot be fettered by any legislative restrictions. .

in united states v. klein , the court found unconstitutional a congressional provision that purported to limit the use and effect of the president's pardon .

in finding that the congressional provision infringed on the president's pardon power , the court stated: "[t] he legislature cannot change the effect of such a pardon any more than the executive can change a law. .

likewise , the court in schick declared that the president's pardon power "flows from the constitution alone , not any legislative enactments," and it "cannot be modified , abridged , or diminished by congress. .

these judicial pronouncements appear to indicate that congress can take no action that would limit the effect or use of a presidential pardon , nor can congress direct how or when the president may exercise his pardon authority .

generally , members of congress have turned to introducing resolutions expressing the sense of congress that the president either should or should not grant pardons to certain individuals or groups of individuals .

it is unclear , however , whether a reviewing court would reach the same conclusion were congress to pass a measure that expanded the effect of a presidential pardon .

notably , some states have passed legislation that clarifies the effect of a state pardon .

colorado , for example , provides the following: "a pardon issued by the governor shall waive all collateral consequences associated with each conviction for which the person received a pardon unless the pardon limits the scope of the pardon regarding collateral consequences. .

"collateral consequences" are defined as "a penalty , prohibition , bar , disadvantage , or disqualification , however denominated , imposed on an individual as a result of the individual's conviction of an offense , which penalty , prohibition , bar , or disadvantage applies by operation of law regardless of whether the penalty , prohibition , bar , or disadvantage is included in the judgment or sentence. .

similarly , congress could enact a provision that reaffirms the existing principle that a presidential pardon restores civil rights and removes collateral consequences imposed under federal or state law as a result of a federal conviction , unless otherwise provided for by the pardon or by the state ( with respect to state - imposed legal disabilities ) .

however , if a congressional measure specified collateral consequences to be restored , this could be construed as limiting the effect of the pardon .

by expressly reinstating some rights over others , a reviewing court could view such a measure as modifying or abridging the effect of a presidential pardon .

moreover , it may be possible for congress to change the current judicial interpretation by providing that a presidential pardon erases both the underlying guilt and the existence of the federal offense itself .

although the issuance of a pardon does not automatically grant an expungement of criminal records , at least one federal court has noted: "the president's power , if any , to issue an order of expunction of a criminal record must stem from an act of congress or from the constitution itself. .

as it has done with simple drug possession , congress could require , upon application of a presidential pardon recipient , a federal court to enter an expungement order .

in this way , a pardon recipient could avoid the current hurdles he or she may face when a background check is conducted or when the commission of the offense itself may be used to evaluate such person's eligibility .

another possibility for congress , without addressing the effect of a pardon , could be to mirror states that have passed so - called "ban the box" or "fair chance" legislation .

such measures remove the conviction history question on job applications , thereby preventing covered employers ( either public or private ) from considering one's criminal history until later in the hiring process .

in november 2015 , president obama announced that he had directed the office of personnel management ( opm ) to "take action where it can by modifying its rules to delay inquiries into criminal history until later in the hiring process. .

opm issued a proposed rule in may 2016 that would specify to federal agencies that "unless an exception has been requested by a hiring agency and granted by opm , agencies cannot begin collecting background information unless the hiring agency has made a conditional offer of employment to an applicant. .

in the 114 th congress , bills have been introduced that would prohibit federal agencies and federal contractors from requesting that an applicant disclose his or her criminal history record before receiving a conditional offer .

