following a disaster , particularly one that has been designated by the president as a major disaster or emergency , homeowners and businesses may have access to a number of resources to assist in the response , recovery , and rebuilding process .

the range of resources available to individual businesses and households includes insurance payouts , state and local government assistance , charitable donations from private institutions and individuals , and federal assistance .

the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) is the primary entity charged with managing disaster response activities .

the scope of fema assistance is based on the extent of damage incurred .

fema and its programs , however , are not the sole source of federal assistance that may be available following a presidential disaster declaration .

other forms of federal disaster assistance include the small business administration's ( sba's ) disaster loan program ( sba disaster loan program ) and the department of housing and urban development's ( hud's ) community development block grant disaster recovery ( cdbg - dr ) program .

while the sba disaster loan program is automatically triggered by a presidential disaster declaration , cdbg - dr is not .

instead , congress has occasionally addressed unmet disaster needs by providing supplemental disaster - related appropriations for the cdbg - dr program .

consequently , cdbg - dr is not provided for all major disasters , but only at the discretion of congress .

the array of disaster recovery assistance available to businesses and individuals can sometimes result in the awarding of funds in excess of the replacement cost of losses suffered .

in instances where the president has issued a major disaster declaration , section 312 of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( hereinafter the stafford act , p.l .

93-288 ) requires federal agencies providing disaster assistance to ensure that individuals and businesses do not receive disaster assistance for losses for which they have already been compensated or may expect to be compensated .

duplication of benefits occurs when compensation from multiple sources exceeds the need for a particular recovery purpose .

in such instances , the recipient receiving federal assistance is liable to the united states when the assistance duplicates benefits provided for the same purpose by any other source .

this report addresses issues surrounding duplication of benefits , focusing on sba disaster loans to individuals and businesses and cdbg - dr grants to state and local governments .

cdbg - dr grant recipients provide grants and loans to individuals and businesses .

the purpose of this report is to provide a brief review of the sba disaster loan and cdbg - dr programs ; identify federal statutory authorities , regulations , and policy guidance documents governing the duplication of benefits in the provision of federal disaster assistance to businesses and individuals ; identify issues and conflicts that may arise in interpreting and implementing the federal requirements governing duplication of benefits ; highlight key policy considerations with respect to the sba disaster loan program and cdbg - dr duplication of benefits ; and examine legislative policy options that may address issues related to the duplication of benefits in the provision of sba disaster loan and cdbg - dr disaster recovery assistance .

because disaster assistance is provided through a variety of entities , policies and guidelines governing the duplication of benefits stem from multiple authorities .

some observers contend that the authorities appear incongruous and confusing .

the following is a listing of relevant authorities and regulations pertaining to duplication of benefits with respect to the sba disaster loan program and cdbg - dr .

there are several key areas of congressional concern related to the duplication of cdbg - dr assistance and sba disaster loans , including confusion about the orderly execution of the delivery sequence as dictated by fema , how the duplication of benefits policy and the delivery sequence are interpreted , and concerns expressed about fairness , fraud , and delays in rebuilding efforts .

as mentioned previously , fema's regulations do not specifically mention cdbg - dr funding in the delivery sequence .

in practice , fema considers cdbg - dr funding as assistance that follows sba disaster loans in the delivery sequence .

however , leaving cdbg - dr unmentioned in fema's regulation could lead to confusion as to where cdbg - dr is ranked in the delivery sequence .

it may also be argued that the omission makes the delivery sequence open to interpretation .

if congress is concerned that the omission could lead to confusion or different interpretations of code , congress could require that 44 c.f.r .

206.191 be revised to specify the location of cdbg - dr within the delivery sequence .

some might argue that people and businesses that qualify for sba disaster loans should not be eligible for cdbg - dr grants .

they may contend that individuals who are determined to have sufficient resources to repay a sba disaster loan should not receive cdbg - dr assistance , particularly grant assistance .

grants , they would argue , should only go to those who cannot recover and rebuild on their own .

most federal disaster assistance programs are funded through annual appropriations .

this generally ensures that the programs have funds available when an incident occurs .

as a result , these programs can provide assistance in a relatively short period of time .

for example , a july 2015 sba oig study found that sba's processing time for home disaster loans averaged 18.7 days and application processing times for business disaster loans averaged 43.3 days .

cdbg disaster assistance , on the other hand , is funded through supplemental funding .

in general , congress only provides supplemental funding when disaster needs exceed the amount available through annual appropriations .

this typically only occurs when a large incident takes place , such as hurricanes katrina and sandy .

consequently , funding for cdbg - dr is not available for all incidents .

in addition , congress must debate and pass supplemental funding .

as demonstrated earlier in figure 3 , on average , congress has passed supplemental appropriations for disaster assistance within 38.9 days of the disaster declaration .

in a few cases , supplemental funding has been provided in less than a week after an incident ( for example , hurricane katrina and 9 / 11 received funding in three days and seven days respectively ) .

cdbg - dr assistance is not immediately made available after an appropriation .

for example , an appropriation for cdbg - dr was enacted on june 3 , 2008 .

the allocation date for the cdbg - dr was september 11 , 2008 — three months after the enacted appropriation .

in addition to the amount of time it can take to pass a supplemental appropriation , it takes some time for hud to formulate distribution formulas for multiple states .

consequently , cdbg - dr is generally provided later than other forms of disaster assistance .

this explains , in part , why the delivery sequence is often broken — because other forms of assistance can be provided more quickly .

one potential option would be to fund cdbg - dr through annual appropriations .

doing so would create an account with funds that could be made immediately available and help expedite cdbg - dr assistance .

this option may eliminate gaps and confusion in the delivery sequence because a recipient could potentially receive cdbg - dr assistance around the same time that a sba disaster loan could be processed .

the annual appropriation could be designed similarly to fema's disaster relief fund ( drf ) .

funds from the drf are used by fema to pay for ongoing recovery projects from disasters occurring in previous fiscal years , to meet current emergency requirements , and as a reserve to pay for upcoming incidents .

the drf is funded annually and is a "no - year" account , meaning that unused funds from the previous fiscal year ( if available ) are carried over to the next fiscal year .

in general , when the balance of the drf becomes low , congress provides additional funding through both annual and supplemental appropriations to replenish the account .

critics of this policy option might argue that if this approach were used , it would be necessary to determine under what situations cdbg - dr assistance would be released .

similarly , as mentioned previously , cdbg - dr assistance is typically only available for large - scale incidents .

creating a permanent cdbg - dr might provide a gateway for smaller incidents to receive cdbg - dr assistance .

this , in turn , might lead to increased federal expenditures for disaster assistance .

the federal government allows states to exercise considerable discretion with respect to awarding cdbg - dr assistance , which is often , but not always , in the form of a grant .

in some cases , states have made the decision to deny cdbg - dr assistance to sba disaster loan recipients .

the rationale for this decision is that if the recipient has the ability to obtain an sba disaster loan , then they possess sufficient resources to recover without a grant .

some argue that individuals who are determined to have sufficient resources to repay their sba disaster loans should not receive grant money because grants are not repaid , which places the financial burden on taxpayers .

it is not uncommon for sba loan recipients to see the denial of a cdbg - dr grant as an equity issue .

some question why they have to pay off a loan to repair and recover from a disaster , while others receive grant money in response to the same disaster .

furthermore , they tend to blame the federal government for cdbg - dr award decisions when , in fact , these decisions have been made by the state .

congress could potentially address this issue of perception by requiring uniformity in the distribution of cdbg - dr assistance .

congress could require that states provide cdbg - dr assistance to all eligible sba disaster loan recipients .

alternatively , congress could pass legislation that makes people and businesses eligible for sba loans , ineligible for cdbg - dr assistance .

both methods would likely create uniformity with respect to cdbg - dr awards .

some , however , may say the latter approach would not address the perception issue .

one potential method of addressing duplication is creating and managing a single database that tracks assistance to individuals and businesses from multiple sources .

the system could alert recipients that they are at risk of duplicating assistance .

the system might also be used for more timely identification of duplication of benefits .

fema already coordinates with sba through fema's disaster assistance website , http: / / www.disasterassistance .gov .

congress could examine whether the website could be modified to track duplication of assistance in a more robust manner .

critics might argue , however , that such a system would not identify all cases of duplication because some individuals and businesses might fail to self - report their assistance .

this could be intentional or unintentional .

