t he financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill includes funding for the department of the treasury ( title i ) , the executive office of the president ( eop , title ii ) , the judiciary ( title iii ) , the district of columbia ( title iv ) , and more than two dozen independent agencies ( title v ) .

the bill typically funds mandatory retirement accounts in title vi , which also contains additional general provisions applying to the funding provided agencies through the fsgg bill .

title vii contains general provisions applying government - wide .

the fsgg bills have often also contained provisions relating to u.s. policy toward cuba .

the house and senate fsgg bills fund the same agencies , with one exception .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is funded through the agriculture appropriations bill in the house and the fsgg bill in the senate .

this structure has existed in its current form since the 2007 reorganization of the house and senate committees on appropriations .

although financial services are a major focus of the bills , fsgg appropriations bills do not include many financial regulatory agencies , which are instead funded outside of the appropriations process .

on february 9 , 2016 , then - president obama submitted his fy2017 budget request .

the request included a total of $46.5 billion for agencies funded through the fsgg appropriations bill , including $330 million for the cftc .

on june 15 , 2016 , the house committee on appropriations reported a financial services and general government appropriations act , 2017 ( h.r .

5485 , h.rept .

114-624 ) .

total fy2017 funding in the reported bill would have been $43.5 billion , with another $250 million for the cftc included in the agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r .

5054 , h.rept .

114-531 ) , which was reported on april 26 , 2016 .

the combined total of $43.8 billion would have been about $2.8 billion below the president's fy2017 request with most of this difference in the funding for the department of the treasury and the general services administration ( gsa ) .

after a number of amendments on the floor , the house of representatives passed h.r .

5485 on july 7 , 2016 .

although funding was shifted among some fsgg agencies , the overall level remained unchanged .

on june 16 , 2016 , the senate committee on appropriations reported the financial services and general government act , 2017 ( s. 3067 , s.rept .

114-280 ) .

s. 3067 would have appropriated $44.4 billion for fy2017 , about $2.2 billion below the president's request .

as with the house bill , most of this difference is due to the treasury and gsa .

although financial services are a focus of the fsgg bill , the bill does not actually include funding for the regulation of much of the financial services industry .

financial services as an industry is often subdivided into banking , insurance , and securities .

federal regulation of the banking industry is divided among the federal reserve , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , the office of comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , and the bureau of consumer financial protection ( generally known as the consumer financial protection bureau , or cfpb ) .

in addition , credit unions , which operate similarly to many banks , are regulated by the national credit union administration ( ncua ) .

none of these agencies receives its primary funding through the appropriations process , with only the fdic inspector general and a small program operated by the ncua currently funded in the fsgg bill .

insurance generally is regulated at the state level with some oversight at the holding company level by the federal reserve .

there is a relatively small federal insurance office ( fio ) inside of the treasury , which is funded through the departmental offices account , but fio has no regulatory authority .

federal securities regulation is divided between the sec and the cftc , both of which are funded through appropriations .

the cftc funding is a relatively straightforward appropriation from the general fund , whereas the sec funding is provided by the fsgg bill , but then offset through fees collected by the sec .

although funding for many financial regulatory agencies may not be provided by the fsgg bill , legislative provisions that would affect some of these agencies have often been included .

h.r .

5485 would change the funding procedure for the cfpb , with future funding to be provided by congressional appropriations rather than the current situation in which primary cfpb funding is provided through unappropriated funds transferred from the federal reserve .

the house bill also includes other provisions that would amend the dodd - frank act , such as changing the leadership of the cfpb to a five - person commission and changing the authority of the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) .

previous fsgg bills have also included similar dodd - frank act changes that have proven controversial in the past .

p.l .

115-31 did not include the cfpb nor the fsoc provisions from h.r .

5485 .

the house and senate committees on appropriations reorganized their subcommittee structures in early 2007 .

each chamber created a new financial services and general government subcommittee .

in the house , the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee comprised primarily of agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies , commonly referred to as "tthud. .

in addition , the house fsgg subcommittee was assigned four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies subcommittee: the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) .

in the senate , the jurisdiction of the new fsgg subcommittee was a combination of agencies from the jurisdiction of three previously existing subcommittees .

the district of columbia , which had its own subcommittee in the 109 th congress , was placed under the purview of the fsgg subcommittee , as were four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies subcommittee: the fcc , ftc , sec , and sba .

in addition , most of the agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the tthud subcommittee were assigned to the fsgg subcommittee .

as a result of this reorganization , the house and senate fsgg subcommittees have nearly identical jurisdictions , except that the cftc is under the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee in the senate and the agriculture subcommittee in the house .

 table 4 below lists various departments and agencies funded through fsgg appropriations and the names and contact information for the crs expert ( s ) on these departments and agencies .

