both the united states and european union ( eu ) have large , diverse , and economically important agricultural sectors .

in addition , both political entities provide significant government support to their agricultural sectors .

each entity's agricultural policy regime has changed substantially over the years , although the nature and extent of their policy interventions differ markedly .

since the mid - 1990s , both regions have reoriented their domestic agricultural policy in response to internal budget pressures as well as commitments to international trade rules governing the use of domestic support programs — based largely on the world trade organization's ( wto ) agreement on agriculture ( aoa ) , which encourages greater use of less market - distorting policies .

but eu policymakers have faced additional pressures to reform domestic agricultural policy , in particular due to the eu's steady growth to 28 european nations and 508 million people as of 2013 — including most of the agriculturally intensive but economically poorer countries of eastern europe ( table 3 ) .

this report provides a brief comparison of the agricultural sectors and policy frameworks of the united states and eu .

first , it notes the importance of trade between the two entities .

then it describes some of the major differences in agricultural and geopolitical settings that underlie and drive the policy frameworks for supporting their agricultural sectors .

third , the report provides a short recounting of the historical context that produced the current policy regimes in each entity .

this is followed by an overview of the current agricultural policy structure in both the eu and united states .

the final section compares each entity's agricultural support programs and outlays based on two international data sources: ( 1 ) annual domestic support notifications to the wto ; and ( 2 ) a set of comparative policy measures published annually by the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) .

comparisons of agricultural support outlays between the u.s. and eu are complicated by the difficulties inherent in defining what constitutes support — or even what constitutes agriculture .

u.s. and eu farm program support differs in both size and scope , as well as in the manner in which the support is provided .

for example: in the united states , congress develops and authorizes federal farm policy .

in contrast , the eu agricultural policy has traditionally been developed by the european commission , largely outside of the legislative arena .

the united states has traditionally focused its producer support programs on dairy and row crops including grains , oilseeds , and cotton .

in addition , the united states has provided substantial support to the sugar sector via supply management and import quotas .

eu agricultural policy provides support to a broader range of farm and food products — traditional row crops , sugar , and dairy as well as livestock products and fresh and processed fruits and vegetables — with more extensive cross compliance provisions .

both the united states and the eu have relied on similar policy instruments to support their respective agricultural sectors — commodity - specific price - triggered supports , direct payments to producers , supply controls , and border measures — although their implementation and the range of affected commodities have been fairly different over the years .

to fully appreciate the current status of u.s. and eu farm policy , this section briefly reviews the origins and evolution of their respective policies .

agriculture is one of the principal policy areas where all eu member states sacrifice national sovereignty in favor of a common policy — the cap .

the nature and objectives of the cap have evolved significantly since the 1990s , shifting from support that intervened heavily in the marketplace to more decoupled , better targeted , and more environmentally friendly support .

for example , in 1992 , market - related support measures represented over 90% of total cap expenditures , driven by domestic purchases ( referred to as intervention purchases ) at high internal support prices and export subsidies ( referred to as refunds ) to push domestic surpluses into international markets .

in the cap 2014-2020 budget , market support has dropped to about 4% , while decoupled direct payments now account for 71% of the budget .

rural development comprises the remaining 24% ( table 5 ) .

this section briefly describes the current cap .

the cap governs agricultural policies and programs for the eu's 28 member countries .

following the most recent reform completed in june 2013 , the overall cap budget has been set for the seven - year period 2014-2020 at €408.3 billion in 2015 prices ( or approximately $452.8 billion ) .

the cap is now focused on three long - term priorities: 1 .

promoting viable food production with a focus on agricultural income , agricultural productivity , and price stability ; 2 .

promoting sustainable management of natural resources and climate action , with a focus on greenhouse gas emissions , biodiversity , soil , and water ; and 3 .

promoting balanced territorial development , with a focus on rural employment , growth , and poverty in rural areas .

the 2013 reform maintained the concept of two separate pillars for the cap but tightened the link between them by expanding direct payments to have seven potential components ( as described below ) .

in addition , payments made under both pillars are subject to a common set of cross compliance requirements ( also described below ) .

furthermore , the cap sets rules and regulations for how funds may be used between and within these two pillars .

in addition to the cap framework , member states also generally implement supplementary measures funded at the national level that may target specific local or national objectives .

the 2014 farm bill ( the agricultural act of 2014 ; p.l .

113-79 ) , signed into law by president obama on february 7 , 2014 , governs current u.s. farm policy .

the farm bill is an omnibus , multi - year ( 2014-2018 ) piece of authorizing legislation that governs agricultural and food programs including traditional commodity programs as well as conservation , trade , rural development , nutrition , and other program areas .

the 2014 farm bill reshaped the farm safety net for traditional program crops , most notably by eliminating decoupled direct payments ( valued at $5 billion per year for 1996-2013 ) and adding two new partially coupled payment programs: the price loss coverage ( plc ) and agriculture risk coverage ( arc ) programs .

unlike the eu , where direct payments represent the largest share ( 71% ) of the projected cap budget for 2014-2020 ( table 5 ) , domestic nutrition programs comprise the largest share ( 80% ) of projected farm bill outlays over the five - year farm bill period 2014-2018 ( table 6 ) .

the u.s. farm commodity safety net is comprised of three components .

first are the traditional f arm commodity programs which represent the heart of u.s. farm policy by virtue of their long history ( dating back to the 1930s ) .

support is based primarily on statutorily fixed prices , although arc uses a moving average of market prices .

for crop years 2014-2018 , the marketing loan program establishes minimum prices for approximately two dozen commodities , including corn , soybeans , wheat , rice , and peanuts .

in addition , producers with production histories for covered crops could choose between plc payments and arc payments .

second is f ederal crop insurance which makes available subsidized insurance for more than 130 commodities to help farmers manage risks associated with a loss in yield or revenue .

producers pay a portion of the premium , which increases as the level of coverage rises .

usda pays the rest of the premium — 62% , on average , in 2014 — and covers the cost of selling and servicing the policies .

third , a gricultural disaster assistance is permanently authorized for livestock and orchards .

this final section compares eu and u.s. agricultural support programs and outlays based on two international data sources: ( 1 ) annual domestic support notifications to the wto , and ( 2 ) a set of comparative policy measures published annually by the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) as part of its country - level policy database .

each of these data sources uses a slightly different metric to evaluate and measure agricultural support — including both direct and implicit support — but arrives at very similar conclusions .

the policy comparison highlights are presented first , followed by a more detailed discussion of specific policies and their support measurements .

the eu is one of the united states' chief agricultural trading partners and also a major competitor in world food markets .

both the eu and the united states heavily support their agricultural sectors .

however , strong budgetary pressures coupled with a shifting policy preference toward greater market orientation have motivated both the united states and the eu to modify their farm programs since the 1980s .

traditional price and income support programs have been progressively replaced by support that is decoupled from production or prices .

many in congress have historically defended u.s. farm support programs as a means to ensure that the united states has continued access to the "world's safest , highest quality , and most abundant food supply. .

european defenders of the cap have made similar arguments for state - sanctioned intervention in the agricultural sector .

yet longstanding criticisms and continued debate have challenged the extent of and need for government support of farm programs .

some argue that the failure of the united states and eu to enact more substantial reform to their respective farm support programs contributed to delays in the now defunct wto doha round of multilateral trade negotiations .

because the united states and the eu figure so dominantly in the development and use of agricultural policy on the global level , information comparing the eu and u.s. farm support programs will likely continue to be of interest to congress as the united states prepares for another round of domestic farm bill negotiations and as it continues to engage in international trade negotiations on several fronts , including the transatlantic trade and investment partnership with the eu and the trans - pacific partnership with pacific rim nations and within the wto's multilateral negotiating forum .

