the pricing of prescription drugs remains a significant concern for many u.s. consumers .

as spending on health care has risen in recent years , so too has consumer interest in purchasing more affordable medications .

overseas markets provide one possible source of less costly prescription drugs .

some comparative studies of prescription drug prices in the united states and foreign nations have concluded that prices for specific drugs may be significantly lower abroad .

in order to take advantage of these price disparities , at least six bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress that would allow individuals to import lower - cost prescription drugs from foreign jurisdictions .

the bills differ on the jurisdictions from which imports are permissible .

some bills restrict the sources of prescription drugs to canadian pharmacies ; some to a set of specifically named jurisdictions ; while others potentially apply to any foreign country .

none of these bills have been enacted .

none of the bills introduced in the 114 th congress address the intellectual property implications of this so - called "parallel importation" or "re - importation. .

although debate surrounding the parallel importation of prescription pharmaceuticals has largely addressed the safety and efficacy of the imported medications , this practice may also raise significant intellectual property concerns .

many prescription drugs are subject to patent rights in the united states .

among the rights granted by an issued patent is the ability to exclude others from importing the patented product into the united states .

as a result , even if a foreign drug is judged safe and effective for domestic use , brand - name firms may nonetheless be able to block the unauthorized importation of prescription drugs through use of their patent rights .

the parallel trade of patented pharmaceuticals involves a fundamental trade - off within the intellectual property law: encouraging the labors that led to technological innovation , on one hand , and promoting access to the fruits of those labors , on the other .

the patent system is built upon the premise that patents provide individuals with an incentive to innovate by awarding inventors exclusive rights in their inventions for a limited period of time .

some observers believe that a diminishment of patent rights will decrease incentives to develop new pharmaceuticals in the future .

yet there is growing concern that drug prices are too high in the united states as compared to other nations .

some commentators believe that the patent system should not be used to regulate the movement of legitimate , lawfully purchased products through the global marketplace .

this report explores the intellectual property laws and policies concerning the parallel importation of patented pharmaceuticals into the united states .

it begins with a review of patent policy and procedures .

the report then discusses the current legal framework for analyzing the permissibility of the parallel importation of patented pharmaceuticals , including both the domestic and international exhaustion doctrines .

this report closes with a review of legislative issues and alternatives as they relate to intellectual property issues and parallel importation .

in some circumstances , widely divergent drug prices between the united states and other nations have encouraged parallel importation .

price disparities between the united states and other nations create incentives for individuals to purchase medications from abroad , and import them into the united states , in order to lower health care costs or undercut the u.s. distributor .

in this context , the term "parallel imports" refers to patented products that are legitimately distributed abroad , and then sold to consumers in the united states without the permission of the authorized u.s. dealer .

although these "grey market goods" are authentic products that were sold under the authorization of the brand - name drug company , they entered the u.s. market outside the usual distribution channels for that drug .

two competing positions have arisen with respect to the use of patent rights to block parallel importation .

one is that the exhaustion doctrine is not limited to domestic sales by the patentee or its representative , but to all sales regardless of their location .

this position is commonly referred to as "international exhaustion. .

under this view , because the importer lawfully purchased authentic goods from the patent holder or its representative , the u.s. patent right is subject to "international exhaustion" due to the sale , despite the fact that the sale technically took place under a foreign patent .

the other position , more favorable to patent proprietors , is that the u.s. patent is fully enforceable against imports despite the exhaustion doctrine .

the federal circuit has , since at least 2001 , adopted this view of "national exhaustion. .

under this line of reasoning , a "patentee's authorization of an international foreign sale does not affect exhaustion of the patentee's rights in the united states. .

this principle relies on the fact that u.s. patents exist independently of foreign patents , and that u.s. patents are effective only within the united states .

as a result , this reasoning continues , a foreign sale cannot result in exhaustion of a u.s. patent .

this legal doctrine — which restricts the exhaustion doctrine to domestic sales only — allows the u.s. patent to be used to block unauthorized imports of a patented pharmaceutical .

the position of the federal circuit became subject to question in view of the supreme court's 2013 ruling in kirtsaeng v. john wiley & sons .

in kirtsaeng , the supreme court held that sales of books that were purchased overseas , imported in the united states , and sold here did not infringe copyrights on the books .

the court's adoption of an "international exhaustion" principle with respect to copyright created a distinct rule from the "national exhaustion" principle that the federal circuit has applied to patents .

the supreme court decision centered upon the activities of supap kirtsaeng , a thai national who came to the united states to study at cornell university .

he discovered that textbooks sold by john wiley & sons were more expensive in the united states than in thailand .

kirtsaeng asked his relatives to buy wiley books in thailand and ship them to him .

kirtsaeng then sold the books at a profit .

when wiley sued kirtseang for copyright infringement , the supreme court applied the "international exhaustion" principle .

under the court's ruling , works of authorship lawfully purchased abroad , and then imported into the united states , were protected from charges of copyright infringement via the first sale doctrine .

the court based its decision on two principal grounds .

first , the court construed several provisions of the copyright statute to determine that the international exhaustion was the appropriate rule .

second , the court believed that sound intellectual property policy supported international exhaustion .

to restrict copyright exhaustion to domestic sales , the court concluded , would establish intolerable burdens for booksellers , museums , and retailers who would have to determine whether particular copies of works of authorship were fabricated overseas .

in this respect , the court observed: technology companies tell us that "automobiles , microwaves , calculators , mobile phones , tablets , and personal computers" contain copyrightable software programs or packaging... .

many of these items are made abroad with the american copyright holder's permission and then sold and imported ( with that permission ) to the united states.... a [domestic exhaustion rule] would prevent the resale of , say , a car , without the permission of the holder of each copyright on each piece of copyrighted automobile software .

yet there is no reason to believe that foreign auto manufacturers regularly obtain this kind of permission from their software component suppliers , and wiley did not indicate to the contrary when asked... .

without that permission a foreign car owner could not sell his or her used car .

in view of the supreme court decision in kirtsaeng , the federal circuit decided to take a fresh look at its stance on the international exhaustion of patented products .

the result was the 2016 decision in lexmark international , inc. v. impression products , inc .

 , which confirmed the appeals court's earlier position rejecting the doctrine of "international exhaustion. .

following lexmark , in contrast to the international exhaustion principle of copyright law , the patent exhaustion doctrine is limited to sales that occur within the united states .

writing for the majority , judge taranto reasoned that the supreme court had based the kirtsaeng ruling upon its interpretation of specific provisions of the copyright act .

the patent act does not include analogous provisions — indeed , it does not expressly address exhaustion at all .

he also concluded that , unlike copyright , patent rights may vary significantly from country to country .

under this view , patents should not be so easily equated with copyrights with respect to international exhaustion .

judge taranto also observed , with respect to patented pharmaceuticals: there seems to be no dispute that u.s. - patented medicines are often sold outside the united states at substantially lower prices than those charged here and , also , that the practice could be disrupted by the increased arbitrage opportunities that would come from deeming u.s. rights eliminated by a foreign sale made or authorized by the u.s. patentee .

judge dyk authored a dissenting opinion asserting that many of the policy arguments that the kirtsaeng opinion advanced in favor of the international exhaustion rule apply with equal force to patents .

he observed that , as with copyrights , u.s. retailers deal with high - technology , patented products that may or may not have been manufactured in this country .

unless an international exhaustion rule were to be adopted , judge dyk asserted , sorting through applicable patent rights may prove extremely burdensome .

unless the supreme court decides to intervene , the federal circuit's ruling in lexmark v. impression products remains the law of the land .

under this holding , patent exhaustion applies only to sales that occurred in the united states .

this rule squarely rejects the principle of "international exhaustion. .

as a result , brand - name drug companies may potentially block imports of patented medications into the united states even if the imported good is the patent owner's own product , legitimately sold to a customer in a foreign jurisdiction .

in addition to the issue of patent infringement , the parallel importation of patented pharmaceuticals potentially raises other issues .

this report next considers three of them: the status of state and local governments that have either themselves imported , or have encouraged others to import , patented medications from foreign jurisdictions ; the potential use of label licenses on patented drugs ; and the implications of international trade rules established by world trade organization ( wto ) .

should congressional interest continue in this area , a variety of options are available .

if the possibility of an infringement action against unauthorized importers of patented pharmaceuticals is deemed sound , then no action need be taken .

alternatively , congress could confirm the federal circuit's decision in lexmark v. impression products , which rejects the doctrine of international exhaustion and confines the patent exhaustion principle to sales that occurred within the united states .

if legislative activity is deemed appropriate , however , another possibility is the introduction of some form of international exhaustion doctrine into u.s. patent law .

the trips agreement does not seem to require that a country adopt the international exhaustion doctrine as an all - or - nothing proposition , applying either to all patented products or to none .

as a result , if congress chose to limit application of the international exhaustion doctrine to patented pharmaceuticals , or some other specific type of invention , then no ramifications appear to arise with respect to the trips agreement obligations of the united states .

at least two statutory mechanisms exist for implementing the international exhaustion doctrine into u.s. patent law .

one possible approach would be to declare that importation into the united states of goods sold abroad by a patent proprietor or its representative is not a patent infringement .

for example , in the 108 th congress , the pharmaceutical market access and drug safety act of 2004 ( s. 2328 ) , would have taken this approach with respect to patented pharmaceuticals , specifying that it shall not be an act of infringement to use , offer to sell , or sell within the united states or to import into the united states any patented invention under section 804 of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act that was first sold abroad by or under authority of the owner or licensee of such patent .

s. 2328 further stipulated that this amendment shall not be construed "to affect the ability of a patent owner or licensee to enforce their patent , subject to such amendment. .

this language suggests a congressional intention to leave intact other rights established by the patent act of 1952 .

in addition to codifying the international exhaustion doctrine with respect to pharmaceuticals , such an amendment may conversely lead to the implication that the international exhaustion doctrine does not apply to patented inventions other than pharmaceuticals .

this provision could potentially fortify the ruling in lexmark v. impression products for inventions outside of the pharmaceutical field .

another statutory mechanism for promoting the importation of patented drugs is to immunize specific individuals from infringement liability .

the patent act of 1952 , as amended , takes this approach in the area of patented medical methods , exempting licensed medical practitioners and certain health care entities from patent infringement in certain circumstances .

in the case of drug importation , potential patent infringers include importers , distributors , wholesalers , pharmacies , and individual consumers .

should congress wish to promote parallel trade in patented pharmaceuticals , an explicit statutory infringement exemption could encourage individuals to engage in drug importation .

in considering these or other legal changes to the patent laws , the possibility of label licenses should be kept in mind .

even if congress exempted drug importation practices or practitioners from patent infringement liability , firms may still be able to stipulate through the contract law that a drug sold in a foreign jurisdiction is for use exclusively within that jurisdiction .

if a purchaser instead imported that medication into the united states , then the seller may have a cause of action for breach of contract .

as a result , any legal changes may need to account for the ability of firms to use contractual provisions as something of a substitute for patent protection in the area of prescription drug importation .

controlling the costs of prescription drug spending , on one hand , and encouraging the development of new drugs , on the other , are both significant goals .

these aspirations may potentially conflict , however .

although introducing international exhaustion into u.s. patent law may initially lower the price of patented drugs , it might also decrease the incentive of firms to engage in the research and development of new pharmaceuticals , as well as to shepherd new drugs through time - consuming and costly marketing approval procedures .

consideration of patent law reforms would likely be put into the larger context of drug costs , which may be influenced by the pricing policies of foreign nations , profits earned by wholesalers and other intermediaries , the physical costs of shipment into the united states , and other diverse factors .

striking a balance between increasing access to medications and ensuring the continued development of new drugs by our nation's pharmaceutical firms is a central concern of the current drug importation debate .

