militant islamist groups have operated in southeast asia for decades .

the region , home to more than 625 million people , has numerous countries with large muslim populations , including indonesia , the world's most populous muslim - majority nation and the world's third most populous democracy ( after india and the united states ) .

the region is home to several longstanding and sometimes violent separatist movements , as well as pockets of islamist radicalism , which have led to instances of violence over the past 30 years , particularly during the 2000s .

many observers have noted the success of some southeast asian governments' efforts combatting violent militancy and degrading some of the region's foremost terrorist groups , including the pan - regional , but largely indonesian based , jemaah islamiyah and the philippines' abu sayyaf .

the united states has offered considerable counterterrorism assistance to southeast asian governments , particularly since the september 11 , 2001 , attacks .

these include helping indonesia create a centralized antiterrorism unit and providing u.s. advisory troops on the southern philippine island of basilan to help the armed forces of the philippines combat violent groups in the country's deep south .

the rise of the islamic state ( is ) in iraq and syria since 2014 , however , has raised the possibility of new and heightened terrorism risks in southeast asia .

a january 2016 terrorist attack in jakarta , indonesia , that killed eight individuals , four of them civilians , demonstrated that militants in the region are seeking support or inspiration from the islamic state , increasing the risks of terrorism in southeast asia — risks that could harm united states citizens or adversely affect u.s. security interests in the region .

the state department's 2015 country reports on terrorism stated that , "countries in the east asia and pacific region faced the threat of terrorist attacks , flows of foreign terrorist fighters to and from iraq and syria , and groups and individuals espousing support for the islamic state of iraq and the levant ( isil ) . .

the trump administration has indicated that combatting is is one of its highest priorities .

a january 2017 foreign policy statement posted on the white house website stated that , "defeating isis and other radical islamic terror groups will be our highest priority.... [t]he trump administration will work with international partners to cut off funding for terrorist groups , to expand intelligence sharing , and to engage in cyberwarfare to disrupt and disable propaganda and recruiting. .

in southeast asia , despite perceptions among analysts that risks are growing , the region generally has not been seen as a front - line threat on par with some other parts of the world , such as the middle east or northern africa .

as congress considers u.s. policy towards southeast asia , it may wish to consider several questions: what is the nature and extent of radicalization in southeast asia , and does it constitute a threat to u.s. interests in the region ? .

if so , how , and to what extent ? .

what is the nature of threats to u.s. security interests that radicalism poses in southeast asia , and how acute are they ? .

are these threats increasing in significance ? .

are threat levels affected by the rise of the islamic state ? .

if so , in what ways ? .

how effective are southeast asian governments' capabilities to monitor and combat the threat of terrorism in their homelands , and to coordinate efforts when those threats spread across borders ? .

where these capabilities are insufficient , could u.s. assistance help address capability gaps ? .

if so , then what are the most effective legislative and oversight tools that congress has at its disposal to ensure that u.s. assistance is used effectively towards these ends ? .

what priority should policymakers place on supporting counterterrorism efforts in southeast asia , compared with other u.s. security , diplomatic and economic goals ? .

what are the most effective legislative and oversight tools that congress has at its disposal to help shape the development and ordering of those priorities ? .

what tools does congress have at its disposal to ensure that u.s. support for southeast asian counterterrorism efforts does not encourage and enable countries to unduly curtail human rights and the rule of law ? .

congress may wish to consider , for example , conditionalities on assistance , and the implementation of existing vetting procedures and requirements .

what lessons might be drawn from southeast asian efforts to degrade terrorist groups and de - radicalize individuals harboring militant views , and is the administration effectively evaluating such lessons ? .

are these lessons applicable in other parts of the world as well ? .

southeast asia is home to large sunni muslim populations — around 240 million people region - wide , or 40% of southeast asia's overall population and over 15% of the world's estimated muslim population – making it one of the primary demographic centers of the islamic world .

the vast majority of southeast asian muslims have traditionally subscribed to moderate , syncretic forms of the religion .

more conservative sunni communities , however , have grown with support from donors in the arab gulf states since the late 20 th century and small pockets of radicalism have been active for decades .

militant islamist groups in southeast asia have widely different origins .

longstanding separatist movements in parts of the indonesian archipelago , particularly in aceh , have also created safe havens for violent groups .

the philippines and thailand — dominated , respectively , by catholic and buddhist majorities — have fought separatist movements in their muslim - majority southern regions for decades , and grievances in those regions have led to extremism and violence .

islam played a role in anti - u.s. insurgency in the philippines from the earliest stages of u.s. colonial involvement in the philippines in the late 19 th century .

malaysia , another muslim - majority nation , has not had a strong indigenous terrorist movement , but like the other nations in the region , its porous borders have allowed terrorists to operate from its shores .

some observers also believe malaysia has been an active source and transit point for terrorist financing .

with the notable exception of the jemaah islamiyah network in the early 2000s , the linkages among violent southeast asian groups , and links between them and groups centered in the middle east , traditionally have been weak .

most southeast asian militant groups have operated only in their own country or islands , and focused on domestic issues such as promoting the adoption of islamic law ( sharia ) and seeking independence from central government control .

however , the war in afghanistan and the rise of globalized social media contributed to the radicalization of islam in southeast asia , and jemaah islamiyah was widely linked to al qaeda , and to the abu sayyaf group in the philippines .

likewise , over the past two years , the rise of the islamic state has led to a new phase of islamist militancy in southeast asia , as in the middle east and across the muslim world .

terrorism experts say is offers inspiration , and the potential for training and material support , for militants in southeast asia .

is has conducted online recruitment efforts in indonesia's national language ( called "bahasa indonesia" ) and in the malay language .

analysts estimate that hundreds of southeast asians have travelled to the middle east to fight with is — just as some did in the late 1990s in afghanistan with al qaeda .

terrorism experts describe a southeast asian "military arm" of the islamic state known as katibah nusantara , made up of indonesians , malaysians and others , operating in syria .

several southeast asian governments , including indonesia , malaysia , and singapore , have intensified counterterror efforts since 2014 , outlawing calls for support of is and strengthening policing and border - control efforts .

it is difficult to estimate with precision how many individuals from the region have traveled to the middle east to join the islamic state fight , or how much financial support the group has derived from southeast asia .

authorities in indonesia , malaysia , the philippines , and singapore , however , have all expressed concerns that the return of battle - trained militants from the middle east who could conduct attacks in - country or train others to do so poses a threat .

some analysts have noted that southeast asian counterterrorism efforts in the 2000s and early 2010s largely broke up or weakened large terrorist groups in the region such as ji and abu sayyaf .

however , many observers argue that this has led to a dangerous situation in which small splinter groups that have survived may now have incentives to use violence to demonstrate their effectiveness and bolster their legitimacy .

in so doing , they have sought to attract material support from is ( or other outside groups such as al qaeda ) , and to recruit new members .

one other potential concern is that terrorist activity may increase as competition grows between the islamic state and al qaeda over the leadership , definition , and goals of the global community of jihadist - salafist sunni muslims .

some argue this rivalry has created "a rift within the region's islamist fraternity by dividing them into al - qaeda loyalists and islamic state followers. .

some officials in the region are concerned that in this new phase , militants may shift strategy and tactics .

new attacks may seek to emulate the november 2015 paris attacks to attack soft targets .

there is a potentially larger pool of battle - hardened fighters that could return home from syria or iraq to carry out such attacks or to spread radicalism to others .

there appears to be increasing use of social media as a recruitment tool that can inspire lone - wolf attacks and draw converts to the is cause .

while it is too early to draw conclusions , the january 2016 jakarta attack , which targeted a starbucks and a large shopping mall in addition to a police station , may also point to a return to focusing on western targets in the region .

the islamic state may also be expanding its activities into southeast asia and elsewhere as a way of internationalizing its struggle and compensating for losses in syria and iraq .

it may also seek to gain the allegiance of existing islamist groups as a way of expanding its regional network .

southeast asia is a diverse region , comprising three muslim - majority states ( indonesia , malaysia , and brunei ) , and several countries with substantial muslim minorities ( the philippines , thailand , singapore , and burma ) .

this section will discuss specific issues in indonesia , the philippines and malaysia , the three southeast asian countries where observers consider terrorism risks that span borders or are directed at western targets to be highest .

it will also discuss australia , a nation where the threat of terrorism is at least partly derived from its open immigration policies and links to southeast asia .

thailand and singapore will also be discussed .

violent militancy has been a threat in southeast asia for many years , increasing in intensity in the years following the september 11 , 2001 , attacks in the united states , and then seemingly easing in the late 2000s - early 2010s , as southeast asian governments' efforts to degrade domestic militant groups appeared to bear fruit .

the rise of the islamic state and the potential it raises for militant recruitment in southeast asia and beyond raises new challenges that may guide u.s. counterterrorism policy .

most analysts assess that terrorist threats in southeast asia remain lower than in some other regions .

the state department's 2015 country reports on terrorism said in its overall strategic assessment that asian countries "actively sought to address threats and degrade the ability of terrorist groups to operate .

governments worked to strengthen legal frameworks , investigated and prosecuted terrorism cases , increased regional cooperation and information sharing , and addressed critical border and aviation security gaps. .

however , risks remain that southeast asia could still be subject to terrorism — either locally organized "lone wolf" attacks or more organized and larger - scale trans - national efforts .

many of the region's most prominent militant groups and individuals have publicly expressed support for the islamic state , and analysts report substantial is recruitment activity aimed at the region's large muslim populations .

analysts have expressed concern about the region's ability to monitor and track new threats arising from the potential return of battle - trained individuals from the middle east .

it remains difficult to assess whether concrete operational and planning linkages have been established between the islamic state and southeast asian militants , or whether the region's generally successful counterterrorism efforts continue to marginalize militant groups .

the course of the region's counterterrorism activities — and the effectiveness of u.s. counterterrorism efforts in southeast asia — are likely to remain priority issues for the united states and governments in the region .

in part for these reasons , congress may opt to consider the legislative and oversight tools at its disposal to help develop and shape the ordering and pursuit of priorities to counter terrorism and violent extremism in southeast asia .

