active protection systems ( apss ) are subsystems integrated into or installed on a combat vehicle to automatically acquire , track , and respond with hard or soft kill capabilities to a variety of threats , including rocket - propelled grenades ( rpgs ) and anti - tank guided missiles ( atgms ) .

aps technologies are not new , and a number of nations have already employed aps on the battlefield .

the u.s. military is now beginning to include aps as part of its formal combat vehicle modernization plans and , if the initial deployment of aps proves successful , could expand the use of aps to potentially thousands of tactical military vehicles — a complex and potentially costly undertaking .

congress , in its oversight and authorization and appropriations roles , has expressed interest in past and current u.s. military aps efforts and will likely continue to be actively involved as these technologies mature and possibly are integrated onto u.s. combat vehicles .

a combination of evolving threats , advances in technology , experiences in combat , and the possibility of future conflicts has served to heighten the perceived need to pursue aps for u.s. military use more aggressively .

some of the factors affecting current u.s. aps efforts are discussed in the following sections .

as noted in the previous sections , the basic science and engineering of aps present a number of challenges .

these challenges are exacerbated by the possibility that an enemy may employ tactics and techniques , as well as defensive measures , to neutralize the effectiveness of the aps .

those measures may vary "from sophisticated jammers and decoys to simply firing a volley of cheap and widely available rocket - propelled grenades to overwhelm the defense. .

a general description of armored vehicle survivability challenges , as well as additional developmental challenges ( in no particular order of priority ) , is discussed in the following sections .

according to the u.s. army tank - automotive research , development , and engineering center ( tardec ) , "active protection systems have been in the design and development stages since the early 1950s , but none have successfully made the transition from development to integration on a [u.s.] platform. .

in the late 1990s , for example , the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) led efforts to develop "a small , low - cost , fully self - contained active defense system for military vehicles and high value assets. .

the system , designated slid for "small , low - cost , interceptor device," was intended to protect from missile and artillery threats .

in 1998 , the army was involved in a program designated the counter active protective systems ( caps ) , which was intended to develop a suite of capabilities — including electronic countermeasures ; advanced , long stand - off warheads ; decoys ; and ballistic hardening countermeasures — that could be mounted on tanks .

aps development figured prominently in the army's future combat system ( fcs ) program , which began in 1999 .

according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , in 2005 the lead systems integrator for the fcs program sought proposals from industry for a developer who could design and deliver an aps prototype that could be mounted on current combat vehicles by 2009 and tested on fcs vehicles in 2011 .

the fcs program was cancelled in 2009 .

it was decided , however , to continue work on both developing an aps for use on combat vehicles as well testing existing aps systems that could be mounted on combat vehicles to meet urgent operational needs until an aps could be developed and fielded .

although the united states has been exploring aps technologies since the 1950s , other nations have developed and successfully fielded aps to their forces .

the first operational aps — the drozd — was developed by the soviet union between 1977 and 1982 .

designed to protect against rpgs and atgms , it used primitive millimeter - wave radar sensors mounted on each side of the tank's turret to detect incoming rounds .

the drozd covered only the forward 60 degrees of the turret , but the tank crew could rotate the turret to change the tank's protective profile .

the drozd was reported 80% successful against rpgs in afghanistan .

in the late 1990s , france mounted the galix countermeasures system on its leclerc main battle tanks .

the turret - mounted galix provided 360-degree coverage and could automatically fire 80 mm smoke rounds , anti - personnel rounds , or decoy rounds .

israel has employed aps operationally on selected vehicles since the late 1990s and , as previously discussed , has recently employed its trophy aps extensively in combat in 2014 , with plans underway to expand its use with israeli forces .

currently , russia's newest tank , the t - 14 armata , has separate hard kill and soft kill apss .

although these systems reportedly have multiple sensors and launch tubes , the armata's aps supposedly covers only against threats lateral to the turret , meaning that there is no protection against guided missiles that are air - launched or have a top - attack mode .

in march 2006 , a contract potentially worth $70 million was awarded to raytheon to develop an aps for fcs - manned ground vehicles as well as the army's fleet of combat vehicles .

the aps program came under public criticism in september 2006 when a press report alleged that the army rejected the israeli - developed trophy aps for use in the fcs program , despite the system being successfully tested on u.s. combat vehicles .

the report further contended the army was favoring the aps system in development by raytheon over the trophy system because of "money and politics" and that u.s. forces in the field were suffering casualties because of this decision .

a gao report , however , maintains there was no conflict of interest , concluding: no officials from the offering companies participated in the evaluation and all offers were evaluated based on the same criteria .

four proposals were evaluated and three were determined to be comparable in terms of cost and schedule .

the winner — raytheon — was chosen on technical merit , as being more likely to meet aps requirements although its design had less mature technology .

among the army's concerns was that the trophy system had a single - shot capability .

the army also believed the raytheon system would result in less collateral damage than the trophy system .

the army suggested that adopting the trophy system could provide soldiers with a "false sense of security" and also suggested that the raytheon - developed system was progressing favorably , noting it had intercepted live warheads during testing .

section 216 of the fiscal year 2008 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

110-181 ) required the secretary of defense to conduct live fires tests of foreign and u.s. apss suitable to protect wheeled tactical vehicles — especially light wheeled tactical vehicles — to determine their effectiveness and develop information that could be useful for defense acquisitions .

the army notes the major findings of these tests were as follows: none of the systems tested were mature enough for fielding ; further development and testing and evaluation standards were needed ; industry claims were not successfully demonstrated ; systems were not fully deployable or tested under operationally realistic conditions ; and there was no u.s. military concept of operations , or tactics , techniques , or procedures for aps use .

in 2013 , u.s. , british , and canadian evaluations of commercially available aps revealed that "aps was deemed too high risk" and "aps was not currently ready to field. .

presently , army officials suggest that the fielding challenges and risks associated with non - developmental aps systems have not changed since 2013 but instead battlefield threats and the operational environment have changed — thereby emphasizing the need for an aps - like capability .

a survey of international industry suggests there are a number of systems either in use or under development that could qualify as "active protection" systems .

the following systems have been featured in press articles and have been associated with dod aps efforts .

according to the marines , it should be noted that these systems are hard kill systems and not illustrative of what industry has previously developed .

according to defense officials , the systems listed here will require additional funding and investment to further test , validate vendor claims , and integrate into selected vehicles .

the house armed services committee and the senate committee on the armed services , as well as the house and senate appropriations committees , included the following aps - related provisions in their respective fy2017 authorization and appropriations acts .

as previously noted , army officials in 2016 suggested the fielding challenges and risks associated with non - developmental aps systems have not changed since 2013 but , instead , battlefield threats and the operational environment have changed , thereby perhaps "driving" the need for an aps - like capability .

in 2013 , the army noted aps was deemed too high - risk and not currently ready to field .

this statement seemingly suggests not much has changed from 2013 to present in terms of ndi aps improvements and raises the possibility that less - than - effective or safe ndi apss could be adopted for operational use based on the perceived urgency of battlefield threats .

however , it is also possible the services are overemphasizing their ndi aps concerns in hopes a "less - risky / more effective" aps can be developed in the future .

in 2010 , then secretary of defense robert gates admonished the services for "gold plating" systems , suggesting that a "70 to 80 percent solution in five years is better than a perfect outcome that could take decades , or worse , never materialize. .

given the army's reservations about ndi aps and past dod practices that some analysts have noted of seeking "perfect" technological solutions , congress might examine the army's and marines' operational and safety requirements for ndi aps in relation to current aps offerings .

such an examination could help to determine if the army and marines are potentially "rushing" to the field a less - than - capable , risky aps based on pressure of a perceived threat or are , instead , waiting for a "perfect" solution in the future when the "70 to 80 percent" solution might be at hand .

in this regard , it could be useful to characterize what a "70 to 80 percent" solution means in terms of vehicle and soldier survivability and what tradeoffs would be involved in adopting a ndi aps versus pursuing a longer - term effort .

the army's current aps efforts — ndi aps and maps — are being conducted in a resource - constrained environment where two somewhat parallel efforts might not be financially viable over the long term .

some have questioned if , under these budgetary constraints , the army can afford both ndi aps and maps .

dr. daniel gouré of the lexington institute suggests: while the army continues to work within the science and technology community on maps , ... if the army likes a system that works through the interim effort [ndi aps] it might want to "just call it a day and buy a bunch and then use the extra research and development money to go figure out the answer to another big problem it's got. .

as previously noted , the army contends maps will permit the rapid introduction of new technologies to respond to evolving threats while preventing "locking into" a single vendor and thereby promoting innovation in the commercial sector .

the army noted a similar maps - like approach has been adopted for modernizing its ah - 64 attack helicopters and has been highly effective .

while these assertions regarding maps appear to be reasonable , congress might examine them in greater detail with army officials to determine their analytical basis .

potential areas for further examination could include the following: given the army's current and total planned investment in maps , how much does the army project in total savings over the option of simply integrating an aps directly into a combat vehicle's existing protective and battle management systems ? .

what are the safety - associated costs associated with installing ndi aps components directly on a vehicle versus installing these components on an existing maps architecture ? .

what are the short - and long - term impacts on vehicle survivability if ndi aps is seen as a "good enough" solution at the expense of maps development ? .

how will maps permit the rapid introduction of new technologies to respond to evolving threats any more effectively than aps vendors upgrading their systems , which — in some cases — involves little more than software updates ? .

given current and projected budgetary limitations and the potential of ndi aps costs increasing if the army decides to outfit an appreciable number of its combat vehicles with these systems in the near future , how might such a cost increase affect longer - term maps efforts ? .

there are also maps - related technological and engineering considerations that congress might further examine in terms of effectiveness and cost .

there could be concerns from a basic systems engineering perspective that requiring ndi aps to operate through the maps interfaces , architecture , and controller could degrade the responsiveness and effectiveness of vendor - developed ndi aps sensors and countermeasures .

in a similar manner , some in industry are worried about the possible technical "mismatch" between commercially developed aps and maps requirements set by dod and the army .

as the center for strategic and international studies ( csis ) notes: the growing commercial role in military - relevant technology and the speed at which that technology is advancing challenges dod's capacity to keep up with the flood of technologies both for its own adoption , and to counter the technologies adopted by adversaries .

this statement illustrates commercial sector concerns that dod and the army might not be technologically at the same level as industry and current aps systems might need to be modified in order to be integrated into maps , potentially resulting in a less - than - optimal aps capability .

finally , some industry representatives have expressed concerns that by adopting maps , per unit cost of their aps sensors and countermeasures might actually increase based on the addition of maps integration requirements .

both the army and marines emphasized that their respective aps efforts were in the very early phases of technology demonstration and , as such , there is not a great deal of specific detailed information available .

while this is understandable at this phase , additional details will be required over time as these efforts mature in order to inform congressional oversight .

such details include but are not limited to the following: what types of army and marine vehicles — other than m - 1 abrams from both services and army m - 2 bradleys and m - 1126 strykers — are being considered for ndi aps and / or maps installation ? .

for example , what are the marines doing to assess aps suitability for their assault amphibian mission profiles and the unique operational and environmental challenges of ship - to - objective transport and maneuver ? .

how many vehicles by class ( armored fighting vehicles , heavy , medium , and light tactical wheeled vehicles , for example ) would receive aps or would only selected vehicles in a unit receive aps in order to provide collective coverage of non - aps capable vehicles ? .

will both active and reserve component vehicles receive ndi aps and / or maps ? .

will vehicles in the service's pre - positioned stocks — both afloat and ashore — be outfitted with ndi aps and / or maps and what is the priority given to these "war stocks" ? .

what are the army's and marines' fielding priorities and how long will it take to field aps and / or maps to designated vehicles ? .

what are the total projected program costs for outfitting potentially tens of thousands of vehicles with aps - related capabilities ? .

as previously noted , "threats are not standing still. .

in addition to aps's advertised ability to defeat rpgs , atgms , and certain tank main gun rounds , there are other types of potential threats to u.s. combat vehicles that merit consideration .

in this regard , congress might wish to examine with the services and industry the adaptability of aps and maps in detecting and defeating threats such as precision artillery and mortar rounds ; main tank gun penetrator , or "sabot," rounds ; aerial atgms from attack helicopters and unmanned aerial systems ( uas ) ; hypersonic missiles ; and advanced electronic defeat technologies .

a greater understanding of aps and maps capabilities , as well as their ability to adapt to a variety of threats — both current and emerging — could prove valuable as congress evaluates the viability and efficacy of army and marine aps efforts .

