both the house and the senate are considering legislation to support medical innovation , primarily through reforms to the national institutes of health ( nih ) and changes to the drug , biologic and device approval pathways at the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

both nih and fda are agencies within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

on february 3 , 2015 senators lamar alexander and patty murray , chairman and ranking member of the committee on health , education , labor and pensions , announced the start of a bipartisan initiative to "examine the process for getting safe treatments , devices and cures to patients and the roles of the [fda] and the [nih] in that process. .

this initiative culminated in a package of 19 bipartisan bills that were reported out of the senate health , labor , education , and pensions ( help ) committee in a series of three executive sessions held on february 9 , 2016 ; march 9 , 2016 ; and april 6 , 2016 .

one of these 19 bills , the adding zika virus to the fda priority review voucher program act ( s. 2512 ) , subsequently was passed by both chambers and signed into law on april 19 , 2016 ( p.l .

114-146 ) .

the remaining 18 bills that comprise the senate's medical innovation legislative effort include the following: s. 1878 , the advancing hope act of 2015 ; s. 1622 , the fda device accountability act of 2015 ; s. 2503 , preventing superbugs and protecting patients act ; s. 2030 , the advancing targeted therapies for rare diseases act of 2015 ; s. 2014 , next generation researchers act ; s. 800 , the enhancing the stature and visibility of medical rehabilitation research at nih act ; s. 849 , advancing research for neurological diseases act of 2015 ; s. 2511 , improving health information technology act ; s. 1077 , the advancing breakthrough medical devices for patients act of 2015 ; s. 1101 , the medical electronic data technology enhancement for consumers health act ; s. 2055 , the medical countermeasures innovation act of 2015 ; s. 1767 , the combination products innovation act of 2015 ; s. 1597 , patient focused impact assessment act of 2015 ; s. 185 , promise for antibiotics and therapeutics for health act ; s. 2713 , advancing precision medicine act of 2016 ; s. 2745 , advancing nih strategic planning and representation in medical research act ; s. 2742 , promoting biomedical research and public health for patients act ; and s. 2700 , fda and nih workforce authorities modernization act .

the senate's medical innovation package is that chamber's companion effort to the house's 21 st century cures initiative , which culminated in the house passage of h.r .

6 , the 21 st century cures act , on july 10 , 2015 , on a vote of 344 to 77 .

h.r .

6 is the result of a series of hearings and roundtable meetings hosted by the house energy and commerce committee dating back to spring 2014 .

the hearings and roundtables focused on a broad range of topics , including modernizing clinical trials , incorporating patient perspectives into medical research and regulatory processes , precision / personalized medicine , digital health care , and more .

while consisting of many different provisions , h.r .

6 is primarily focused on efforts to increase strategic investments in medical research at nih and change some aspects of how the fda executes its regulatory oversight mission with regard to the review and approval of new drugs , biologics , and medical devices .

the silvio o. conte senior biomedical research service ( sbrs ) , established in phsa section 228 , is a special hiring mechanism used by the hhs secretary to attract and retain accomplished scientists to work in public health service ( phs ) agencies .

it is not subject to civil service requirements under title 5 of the u.s. code , and it is distinct from other phs hiring mechanisms , such as the phs commissioned corps .

sbrs requirements are as prescribed in law and regulation ( 42 c.f.r .

part 24 ) .

currently , sbrs is limited to 500 members , who are accomplished doctoral - level scientists in biomedical research or clinical research evaluation .

the rate of pay may not exceed that for level i of the executive schedule ( currently about $206,000 per year ) unless approved by the president .

the secretary may contribute up to 10% of a service member's pay to that person's already established retirement system at the institution of higher education at which the member had been employed .

the provision would rename the sbrs as the silvio o. conte senior biomedical research and biomedical product assessment service ( the service ) .

it would increase the number of authorized members to 2,000 , and would add "biomedical product assessment" as a desired field of expertise .

it would clarify that the secretary is not required to reduce the number of employees serving in other hhs employment systems to offset the number of new employees in the service .

the provision would require the secretary to appoint experts to agencies within hhs , "taking into account the need for the expertise of such expert. .

it also would authorize the appointment of persons who hold "a master's level degree in engineering , bioinformatics , or a related or emerging field," broadening the current requirement for doctoral - level members .

it would increase the upper pay rate limit to that of the president ( currently $400,000 per year ) but would eliminate the authority to contribute to a member's preexisting retirement system .

finally , the provision would require gao to study the changes to the service and their effects on hhs departments and agencies .

the house bill contains a similar provision ( section 2281 ) that would also rename the sbrs the silvio o. conte senior biomedical research and biomedical product assessment service , with a similar stated purpose as the senate bill .

unlike the senate bill , the house bill would eliminate the mention of a specific number of authorized servicemembers .

like the senate bill , the house bill would clarify that the secretary is not required to reduce the number of employees serving in other hhs employment systems to offset the number of employees in the service .

the house bill would require the secretary to report on the hhs website regarding the changes to the service and whether they "have improved the ability of the [fda] to hire and retain qualified experts to fulfill obligations specified under user fee agreements. .

title 5 of the u.s. code provides the broad framework of requirements under which many federal employees are hired ; however , some subsets of employees are hired under alternative government - wide or agency - specific authorities .

numerous hiring authorities target scientists and other technical workers , for whom federal agencies such as fda compete with the private sector and nonfederal public employers .

for example , ffdca section 714 authorizes the secretary to appoint employees to positions in fda to perform , administer , or support activities related to review of medical device applications and human generic drugs "without regard to the provisions of title 5 , united states code , governing appointments in the competitive service. .

the provision would add a new ffdca section 714a , "hiring authority for scientific , technical , and professional personnel," which would authorize the secretary to "appoint outstanding and qualified candidates to scientific , technical , or professional positions that support the development , review , and regulation of medical products" within the competitive service "without regard to the provisions of title 5 , united states code , governing appointments in the competitive service. .

the fda commissioner would be allowed to determine pay ( not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the president ) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees , notwithstanding certain general schedule pay rate requirements .

this provision would require the secretary to submit a report to congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the fda workforce .

this provision also would require gao to conduct a study of fda's ability "to hire , train , and retain qualified scientific , technical , and professional staff ... necessary to fulfill the mission of the food and drug administration to protect and promote public health," among other specified contents with regard to the fda workforce .

the house bill contains a comparable provision ( h.r .

6 , title ii , subtitle p , section 2285 , "hiring authority for scientific , technical , and professional personnel ) , which would add a new ffdca section 714a , additional hiring authority .

like the senate bill , the house provision would allow the secretary to "appoint qualified candidates to scientific , technical , or professional positions" in the competitive service "without regard to the provisions of title 5 , united states code , governing appointments in the competitive service. .

unlike the senate bill , the house provision specifies that these positions would be within fda's center for drug evaluation and research , center for biologics evaluation and research , and center for devices and radiological health .

like the senate bill , the house provision would allow the hhs secretary to determine pay ( not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the president ) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees , notwithstanding certain general schedule pay rate requirements .

like the senate bill , the house provision would require the secretary to submit a report to congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the fda .

unlike the senate bill , the house provision would not require a gao study with regard to the fda workforce .

fda regulatory authority over medical product safety and effectiveness covers drugs , biological products , and medical devices .

the agency generally divides responsibilities for the review of marketing applications in its product - centered offices .

the center for drug evaluation and research reviews new drug applications for approval , the center for biologics evaluation and research reviews biologics license applications for licensure , and the center for devices and radiological health reviews premarket approval applications for approval and 510 ( k ) notifications for clearance .

as part of the vice president's cancer moonshot initiative , the obama administration has proposed an oncology center of excellence to streamline collaboration across fda's human drugs , biologics , and devices and radiological health programs .

according to the fy2017 congressional justification , "with the continued development of companion diagnostic tests and the use of combinations of drugs and biologics to treat cancer using methods developed through the science of precision medicine , to most benefit those affected , fda needs to take an integrated approach in its evaluation of products for the prevention , screening , diagnosis , and treatment of cancer. .

although the administration's proposed center of excellence is specific to cancer , there has arguably also been an increase in the number and complexity of diagnostics and therapeutics for other diseases as well , and some groups have suggested that such pilots could also be done in other areas ( eg , cardiology , neurology , and infectious disease ) .

this provision would add a new ffdca section 1014 , "food and drug administration intercenter institutes. .

this provision would require the secretary to establish one or more "intercenter institutes" for a major disease area ( s ) .

such institutes would be responsible for coordinating activities applicable to specific disease area ( s ) between the center for drug evaluation research , the center for biologics evaluation and research , and the center for devices and radiological health ; for example , coordinating staff from the three centers with diverse product expertise relevant to a major disease area , and streamlining the review of medical products related to that major disease area .

this provision would require the secretary to establish at least one institute within one year of enactment of h.r .

2700 , and would require the secretary to provide a public comment period while each institute is being implemented .

this provision also would allow the secretary to terminate any such institute if the secretary determines that it is no longer benefitting the public health .

no comparable provision in h.r .

6 .

following allegations of misspent funds during a 2010 general services administration meeting held in las vegas , the office of management and budget ( omb ) imposed restrictions on conference travel for federal employees in memorandum m - 12-12 .

the memorandum directed agencies , beginning in fy2013 , to spend at least 30% less than what was spent in fy2010 on travel expenses , and stated that agencies "must maintain this reduced level of spending each year through fy 2016. .

senior - level agency approval is required for all conferences sponsored by an agency where the conference expenses to the agency exceed $100,000 .

agencies are prohibited from spending more than $500,000 on a single conference .

however , this restriction may be waived if the agency head "determines that exceptional circumstances exist whereby spending in excess of $500,000 on a single conference is the most cost - effective option to achieve a compelling purpose. .

under the senate provision , if attendance at a scientific meeting is directly related to the professional duties of scientific or medical professionals of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , then the meetings would not be considered to be conferences for the purposes of ( 1 ) federal reporting requirements in annual appropriations acts , and ( 2 ) a restriction in omb memorandum m - 12-12 or any other regulation restricting such travel .

each hhs operating division would be required to post on their website an annual report on scientific meeting attendance and related travel spending for each fiscal year , including details as specified .

the nih travel ( title i , subtitle b , section 1025 ) and the enabling fda scientific engagement ( title ii , subtitle p , section 2282 ) provisions in h.r .

6 are comparable to s. 2700 .

both provisions in h.r .

6 express the sense of congress that participation in or sponsorship of scientific conferences and meetings is essential to the mission of nih and fda .

ffdca section 770 , as added by the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( fdaaa , p.l .

110-85 ) , created the reagan - udall foundation for the food and drug administration , a nonprofit organization "to advance the mission" of fda .

its duties cover activities such as identifying and then prioritizing unmet needs ; awarding grants or entering into other agreements with scientists , academic consortia , public - private partnerships , nonprofit organizations , and industry ; holding meetings and publishing information and data for use by fda and others ; and taking action to obtain patents and licensing of inventions , among others .

it is led by a board of directors , four of whom are ex officio members , nine from candidates provided by the national academy of sciences , and five from candidates provided by "patient and consumer advocacy groups , professional scientific and medical societies , and trade organizations. .

section 770 specifies the number of members to be appointed representing each type of group and requires that the ex officio members ensure specific expertise among the members .

the provision would amend ffdca section 770 to change the membership of the board of directors to allow the voting members of the board to increase the size of the board and appoint new members by majority vote , without regard to the balance of expertise and affiliation required by current law .

it would limit to 30% of the membership "representatives of the general pharmaceutical , device , food , cosmetic , and biotechnology industries. .

the obligation to ensure specific expertise among the members would be broadened to rest with all members of the board , not only ex officio appointees .

that broader group would also decide other administrative matters .

as with the current law , each board member's term of office would last for four years , and initially appointed board members' terms would expire on a staggered basis , as determined by the ex officio members .

this provision would add that for the additional board members appointed pursuant to s. 2700 , section 6 , the terms of office for the initially appointed persons can expire on a staggered basis , as determined by the members of the board .

the provision would remove the salary cap of the foundation's executive director , which is now set at the compensation of the commissioner .

also amended would be the language regarding separation of funds .

the current requirement is that funds received from the treasury be held in separate accounts from funds received from other sources , including private entities .

the provision would change the requirement , so that funds received from the treasury would be "managed as individual programmatic funds , according to best accounting practices. .

the house bill provision ( h.r .

6 , title ii , subtitle p , section 2283 , "reagan - udall foundation for the food and drug administration" ) is the same as the senate bill .

the paperwork reduction act ( pra , 44 u.s.c .

chapter 35 ) , enacted in 1980 and amended in 1995 , established the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) in the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

congress required that agencies seek oira permission before collecting information from the public .

the first of 11 stated purposes was to "minimize the paperwork burden for individuals ... and other persons resulting from the collection of information by and for the federal government. .

the pra requires that federal agencies receive clearance from oira before requesting most types of information from the public .

pra clearance is required when standardized information is collected from 10 or more respondents within a 12-month period .

pra does not apply to certain types of scientific research , including collections that are neither sponsored nor conducted by the agency and those that are subject to a clinical exception .

the provision would amend section 301 of the phs act by adding a subsection stating that the pra would not apply to the collection of information during the conduct of nih research .

the exemption for the national institutes of health from the paperwork reduction act requirements provision ( title i , subtitle b , section 1024 ) is comparable to s. 2700 .

it would amend 44 u.s.c .

chapter 35 to exempt nih research from the requirements of the pra .

through various amendments to the ffdca , congress has required the secretary ( sometimes through the delegation of authority to fda ) to submit specified reports to congress or to contract with other entities ( eg , the institute of medicine [iom] ) , to conduct specified studies .

for example , the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( fdaaa , p.l .

110-85 ) required fda to take several actions regarding how it informs the public , expert committees , and others about agency actions and plans , as well as information the agency has developed or gathered about drug safety and effectiveness .

other amendments to the ffdca have imposed additional requirements upon the secretary or the fda .

this provision would remove from the ffdca the following: section 505 ( k ) ( 5 ) , which required the secretary to report to congress not later than two years after the enactment of the fdaaa in 2007 on certain fda procedures addressing post market safety issues .

section 505a ( p ) , which required the secretary to contract with the iom , not later than three years after the enactment of the best pharmaceuticals for children act of 2007 , to conduct a study , which was further specified in this section .

section 505b ( l ) , which required the secretary , within three years of the enactment of the pediatric research equity act of 2007 , to contract with the iom to "conduct a study and report to congress regarding the pediatric studies conducted pursuant to this section or precursor regulations. .

section 523 ( d ) , which required the secretary , not later than january 10 , 2007 , to conduct a study related to devices , as specified , and to submit the findings of this study in a report to congress .

there is no comparable provision in h.r .

6 .

ffdca section 505 and accompanying regulations provide the framework for fda's approval of sponsors' drug marketing applications .

for a drug whose active ingredient has never been fda - approved , the law requires the sponsor to submit a new drug application that includes data to provide evidence of the drug's safety and effectiveness for its intended use , information about the manufacturing process , and the drug labeling .

once a product has an approved new drug application ( nda ) , fda requires that the manufacturer submit a supplemental nda each time the manufacturer wants to change the labeling , the manufacturing process , or the dosing , or when it wants to add a new indication ( a new intended use ) of the drug .

regulations at 21 c.f.r .

sections 314.50 and 314.54 describe the required contents of those applications .

regarding clinical data , the regulations direct the applicant to submit , in addition to descriptions and analysis of controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies , ( iv ) a description and analysis of any other data or information relevant to an evaluation of the safety and effectiveness of the drug product obtained or otherwise received by the applicant from any source , foreign or domestic , including information derived from clinical investigations , including controlled and uncontrolled studies of uses of the drug other than those proposed in the application , commercial marketing experience , reports in the scientific literature , and unpublished scientific papers .

 ( 21 c.f.r .

314.50 ( d ) ( 5 ) ( iv ) ) the clinical data submission must also include an "integrated summary of the data demonstrating substantial evidence of effectiveness for the claimed indications. .

this provision would amend ffdca section 505 ( c ) to permit the secretary , in reviewing a supplemental nda submitted by the sponsor of an approved drug when seeking to add to the approval a new indication that is "qualified," to rely upon "qualified data summaries" to support the approval of the supplemental nda .

this provision adds that such supplemental application is eligible only if data demonstrating the safety of the drug are available and acceptable to the secretary , and all data used to develop the qualified data summaries are submitted as part of the supplemental drug application .

this section defines qualified data summary as a "summary of clinical data that demonstrates the safety and effectiveness of a drug with respect to a qualified indication. .

h.r .

6 contains a comparable provision ( title ii , subtitle d , section 2063 , "streamlined data review program" ) .

the house provision would add a new section 505h to the ffdca , which , like the senate bill , would address the data requirements in a supplemental nda that a sponsor of an approved drug would submit when seeking to add to the approval a new indication that is "qualified" ( defined in this section as treating cancer or other indications as determined by the secretary ) .

note that the senate provision does not include treating cancer in its definition of "qualified indication. .

the approach for authorizing the secretary to rely upon qualified data summaries is a bit different in the house bill .

new ffdca section 505h would require the secretary to "establish a streamlined data review program" through which a sponsor could submit a "qualified data summary" when "there is an existing database acceptable to the secretary regarding the safety of the drug developed for one or more indications" of the approved drug .

the definition of "qualified data summary" in the house provision is similar to the senate bill: "a summary of clinical data intended to demonstrate safety and effectiveness with respect to a qualified indication for use of a drug. .

also similar to the senate bill , the house provision would require the sponsor to submit the full data sets used to develop the qualified data summaries , but the house provision adds the exception "unless the secretary determines that the full data sets are not required. .

unlike the senate bill , the house provision would state a sense of congress that the new streamlined data review program "should enable the food and drug administration to make approval decisions for certain supplemental applications based on qualified data summaries ( as defined in such section 505h ) . .

also unlike the senate bill , the house provision would require that the fda commissioner issue implementation guidance for the streamlined data review program and would allow the commissioner to issue regulations for implementation .

the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( fdaaa , p.l .

110-85 ) required fda to take several actions regarding how it informs the public , expert committees , and others about agency actions and plans and information the agency has developed or gathered about drug safety and effectiveness .

among other things , the law required biweekly screening of the fda adverse event reporting system ( faers ) database and quarterly reporting on the faers website regarding new safety information or potential signals of a serious risk .

the fdaaa also required the development and maintenance of a website with extensive drug safety information , and required the secretary to "prepare , by 18 months after approval of a drug or after use of the drug by 10,000 individuals , whichever is later , a summary analysis of the adverse drug reaction reports received for the drug , including identification of any new risks not previously identified , potential new risks , or known risks reported in an unusual number. .

the fdaaa also named the risk - management process "risk evaluation and mitigation strategies" ( rems ) and expanded the risk - management authority of fda .

a rems may include "an elements to assure safe use" ( etasu ) , which is a restriction on distribution or use that is intended to ( 1 ) allow access to those who could benefit from the drug while minimizing their risk of adverse events and ( 2 ) block access to those for whom the potential harm would outweigh potential benefit .

this provision would amend ffdca section 505 ( k ) ( 5 ) to require the secretary to conduct regular screenings of the faers database instead of the bi - weekly screenings required by current law .

this provision also would require the secretary to post guidelines on the fda website , with input from experts , that detail best practices for drug safety surveillance using faers and criteria for public posting of adverse event signals .

this provision would also amend ffdca section 505 ( r ) ( 2 ) ( d ) to remove the requirement that the secretary prepare a summary analysis of the adverse drug reaction reports received for a drug "by 18 months after approval" and instead require that the secretary make publicly available on the fda website "best practices for drug safety surveillance activities for drugs newly approved under this section or section 351 of the public health service act. .

this provision also would amend ffdca section 505-1 ( f ) ( 5 ) ( a ) , which would expand the authority to evaluate the etasu for a drug to include "or other advisory committee," compared with current law , which designates this responsibility to the secretary "through the drug safety and risk management advisory committee ( or successor committee ) " of the fda .

this provision would also amend ffdca section 505-1 ( f ) ( 5 ) ( b ) , which would change the requirement that the committee evaluate the etasu for one or more drugs from "annually" to "periodically. .

there is no comparable provision in h.r .

6 .

biological products must be licensed by fda , pursuant to phsa section 351 , before they can be marketed in the united states .

ffdca section 351 ( j ) specifies that a biological product licensed under this authority does not also need to have an approved new drug application ( nda ) under ffdca section 505 .

the u.s. pharmacopeia convention ( usp ) is a "scientific nonprofit organization that sets standards for the identity , strength , quality , and purity of medicines , food ingredients , and dietary supplements manufactured , distributed and consumed worldwide. .

usp standards "play a role in the adulteration and misbranding provisions of the ffdca ( which apply as well to biologics , a subset of drugs , under the phs act ) . .

usp develops and publishes standards for drug substances , drug products , and excipients in the united states pharmacopeia – national formulary ( usp – nf ) ; the ffdca defines official compendium as "the official united states pharmacopeia , official homeopathic pharmacopeia of the united states , official national formulary , or any supplement to any of them. .

under the ffdca , "a drug will be deemed misbranded unless its label bears to the exclusion of any other nonproprietary name the 'established' name , which ordinarily is the compendial name... .

drugs also must comply with compendial standards for strength , quality , and purity ( tests for assay and impurities ) . .

the senate bill would amend section 351 ( j ) of the phs act by adding that the provisions of the ffdca that refer to an "official compendium" as developed and published by the united states pharmacopeia would not apply to biological products regulated under phs act section 351 .

there is no comparable provision in h.r .

6 .

fda regulates the u.s. sale of drugs and biological products , basing approval or licensure on evidence of the safety and effectiveness for a product's intended uses .

without that approval or licensure , a manufacturer may not distribute the product except for use in the clinical trials that will provide evidence to determine that product's safety and effectiveness .

under certain circumstances , however , fda may permit the sponsor to provide an unapproved or unlicensed product to patients outside that standard regulatory framework .

one such mechanism is expanded access to investigational drugs , commonly referred to as "compassionate use. .

if excluded from a clinical trial because of its enrollment limitations , a person , acting through a physician , may request access to an investigational new drug outside of the trial .

fda may grant expanded access to a patient with a serious disease or condition for which there is no comparable or satisfactory alternative therapy , if , among other requirements , probable risk to the patient from the drug is less than the probable risk from the disease ; if there is sufficient evidence of safety and effectiveness to support the drug's use for this person ; and if providing access "will not interfere with the ... clinical investigations to support marketing approval. .

the widespread use of expanded access is limited by an important factor: whether the manufacturer agrees to provide the drug , which — because it is not fda - approved — cannot be obtained otherwise .

fda does not have the authority to compel a manufacturer to participate .

manufacturers may consider several factors in deciding whether to provide an investigational drug , such as available supply , perceived liability risk , limited staff and facility resources , and need for data to assess safety and effectiveness .

although fda reports the number of investigational drug requests it receives , manufacturers do not .

the provision would add a new ffdca section 561a , "expanded access policy required for investigational drugs" to require a manufacturer to make its policies on responding to compassionate use requests publicly available .

required elements of the policy would include contact information for the manufacturer or distributor of the drug , request procedures , "the general criteria the manufacturer or distributor will use to evaluate such requests for individual patients , and for responses to such requests," and anticipated time to acknowledge request receipts .

the new section would state that posting of policy would not guarantee patients access to an investigational drug .

the provision would also allow a manufacturer or distributor to revise its policy at any time .

this provision would become effective on the later of the date that is 60 days after the enactment of s. 2700 or "the first initiation of a phase 2 or phase 3 study ... with respect to such investigational drug. .

the house bill contains a comparable provision ( h.r .

6 , title ii , subtitle e , section 2082 , "expanded access policy" ) .

ffdca section 561 ( b ) allows a person , acting through a licensed physician , to request a manufacturer or distributor of an investigational product to provide that product under specified circumstances and conditions .

the sponsor or clinical investigator must provide the hhs secretary with information , as required by regulations .

although fda has approved patient access in over 99% of the requests to which the sponsor has agreed , some sponsors have been reluctant to provide investigational drugs outside of the standard investigational new drug ( ind ) processes because of the uncertainty of how fda would consider potential adverse events associated with the expanded access use in its assessment of the drug's safety , which could influence whether an nda is approved .

this provision would require that the hhs secretary finalize the guidance "expanded access to investigational drugs for treatment use — qs & as," issued in draft form in may 2013 .

the provision would require that the final guidance "clearly define how the secretary of health and human services interprets and uses adverse drug event data reported by investigators in the case of data reported from use under a request submitted under" ffdca section 561 ( b ) .

the house bill contains an identical provision ( h.r .

6 , title ii , subtitle e , section 2083 , "finalizing draft guidance on expanded access" ) .

the orphan drug act of 1983 ( p.l .

97-414 ) was signed into law to incentivize development of drugs to treat rare diseases , which affect fewer than 200,000 individuals in the united states .

since the law's passage , fda has approved over 400 new orphan drugs and biological products .

incentives for sponsors of orphan drugs include seven years of market exclusivity , tax credits for clinical trial expenses , user fee waivers , and federal grants to cover costs of qualified clinical testing expenses .

the ffdca contains provisions to grant market exclusivity for statutorily defined time periods ( in months or years ) to the holder of the nda for a product that is , for example , a drug used in the treatment of a rare disease or condition , the first generic version of a drug to come to market , certain pediatric uses of approved drugs , and new qualified infectious disease products .

during the period of exclusivity , fda does not grant marketing approval to another manufacturer's product .

section 5 of the orphan drug act ( 21 u.s.c .

360ee ) allows the secretary to make grants and enter into contracts with certain entities to assist in "defraying the costs of qualified clinical testing expenses incurred in connection with the development of drugs for rare diseases and conditions. .

section 5 defines "qualified testing" as human clinical testing ( i ) which is carried out under an exemption for a drug for a rare disease or condition under section 505 ( i ) of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( or regulations issued under such section ) ; ( ii ) which occurs after the date such drug is designated under section 526 of such act and before the date on which an application with respect to such drug is submitted under section 505 ( b ) or under section 351 of the public health service act ; and ( b ) preclinical testing involving a drug is designated under section 526 of such act and before the date on which an application with respect to such drug is submitted under section 505 ( b ) or under section 351 of the public health service act .

this provision would amend section 5 of the orphan drug act ( 21 u.s.c .

360ee ) to broaden the use of grants made by the secretary to assist in "defraying the costs of developing drugs for rare diseases or conditions" and would include but not be limited to qualified testing expenses .

this provision also would expand the definition of qualified testing to include "prospectively planned and designed observational studies and other analyses conducted to assist in the understanding of the natural history of a rare disease or condition and in the development of a therapy... .

h.r .

6 contains a related provision ( section 2151 .

extension of exclusivity periods for a drug approved for a new indication for a rare disease or condition ) .

unlike the senate bill which would broaden the use of grants for development of rare diseases , the house provision would add a new ffdca section 505i , which would add six months to the exclusivity period of an approved drug already on the market when fda approves a supplemental application for that drug for a new indication to prevent , diagnose , or treat a rare disease or condition .

the sponsor of a drug that receives the extended exclusivity under this provision would be required to notify the secretary "of any discontinuance of the production of the drug for solely commercial reasons at least one year before such discontinuance. .

the six - month extension would not be available for a drug that had already received a six - month extension under this provision .

regenerative medicine is defined by nih as "the process of creating living , functional tissues to repair or replace tissue or organ function lost due to age , disease , damage , or congenital defects. .

the regulation of cells or tissues intended for implantation or infusion into a human patient is the responsibility of the fda center for biologics evaluation and research ( cber ) .

fda refers to such cells as hct / ps , which stands for human cells , tissue , and cellular and tissue - based products .

stem cells are one example of hct / p .

cber held a public workshop on standards development for cellular therapies and regenerative medicine products in march 2014 .

this section would amend the ffdca by adding a new section 506g , "standards for regenerative medicine and advanced therapies. .

it would require the secretary , in consultation with the national institute of standards and technology and specified stakeholders , to facilitate the development of standards for regenerative medicine and advanced therapies through a transparent public process .

after the development of such standards , the secretary would update relevant regulations and guidance through a transparent public process .

the term "regenerative medicine and advanced therapies" is defined as including cell therapy , gene therapy , gene - modified cell therapy , therapeutic tissue engineering products , human cell and tissue products , and combination products using any such therapies or products .

there is no comparable provision in h.r .

6 .

rules ( or regulations ) generally start with an act of congress , and they are the means by which statutes are implemented and specific requirements are established .

in lieu of or in addition to rulemaking , agencies may issue guidance that , although not legally binding , explains the agency's interpretation of , or policy on , a regulatory or statutory issue .

guidance may be used , among other things , to provide an interpretation of either statute or regulation or to inform regulated entities as to how an agency intends to implement and enforce a program .

according to fda's website , the agency prepares guidance documents "primarily for industry , but also for other stakeholders and its own staff , and uses them to address such matters as the design , manufacturing , and testing of regulated products ; scientific issues ; content and evaluation of applications for product approvals ; and inspection and enforcement policies. .

fda issues more than 100 guidances each year .

ffdca section 701 ( a ) provides fda with the authority to promulgate regulations for the enforcement of the ffdca .

section 701 ( h ) ( 1 ) ( a ) directs the secretary to "develop guidance documents with public participation and ensure that information identifying the existence of such documents and the documents themselves are made available to the public both in written form and , as feasible , through electronic means. .

some members of congress have expressed concern with fda's use of guidance documents in lieu of the rulemaking process in certain instances .

this provision would amend ffdca section 701 ( h ) ( 1 ) ( c ) by adding clause ( iii ) , which would require the secretary , when proposing or finalizing a guidance document , to include in that guidance document a statement explaining why the interpretation or policy set forth in such guidance is being provided in a nonbinding guidance document and not established through rulemaking , and identifying each specific statutory provision or regulation being interpreted in the guidance document or authorizing policy decision described in the guidance document .

there is no comparable provision in h.r .

6 .

phsa section 319 authorizes the hhs secretary to determine the existence of a public health emergency , which in turn authorizes certain further actions to enhance response flexibility , such as waivers of requirements for grant - making and hiring .

the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) ensures that federal agencies do not overburden the public with federally sponsored data collections .

among other things , the pra requires review and pre - clearance of federal data collection proposals by the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

section 17 would add an additional provision to phsa section 319 to waive requirements for voluntary data collection under the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) when a public health emergency declaration is in effect ( subject to certain conditions ) , allowing the hhs secretary to more easily investigate outbreaks or other circumstances germane to the emergency response .

there is no comparable provision in h.r .

6 .

