s tatements of administration policy , or saps , are one of the president's communication tools designed to communicate the administration's position on legislation coming up on the house and senate floor .

issued by the office of management and budget ( omb ) on behalf of the executive office of the president ( eop ) , saps provide the administration's position on pending legislation .

these statements can supply guideposts to congress regarding the administration's legislative approach to the passage and execution of a bill .

a collection of all saps from the current presidential administration is located at the white house omb website .

saps by design always include policy position language and are often the first formal written document indicating the president's intent to sign or veto a legislative measure .

beyond the intent to sign or veto a bill , saps also indicate varying levels of support or opposition to the bill in question .

this report discusses the creation and use of saps , but does not discuss omb's related interagency clearance procedures at length .

this report is divided into five sections .

the report discusses structural components of saps , the development of saps from the ronald reagan administration to the present , the coordination of executive branch actors involved in issuing saps , the receipt of saps and their impact on government institutions , and possible reactions to saps when they are released publicly .

saps are written statements of the administration's policy position towards a particular piece of legislation .

while other avenues and forms of communication exist between congress and the executive branch , saps serve as a contained summation of the administration's positions regarding a specific bill .

this section describes a sap's structure , key components , position statements , and veto threats that may be found in saps .

the report includes an example sap in the appendix .

as described in the u.s. constitution under article ii , section 3 , the president shall recommend for congress's consideration "such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient.... " the recommendations clause , as this is known , has been viewed as the president's basis to make or respond to legislative proposals , and as the president's basis to refuse to do so even when congress asks for such proposals .

when congress considers legislation , the executive branch conducts a parallel process to consider the legislation , make recommendations , and state the administration's views .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) , in addition to assisting with the formulation of the president's budget , assists the president in creating the administration's recommendations and comments on congress's legislative proposals .

since its inception , omb has been a source of institutional memory for executive branch operations , attempting to unify the branch both in directing its policy agenda and its program execution .

by virtue of being comprised of over 90% career civil servants that may stay beyond an individual administration , omb is situated to remember processes and procedures extending across many administrations .

accordingly , some of omb's processes have been developed for internal management , rather than individual administration needs , over time .

this section briefly discusses omb's role in supervising the creation of legislative recommendations and the historical creation of saps .

saps are a formal vehicle through which the president and the president's administration comment on legislation pending before congress .

the process of solicitation and coordination of the executive branch's legislative position is governed by omb circular a - 19 .

this section details the administration's institutional uses for saps , discusses key provisions in circular a - 19 , and describes the omb and agency actors involved .

the section concludes with strategic considerations regarding the timing of a sap's public release .

saps are strategically distributed to legislators in congress , to executive branch agency officials whose duties may be affected by the pending legislation , and others who may assist in bringing about the president's legislative program .

this section describes the evolution of sap transmittals , the managerial implications of saps on the executive branch , and theoretical frameworks for understanding saps as one of the president's persuasion tools .

saps summarize the administration's position towards legislation at a fixed point in time .

saps can supply guideposts to congress regarding the administration's legislative approach to the passage and execution of a bill .

saps give the administration the ability to point to particular amendments or clauses within the bill text if they meet a threshold of significance .

the combination of these bill execution guideposts and areas highlighted as significant to the administration may be useful to congress in crafting their own legislative strategies .

as saps are released publicly via the white house website , saps may be analyzed in relation to three general audiences .

this section details the possible implications that a sap's release may have on congressional , public , and executive branch action .

the intended audience of saps is primarily congress .

saps are released concurrent with floor action by the congressional chambers or the house rules committee and are designed to inform congress of the administration's position towards pending legislation .

however , saps are not released in a vacuum ; the confluence of public reaction and congressional reaction to the administration's position may create new effects and pressures on the legislative and executive relationship in their negotiation efforts .

because saps are the primary written vehicle for veto threats , congress may find these statements particularly useful for the record they provide of presidential positions towards legislation over time .

saps , like veto threats , can constrain the president's and the administration's future ability to negotiate .

saps by design highlight specific provisions that are objectionable or viewed favorably by the administration .

by making a public statement in favor or in opposition to legislation , the president risks limiting the administration's options later on in the negotiation process .

conversely , saps may confer an advantage to congress by giving members a simple method to assess presidential attitudes towards legislation .

in 1954 , richard neustadt recognized the need for a concise method to convey the president's position: on the bulk of this business , overburdened legislators , in committee and out , need a handy criterion for choice of measures to take up , especially when faced with technical alternatives in which they have but little vested interest .

they need , as well , an inkling of administration attitude toward the outcome: how much , if at all , does the president care ? .

this criterion may come in the form of first , whether or not a sap has been issued on a particular bill , and second , what the statement contained in the sap indicates about the level of importance the president has given to pending legislation .

samuel kernell writes , "a closer inspection of the details of the threats finds that the great majority involves the president couching his threat in a proposed compromise .

typically , the threat identifies those provisions that the president objects to and suggests that their removal or alteration along specified lines would lead to his signature. .

saps may help congress find areas of disagreement and possible suggestions for improvement on the bill that would garner the administration's support of the bill .

by issuing a sap , the administration publicly announces its expectations for the bill .

specificity and definitiveness may serve to instill credibility in the administration's position , while at the same time limiting the administration's options .

should the administration deviate from the stated position , the administration could damage its credibility with the public and its leverage with congress .

samuel kernell notes , "for some legislation , presidents sense they can score points in public opinion by vowing publicly to veto some unpopular bill in congress. .

on the other hand , presidents can lose public or congressional support should they later choose to sign legislation they previously said they would oppose or veto , or vice versa .

furthermore , "legislators observe the president's action and conclude that he can ill afford politically to sign a bill that fails to give him what he has demanded , or at least something pretty close. .

a president's reputation is at stake if the administration fails to make the legislation conform to the administration's requirements laid out in a sap .

lending this predictability to the process early on allows for all actors involved to set expectations for legislative outcomes and possible areas of compromise throughout the process .

as previously discussed , many parts of the administration are involved in the sap creation process via circular a - 19 .

in an effort to coordinate the executive branch on behalf of the president , omb consults with executive branch agencies regarding agency priorities and the president's priorities .

from the omb and eop perspective , this is done to ensure consistency and continuity throughout the administration .

from an agency's perspective , this allows the agency an opportunity to advocate for measures on the agency's behalf .

remarking on the structure of the executive branch in 1951 , observer david b. truman wrote that the executive branch is " ... a protean agglomeration of feudalities that overlap and crisscross in an almost continual succession of changes .

some of the lines of control ... terminate in the presidency , some in ... the legislature and some ... 'outside' the government.... " in an attempt to maintain consistent views throughout the administration and the executive agencies , saps offer the president a process and policy documents to coordinate views as soon as legislation becomes pending .

saps represent omb's role in putting forth a unified administration position on pending bills .

this is because of the coordination process involved in sap creation and in omb's attempts to unify disparate agency opinions into one administration position .

although their value to congress regarding pending legislation is apparent in sap statements regarding bill passage , sap insights may also prove useful in congress's efforts to understand executive branch operations and possible implementation of the law .

