t he transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) is a potential reciprocal free trade agree ment that the united states and the european union ( eu ) are negotiating with each other .

formal negotiations commenced in july 2013 .

both sides had initially aimed to conclude the negotiations in two years but have more recently expressed interest in concluding the negotiations by the end of 2016 .

through the negotiation , the united states and eu seek to enhance market access and trade disciplines by addressing remaining transatlantic barriers to trade and investment in goods , services , and agriculture by negotiating a "comprehensive and high - standard" t - tip .

the goals of the negotiation aim to reduce and eliminate tariffs between the united states and eu ; further open services and government procurement markets ; enhance cooperation , convergence , and transparency in regulations and standards - setting processes ; and strengthen and develop new rules in areas such as intellectual property rights ( ipr ) , investment , digital trade , trade facilitation , labor and the environment , localization barriers , and state - owned enterprises .

for more background information on the negotiation , see crs report r43387 , transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) negotiations .

agricultural issues have been an active topic of debate in the t - tip negotiation .

the eu is an important export market for u.s. agricultural exports ; but growth in u.s. agricultural exports to the eu has not kept pace with growth in trade to other u.s. markets .

agricultural imports from europe currently exceed u.s. exports to the eu .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) reports that the eu's import tariffs on u.s. agricultural products average well above u.s. tariffs on eu agricultural products .

high eu average tariffs on u.s. exports are exacerbated by the eu's non - tariff barriers to u.s. agricultural products .

the united states is among the world's largest net exporters of agricultural products , averaging more than $140 billion per year ( 2010-2015 ) worldwide .

the eu is a leading export market for u.s. agricultural exports — absorbing roughly 10% of exports — and is ranked as the fifth largest market for u.s. food and farm exports .

in recent years , however , growth in u.s. agricultural exports to the eu has not kept pace with growth in trade to other u.s. markets , and imports from europe currently exceed u.s. exports to the eu .

in 2015 , u.s. exports of agricultural products to the eu totaled $12 billion , while eu exports of agricultural products totaled $20 billion , resulting in a substantial trade deficit of nearly $8 billion for the united states .

this reverses the net trade surplus in u.s. agricultural exports during the early 1990s ( see figure 1 ) .

overall , compared to the value of all merchandise trade ( both agricultural and non - agricultural products ) between the united states and eu , agricultural trade accounts for less than 5% of total trade annually .

major u.s. agricultural exports to the eu include tree nuts , soybeans , forest products , distilled spirits , vegetable oils , wine and beer , planting seeds and tobacco , and processed fruit and wheat .

major eu agricultural exports to the united states include wine and beer , essential oils , snack foods , processed fruits and vegetables , other vegetable oils , cheese , cocoa paste / butter , live animals , nursery products , and red meats .

these statistics include data for all current 28 eu member states , including the united kingdom ( covering england , scotland , wales , and northern ireland ) , which voted in june 2016 to exit the eu ( referred to as "brexit" ) .

separate trade data for the uk is provided in the section titled " potential impacts of brexit . .

agricultural issues have been actively debated in the t - tip negotiation in the context of market access for agricultural products through reduced or eliminated agricultural import tariffs but also within regulatory and intellectual property rights discussions by addressing existing non - tariff measures that may be barriers to trade .

these goals are generally shared by both u.s. and eu agricultural organizations .

negotiating agricultural issues regarding regulatory and intellectual property rights issues have focused , in part , on the goals of ensuring greater transparency , harmonization , and coherence to improve cooperation and streamline the regulatory approval process among the trading partners .

however , negotiating such issues is often complicated by long - standing differences between the united states and eu in terms of laws and regulations governing food safety and sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) measures .

these include disputes over the use of hormones in beef production and pathogen reduction treatment for poultry , regulations related to bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse , commonly known as mad cow disease ) and pesticide residues on foods , animal welfare , agricultural biotechnology ( genetically modified organisms , or gmos ) , and the use of certain product names and brands and so - called geographical indications ( gis ) .

negotiating documents that were made public in may 2016 were said to suggest that the eu was considering making concessions to its policies and standards regarding sps and other issues .

this interpretation of events has been largely discredited by policymakers in both the united states and eu .

the office of the united states trade representative ( ustr ) maintains a website that provides a summary of u.s. objectives , negotiating round and public forum information , blog posts , facts sheets , reports , and press releases .

the european commission ( ec ) maintains the eu's official website , which contains negotiating proposals and fact sheets on t - tip , covering market access , and regulatory cooperation ( including sps , technical barriers to trade [tbt] , and ipr issues ) , among other sectors and negotiation issues .

high tariff barriers are further exacerbated by additional non - tariff barriers that may limit u.s. agricultural exports , including sps measures and other types of non - tariff barriers .

non - t ariff m easures ( ntms ) generally refer to policy measures other than tariffs that may have a negative economic effect on international trade .

ntms include both technical and nontechnical measures .

technical measures include both sps and tbts and pre - shipment formalities and related requirements .

nontechnical measures include quotas , price control measures , rules of origin requirements , and government procurement restrictions .

non - tariff barriers affect agricultural trade in various ways , including delays in reviews of biotech products ( creating barriers to u.s. exports of grain and oilseed products ) , prohibitions on growth hormones in beef production and certain antimicrobial and pathogen reduction treatments ( creating barriers to u.s. meat and poultry exports ) , and burdensome and complex certification requirements ( creating barriers to u.s. processed foods , animal products , and dairy products ) .

a report by the u.s. international trade commission notes that in addition to high eu tariffs , extensive eu regulations and difficulty finding up - to - date information are among the primary concerns of u.s. businesses , particularly for makers of processed foods .

u.s. businesses report concerns about the lack of a science - based focus in establishing sps measures , difficulty meeting food safety standards and obtaining product certification , differences across countries in food labeling requirements , and stringent testing requirements that are often applied inconsistently across eu member nations .

usda has calculated the ad valorem equivalent ( ave ) effects for a range of agricultural commodities based on both u.s. and eu non - tariff barriers to imports .

eu non - tariff barriers to u.s. agricultural exports are estimated to range from 23% to 102% for some more heavily protected products , including meat products , fruits and vegetables , and some crops ( table 2 ) .

the t - tip negotiations present congress with the challenge of whether the united states and the eu will be able to conclude a final agreement that is "comprehensive and high standard. .

such an outcome depends on a number of factors .

the united states and the eu , like all economies , have offensive and defensive interests .

these include recognition that some sectors are import - sensitive , including certain agricultural products , which may constrain the level of ambition in the t - tip negotiations .

for more information on the overall status of the negotiations , see crs report r43387 , transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) negotiations .

addressing agricultural market access and other non - tariff barriers is an important goal for many on both sides of the negotiation .

a study by a european organization identified agri - business and multinational food companies as the leading constituency lobbying european leadership on aspects of the t - tip negotiation in terms of the number of contacts with government officials .

given a number of sensitive agricultural products — such as beef , pork , poultry , dairy , rice , and fruits and vegetables — along with regulatory differences between the united states and the eu , particularly regarding sps matters , some have questioned whether the agreement might exclude agricultural products altogether .

officials on both sides have suggested that an agreement that does not include agriculture would not be acceptable .

senate leadership has expressed its expectation that any final t - tip agreement should have "a strong framework for agriculture. .

u.s. food and agriculture organizations have also indicated their expectation that a t - tip deal address agriculture , including eu non - tariff trade barriers .

in addition , ustr is urging completion of the negotiation given that the eu has negotiated agreements with a number of u.s. trading partners — including canada , vietnam , and singapore — and is actively negotiating bilateral agreements with other countries , including japan , mexico , brazil , argentina , india , and others .

the impact of brexit on the t - tip negotiation remains unclear .

the uk is a close ally of the united states and has been one of the strongest advocates of t - tip among the eu bloc .

also , in general , the regulatory framework of the uk's food industries and actions taken by its food standards agency is often more aligned with those in the united states .

were the uk to break with the eu , it could lose its preferential market access under a t - tip agreement .

previously , ustr had indicated that the united states is "not particularly in the market for free trade agreements with individual countries" when addressing the possibility that the uk might separate from the eu .

however , since the brexit vote , some in congress have indicated the possibility of the united states negotiating a separate bilateral fta with the uk .

as the uk begins the process of exiting the eu , it will likely remain subject to the same tariffs and trade - related measures as countries outside of the network of u.s. ftas .

the near - term prospects for u.s. agricultural producers , however , are likely to be impacted given the sharp drop in the value of the british pound relative to the u.s. dollar following the brexit vote , effectively making u.s. exports more expensive in the uk .

stakeholders have expressed concern that the t - tip negotiations have not advanced as quickly as hoped and that political momentum and public support for the negotiation has waned .

some hope that the successful conclusion of the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) negotiations might inject new momentum into the t - tip negotiations .

at the same time , many in the u.s. agricultural sectors are looking to the tpp for indications on how certain proposals in t - tip could be negotiated , particularly on issues such a regulatory coherence and gi names .

stakeholders in the united states are also looking to other ongoing separate negotiations between the eu and countries such as canada , japan , and mexico .

they are tracking how those negotiations might address certain sps and gi issues and are concerned about the potential implications for global agricultural trade under these preferential agreements between the eu and its trading partners , as well as establishing precedent on certain issues .

the precautionary principle remains central to the eu's risk management policy regarding food safety and animal and plant health , among other concerns .

it was reportedly referenced as part of the 1992 treaty establishing the eu , and its use was further outlined in a 2000 communication and then formally established in eu food legislation in 2002 ( regulation ec no 178 / 2002 ) .

the eu's regulatory definition ( article 7 ) states: in specific circumstances where , following an assessment of available information , the possibility of harmful effects on health is identified but scientific uncertainty persists , provisional risk management measures necessary to ensure the high level of health protection chosen in the community may be adopted , pending further scientific information for a more comprehensive risk assessment .

the eu's 2000 communication further outlines guidelines for applying the precautionary principle , including implementation , the basis for invoking the principle , and the general standards of application .

in international trade , under eu law , application of the precautionary principle provides for "rapid response" to address "possible danger to human , animal , or plant health , or to protect the environment" and can be used to "stop distribution or order withdrawal from the market of products likely to be hazardous. .

although its application may not be used as a pretext for protectionist measures , many countries have challenged as "protectionist" some eu actions that have invoked the precautionary principle .

no universally agreed - upon definition of the precautionary principle exists , and many differently worded or conflicting definitions can be found in international law .

however , within the context of the wto and the sps agreement , the precautionary principle ( or precautionary approach ) allows a country to set higher standards and methods of inspecting products .

it also allows countries to take "protective action" — including restricting trade of products or processes — if they believe that scientific evidence is inconclusive regarding their potential impacts on human health and the environment ( provided the action is consistent and not arbitrary ) .

the text box provides more information on the precautionary principle in the context of the wto and sps agreement .

for more information , see crs report r43450 , sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) and related non - tariff barriers to agricultural trade .

application of the precautionary principle by some countries remains an ongoing source of contention in international trade , particularly for the united states , and is often cited as a reason why some countries may restrict imports of some food products and processes .

a 2013 paper authored by researchers at several u.s. land grant universities and usda cites the following criticisms of the precautionary principle: ( 1 ) the ambiguity and lack of definition of the precautionary principle ; ( 2 ) the arbitrariness in how it is used and applied ; and ( 3 ) bias against new technologies , such as biotechnology and nanotechnology .

the authors conclude that the precautionary principle has become "unworkable and counterproductive. .

many u.s. agricultural and food organizations contend that the precautionary principle undermines sound science and innovation and results in "unjustifiable restrictions" on u.s. exports .

the stated policy of the u.s. chamber of commerce is also to support a "science - based approach to risk management , where risk is assessed based on scientifically sound and technically rigorous standards" and "oppose the domestic and international adoption of the precautionary principle as a basis for regulatory decision making. .

its strategy aims to "educate consumers , businesses , and federal policymakers about the implications of the precautionary principle. .

several u.s. agricultural and manufacturing groups continue to oppose the eu's application of the precautionary principle and argue that it allows eu regulations to disregard scientific evidence demonstrating that certain food products and processes are safe , based on evidence from available scientific risk assessments , allowing the eu and other importing countries to engage in disguised protectionism .

some in the u.s. agriculture and food industry are urging that the t - tip agriculture negotiations address the use and application of the principle , which is central to the eu's risk management policy .

some contend that the eu's use of the precautionary principle contributes to its practice of taking a generally "more risk - averse approach to risk management" and "allows eu regulators to put in place restrictions on products or processes when they believe that scientific evidence on their potential impact on human health or the environment is inconclusive. .

many in the united states claim that "science - based decision making and not the precautionary principle must be the defining principle in setting up mechanisms and systems" to address sps concerns .

other t - tip objectives for some u.s. agricultural and food groups include calls for changes to the eu's approach for approving and labeling biotechnology products .

however , some wish to further strengthen the eu's application of the precautionary principle and believe the sps agreement too severely limits its use .

many in the eu continue to defend the application of the precautionary principle to a range of agricultural issues , and u.s. agriculture and food groups have expressed concern that "a resolution regarding the t - tip passed by the european parliament on april 24 [2013] strongly expresses the intent of the eu to maintain the precautionary principle , which would undermine sound science and ultimately the agreement itself. .

some groups have expressed concern that the t - tip negotiations might cause the eu to relax its food safety laws and standards , which some believe to be superior to laws and standards in the united states .

the eu's proposals on regulatory cooperation , released in march 2016 , restate the ability of each party to "apply its fundamental principles governing regulatory measures in its jurisdiction , for example in the areas of risk assessment and risk management," which some broadly interpreted as covering the eu's continued application of the precautionary principle .

recent developments further illustrate this divide .

negotiating documents made public in may 2016 were said to suggest , based on the analysis by environmental advocates who released them , that the eu had made compromises in certain areas , including the "precautionary principle. .

related criticisms suggest that a u.s. proposal regarding the eu's biotechnology approval process would likely commit the eu to faster approvals of ge products and would change eu policies regarding traces of ge product found in otherwise approved ge or conventional shipments .

policymakers in both the united states and eu have discredited this interpretation of events .

press reports indicate that ustr has called these interpretations as "misleading" and "wrong. .

the eu's trade commissioner , cecilia malmström , responded that the eu's proposal for regulatory coherence that was tabled during the february 2016 round and made public "includes references to the precautionary principle , and points out our well - established public consultation procedures that are open to all stakeholders. .

specifically , the introduction to the eu's proposal stated: "we stress our commitment to enhance or maintain the levels of protection in public policy areas , to respect the right to regulate and the application of our fundamental principles such as the precautionary principle for the eu side. .

the statement further says: "no eu trade agreement will ever lower our level of protection of consumers , or food safety , or of the environment .

trade agreements will not change our laws on gmos , or how to produce safe beef , or how to protect the environment. .

also in response to press reports , the european parliament's trade committee chairman , bernd lange , said: "the s&d [socialists and democrats] group demands that the eu be equally tough in upholding our own values , including safeguarding the eu's precautionary principle which guarantees high levels of protection for our citizens .

we will not accept a t - tip that includes any lowering of standards. .

the eu's chief negotiator , ignacio garcia bercero , also dismissed media reports about negotiated changes to the eu's precautionary principle and added , "we have made crystal clear that we would not agree on anything that implies changes of our regulatory regime on gmos. .

more recently , another eu official , john clarke , reiterated that eu "laws are not on the table" and that efforts to harmonize regulations between the united states and eu would not weaken eu food safety standards .

previously , in 2015 , garcia bercero stated that the "eu is not going to change its food safety legislation" because of t - tip .

this position dates back even earlier .

