the rapid growth of digital technologies in recent years has created new opportunities for u.s. consumers and businesses but also new challenges in international trade .

for example , consumers today access e - commerce , social media , telemedicine , and other offerings not imagined thirty years ago .

businesses use advanced technology to reach new markets , track global supply chains , analyze big data , and create new products and services .

new technologies facilitate economic activity but also create new trade policy questions and concerns .

data and data flows form a pillar of innovation and economic growth .

the "digital economy" accounted for 6.9% of u.s. gdp in 2017 , including ( 1 ) information and communications technologies ( ict ) sector and underlying infrastructure , ( 2 ) digital transactions or e‐commerce , and ( 3 ) digital content or media .

the digital economy supported 5.1 million jobs , or 3.3% of total u.s. employment in 2017 , and almost two - thirds of jobs created in the united states since 2010 required medium or advanced levels of digital skills .

as digital information increases in importance in the u.s. economy , issues related to digital trade have become of growing interest to congress .

while there is no globally accepted definition of digital trade , the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) broadly defines digital trade as follows: the delivery of products and services over the internet by firms in any industry sector , and of associated products such as smartphones and internet - connected sensors .

while it includes provision of e - commerce platforms and related services , it excludes the value of sales of physical goods ordered online , as well as physical goods that have a digital counterpart ( such as books , movies , music , and software sold on cds or dvds ) .

the rules governing digital trade are evolving as governments across the globe experiment with different approaches and consider diverse policy priorities and objectives .

barriers to digital trade , such as infringement of intellectual property rights ( ipr ) or protective industrial policies , often overlap and cut across sectors .

in some cases , policymakers may struggle to balance digital trade objectives with other legitimate policy issues related to national security and privacy .

digital trade policy issues have been in the spotlight recently , due in part to the rise of new trade barriers , heightened concerns over data privacy , and an increasing number of cybertheft incidents that have affected u.s. consumers and companies .

these concerns may raise the general u.s. interest in promoting , or restricting , cross - border data flows and in enforcing compliance with existing rules .

congress has an interest in ensuring the global rules and norms of the internet economy are in line with u.s. laws and norms .

trade negotiators continue to explore ways to address evolving digital issues in trade agreements , including in the proposed u.s. - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) .

congress has an important role in shaping digital trade policy , including oversight of agencies charged with regulating cross - border data flows , as part of trade negotiations , and in working with the executive branch to identify the right balance between digital trade and other policy objectives .

this report discusses the role of digital trade in the u.s. economy , barriers to digital trade , digital trade agreement provisions and negotiations , and other selected policy issues .

the internet is not only a facilitator of international trade in goods and services , but is itself a platform for new digitally - originated services .

the internet is enabling technological shifts that are transforming businesses .

according to one estimate , the volume of global data flows ( sending of digital data such as from streaming video , monitoring machine operations , sending communications ) is growing faster than trade or financial flows .

one analysis forecasts the global flows of goods , foreign direct investment ( fdi ) , and digital data will add 3.1% to gross domestic product ( gdp ) from 2015-2020 .

the volume of global data flows is growing faster than trade or financial flows , and its positive gdp contribution offsets the lower growth rates of trade and fdi ( see figure 1 ) .

focusing domestically , the bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) estimates that , from 1997-2017 , real value added for the digital economy outpaced overall growth in the economy each year and , in 2017 , the real value - added growth of the digital economy accounted for 25% of total real gdp growth .

the increase in the digital economy and digital trade parallels the growth in internet usage globally .

according to one study , over half of the world's population use the internet , including 95% of people in north america .

as of 2017 , 75% of u.s. households use wired internet access , but an increasing number rely on mobile internet access as the internet is integrated into people's everyday lives ; 72% of u.s. adults own a smartphone .

as of the end of 2018 , approximately 40% of internet traffic in the united states came from mobile devices .

each day , companies and individuals across the united states depend on the internet to communicate and transmit data via various media and channels that continue to expand with new innovations ( see figure 2 ) .

cross - border data and communication flows are part of digital trade ; they also facilitate trade and the flows of goods , services , people , and finance , which together are the drivers of globalization and interconnectedness .

the highest levels reportedly are those flows between the united states and western europe , latin america , and china .

efforts to impede cross - border data flows could decrease efficiency and other potential benefits of digital trade .

powering all these connections and data flows are underlying ict .

ict spending is a large and growing component of the international economy and essential to digital trade and innovation .

according to the united nations , world trade in ict physical goods grew to $2 trillion in 2017 with u.s. ict goods exports over $146 billion .

semiconductors , a key component in many electronic devices , are a top u.s. ict export .

global sales of semiconductors were $468.8 billion in 2018 , an increase of 6.81% over the prior year .

u.s. - based firms have the largest global market share with 45% and accounted for 47.5% of the chinese market .

given the importance of semiconductors to the digital economy and continued advances in innovation , countries such as china are seeking to grow their own semiconductor industry to lessen their dependence on u.s. exports .

ict services are outpacing the growth of international trade in ict goods .

the oecd estimates that ict services trade increased 40% from 2010 to 2016 .

the united states is the fourth - largest oecd exporter of ict services , after ireland , india , and the netherlands .

ict services include telecommunications and computer services , as well as charges for the use of intellectual property ( eg , licenses and rights ) .

ict - enabled services are those services with outputs delivered remotely over ict networks , such as online banking or education .

ict services can augment the productivity and competitiveness of goods and services .

in 2017 , exports of ict services grew to $71 billion of u.s. exports while services exports that could be ict - enabled were another $439 billion , demonstrating the impact of the internet and digital revolution .

ict and other online services depend on software ; the value added to u.s. gdp from support services and software has increased over the past decade relative to that of telecommunications and hardware .

according to one estimate , software contributed more than $1.14 trillion to the u.s. value added to gdp in 2016 , an increase of 6.4% over 2014 , and the u.s. software industry accounted for 2.9 million jobs directly in 2016 .

internet - advertising , an industry that would not exist without ict , generated an additional 10.4 million u.s. jobs .

policies that affect digitization in any one country's economy can have consequences beyond its borders , and because the internet is a global "network of networks," the state of a country's digital economy can have global ramifications .

protectionist policies may erect barriers to digital trade , or damage trust in the underlying digital economy , and can result in the fracturing , or so - called balkanization , of the internet , lessening any gains .

what some policymakers see as protectionist , however , others may view as necessary to protect domestic interests .

for examples of the types of digital trade barriers that are in place around the globe , please see appendix .

despite common core principles such as protecting citizen's privacy and expanding economic growth , governments face multiple challenges in designing policies around digital trade .

the oecd points out three potentially conflicting policy goals in the internet economy: ( 1 ) enabling the internet ; ( 2 ) boosting or preserving competition within and outside the internet ; and ( 3 ) protecting privacy and consumers more generally .

ensuring a free and open internet is a stated policy priority for the u.s. government .

like other cross - cutting policy areas , such as cybersecurity or privacy , no one federal entity has policy primacy on all aspects of digital trade , and the united states has taken a sectoral approach to regulating digitization .

according to an oecd study , the united states is the only oecd country that uses a decentralized , market - driven approach for a digital strategy rather than having an overarching national digital strategy , agenda , or program .

the department of commerce works to promote u.s. digital trade policies domestically and abroad .

in 2015 , commerce launched a digital economy agenda that identifies four pillars: 1 .

"promoting a free and open internet worldwide , because the internet functions best for our businesses and workers when data and services can flow unimpeded across borders" ; 2 .

"promoting trust online , because security and privacy are essential if electronic commerce is to flourish" ; 3 .

"ensuring access for workers , families , and companies , because fast broadband networks are essential to economic success in the 21 st century" ; and 4 .

"promoting innovation , through smart intellectual property rules and by advancing the next generation of exciting new technologies. .

commerce's digital attaché program under the foreign commercial service helps u.s. businesses navigate regulatory issues and overcome trade barriers to e - commerce exports in key markets .

the administration also works to promote u.s. digital priorities by identifying and challenging foreign trade barriers and through trade negotiations .

as with traditional trade barriers , digital trade constraints can be classified as tariff or nontariff barriers .

tariff barriers may be imposed on imported goods used to create ict infrastructure that make digital trade possible or on the products that allow users to connect , while nontariff barriers , such as discriminatory regulations or local content rules , can block or limit different aspects of digital trade .

often , such barriers are intended to protect domestic producers and suppliers .

some estimates indicate that removing foreign barriers to digital trade could increase annual u.s. real gdp by 0.1% - 0.3% ( $16.7 billion - $41.4 billion ) , increase u.s. wages up to 1.4% , and add up to 400,000 u.s. jobs in certain digitally intensive industries .

the european union ( eu ) and china are large u.s. digital trade partners and each has presented various challenges for u.s. companies , consumers , and policymakers .

as the above analysis of eu and china policies demonstrates , there is not a single set of international rules or disciplines that govern key digital trade issues , and the topic is treated inconsistently , if at all , in trade agreements .

as digital trade has emerged as an important component of trade flows , it has risen in significance on the u.s. trade policy agenda and that of other countries .

given the stalemate in comprehensive wto multilateral negotiations , trade agreements have not kept pace with the complexities of the digital economy and digital trade is treated unevenly in existing wto agreements .

more recent bilateral and plurilateral deals have started to address digital trade policies and barriers more comprehensively .

the use of digital trade provisions in bilateral and plurilateral trade negotiations may help spur interest in the creation of future wto frameworks that focus on digital trade and provide input for ongoing plurilateral negotiations occurring in the aegis of the wto ( see below ) .

given the cross - cutting nature of the digital world , digital trade issues touch on other policy objectives and priorities , such as privacy and national security .

while u.s. and international trade agreements are one way for the united states to establish market opening and new rules and disciplines to govern digital trade , not every issue is necessarily suitable for an international trade agreement and not every international partner is ready , or willing , to take on such commitments .

in other international forums outside of trade negotiations , other tools can be used to encourage high - level , nonbinding best practices and principles and align expectations .

g - 20 .

the influential group of 20 ( g - 20 ) is one venue for establishing common principles , and digital issues have been on its agenda recently .

at the 2017 meeting , g - 20 leaders established the digital economy task force ( detf ) .

the g - 20 digital economy ministerial meeting issued a declaration that identified requisites for a thriving digital economy and specific recommendations .

as host , japan is expected to build on the digital economy agenda in 2019 , with a specific emphasis on privacy and data governance .

oecd .

the oecd provides a forum to discuss principles and norms to facilitate a thriving digital economy .

the oecd issued a series of reports in 2017 and 2018 related to digital trade , including an assessment of the digital transformation of each oecd economy and bridging the digital gender divide .

the reports identified specific challenges and recommendations , including establishing a national digital strategy and removing market access barriers .

the united states could work with its oecd partners to reinforce principles , including an open internet and the need to balance public policy objectives .

the oecd global forum on the digital security for prosperity also allows for multi - stakeholder international engagement to discuss issues such as the governance of digital security issues .

apec .

the asian pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum presents another opportunity for sharing best practices and setting high - level principles on issues that may be of greater concern to developing countries with less advanced digital economies and industry .

apec is implementing the cross - border privacy rules ( cbpr ) system to be consistent with the already established apec privacy framework .

according to the business software alliance , most countries across the globe have data protection frameworks based on either the apec cbpr system or the eu regime , but some countries still lack privacy laws .

currently , the united states , japan , mexico , canada , south korea , singapore , taiwan , and australia are cbpr members ; the philippines is in the process of joining .

some observers view cbpr , which aims to reflect a diversity of national privacy regimes , as a scalable solution that could potentially be adopted multilaterally .

others may view the eu regime as a more comprehensive , top - down approach .

due to its voluntary nature , apec has served as an incubator for potential plurilateral agreements .

regulatory cooperation .

ongoing regulatory cooperation efforts are another important tool for addressing differences between parties , better aligning regulatory requirements , and reducing inconsistencies and redundancies that can hamper or discriminate against the free flow of data , goods , and services .

these forums provide an opportunity for u.s. agencies to work directly with overseas counterparts and focus on specific aspects of digital trade such as online privacy , consumer protection , and rules for online contract formation and enforcement .

the eu - u.s. privacy shield is one example of regulatory authorities working together to address such issues .

policy questions continue to evolve as the internet - driven economy and innovations grow .

digital trade is intimately connected to and woven into all parts of the u.s. economy and overlaps with other sectors , requiring policymakers to balance many different objectives .

for example , digital trade relies on cross - border data flows , but policymakers must balance open data flows with public policy goals such as protecting privacy , supporting law enforcement , and improving personal and national security and safety .

the complexity of the debate related to cross - border data flows and digital trade more generally involves complementary and competing interests and stakeholders .

companies and individuals who seek to do business abroad , and trade negotiators who seek to open markets may focus on maintaining open market access , which may include cross - border data flows , while others may want to limit foreign competition .

privacy advocates may focus on protecting personal information .

meanwhile , law enforcement and defense advisors may seek the ability to access or limit information flows based on national security interests .

digital trade raises numerous complex issues of potential interest to congress with possible legislative and oversight implications .

issues include understanding of the economic impact of digital trade on the u.s. economy and the effects of localization and other digital trade barriers on u.s. exports , jobs , and competition .

examining how best to balance market openness and cross - border data flows with other policy goals , such as right to privacy and the government's need for access to protect safety and national security .

considering if the united states would benefit from overarching digital privacy policy and what lessons can be drawn from other countries' experiences , and how to best balance this with u.s. trade negotiating objectives .

effectively addressing important digital trade barriers and cybertheft .

considering how best to assure public confidence and trust in network reliability and security that underlie the global digital economy and allow it to effectively and efficiently function .

examining evolving u.s. trade policy efforts , including how the proposed usmca , wto plurilateral , and potential new bilateral negotiations may address u.s. trade barriers , set new rules and disciplines , and respond to different standard - setting practices that may have global reach , including by the eu and china .

assessing if u.s. agencies have the necessary tools to accurately measure the size and scope of digital trade in order to analyze the impact of potential policies .

assessing the effectiveness of the trump administration's section 301 actions involving chinese trade practices and other bilateral efforts related to cybersecurity and digital trade .

barriers to internet services discriminatory treatment of digital goods and services duties on digital goods or services foreign investment restrictions intermediary liability without safe harbor or fair - use provisions that could make internet platforms responsible for content posted by users low de minimis threshold for customs duties on imported goods , including e - commerce purchases "snippet tax" on search engines that quote text snippets as part of search results taxes on over - the - top ( ott ) services such as media , messaging , or voice - over - internet - protocol ( voip ) web filtering and blocking of content localization barriers data localization requirements prohibiting cross - border data flows and requiring the use of local servers for data storage or processing limited or no access to foreign government procurement markets requirement for use of local technology comprehensive privacy regulations that may discriminate against foreign providers technology barriers restrictions or prohibitions on use of encryption source code , technology , or other intellectual property rights ( ipr ) forced transfer requirements local testing and certification for imported information technology ( it ) equipment may add costs or delays for imported goods other barriers cybersecurity threats or local requirements weak ipr enforcemen .

