there has been controversy for more than 25 years concerning whether to list sage - grouse for protection under the endangered species act ( esa ) .

as with many controversies over rare species , a theme in the sage - grouse controversy is the use of dwindling resources by both humans and sage - grouse — in this case , broad , unfragmented expanses of sagebrush lands .

loss of habitat is the most common factor leading to species' decline .

sagebrush habitat in the western united states is diminishing and becoming fragmented due to energy development , infrastructure , agricultural conversion , wildfire , invasive plants , and other factors .

although the total remaining sagebrush habitat is vast , its fragmentation is problematic for sage - grouse , which need large treeless areas to discourage the roosting of avian predators and to permit travel between breeding and nesting sites .

thus , fences , roads , drilling rigs , and utility poles can produce a substantial change in available sagebrush habitat , even when the actual surface disturbance is minimal .

the sage - grouse ( centrocercus urophasianus ) is found in 11 western states .

the species first appeared as a candidate for listing under esa in 1991 , and its subsequent history with regard to the act has included various petitions , missed deadlines , and lawsuits .

multiple petitions were filed under esa to ask the fish and wildlife service ( fws , department of the interior ) to protect the sage - grouse .

 ( see " chronology of petitions and fws sage - grouse action ," below. ) .

most recently , on september 22 , 2015 , fws announced its decision not to list the sage - grouse under esa , based on the adequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms to protect the species .

some have praised the decision as affording the proper protection through state , local , and private conservation efforts .

others have opposed the decision for varying reasons , including assertions that the existing regulatory mechanisms are not sufficiently protective or that the regulatory mechanisms result in excessive restrictions on land uses .

 ( see " implementation and other issues ," below . ) .

the sage - grouse is a squat , feathered , chicken - like bird , grayish with a black belly and spiked tail feathers ; it is highly prized by hunters .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

sage - grouse have one of the lowest reproductive rates of any north american game bird .

because of this , "its populations are not able to recover from low numbers as quickly as many other upland game bird species. .

a particular issue has been conservation of the locations where male sage - grouse gather in the spring year after year — areas called leks .

the leks are found in open sagebrush areas , usually on broad ridges or valley floors where visibility is excellent and noise will travel well .

there , the males strut , raise and lower their wings , fan their tail feathers , and make loud booming noises with the aid of bright yellow inflatable air sacs in their necks .

under optimal conditions , these sounds carry for hundreds of yards .

dozens or even hundreds of males attract the attention of resident females , who survey the offerings of the displaying males , make their choices , and mate .

once mating has occurred , females leave the lek to nest , sometimes at a distance of several miles .

females raise their offspring alone , without help from males .

due to the importance of leks in the breeding cycle , maintenance and protection of traditional lek areas are key concerns for species conservation .

the sage - grouse is vulnerable to multiple interrelated changes in its habitat .

the construction of a road in sagebrush habitat , for example , may have diverse effects .

sage - grouse hens may hesitate to cross a road with their chicks .

a road can also provide ingress for invasive species such as cheatgrass , which is the primary invasive species threat to sagebrush habitat .

the plant tends to appear after an area has been grazed or when roads are developed .

the nonnative grass spreads quickly , is disliked as forage by grazing mammals and sage - grouse , and burns more readily than native plants .

moreover , the fire threat posed by cheatgrass could be exacerbated by pervasive drought and climate change .

both the number of fires and the total area burned in sage - grouse habitat have increased in the last 100 years .

this example illustrates the links among a range of threats to sage - grouse .

additionally , certain types of development , such as coal - bed methane production and oil wells , introduce standing pools of water into an environment where none existed previously .

these pools provide habitat for mosquitoes , and mosquitoes can carry the west nile virus .

according to the u.s. geological survey , the federal agency responsible for tracking wildlife disease , the west nile virus is always fatal for the sage - grouse .

by 2006 , west nile virus had been reported among sage - grouse in every state of the sage - grouse's range except for washington .

the various threats cited above also sum to form a larger threat: fragmentation of the sagebrush landscape .

although much of the west is still dominated by sagebrush , much of this habitat is no longer intact .

as a result , such areas have become unsuitable for successful breeding .

moreover , because habitats are becoming fragmented , sage - grouse populations are becoming genetically isolated , leaving them more vulnerable .

habitat fragmentation , along with lek protection , is a key concern in species conservation .

according to a team assembled by fws to study the sage - grouse , habitat fragmentation is severely affecting the viability of the species: the primary threat to greater sage grouse is fragmentation .

large expanses of intact sagebrush habitat are necessary to maintain viable sage grouse populations .

only two areas in the 11-state range currently provide such expanses and both are already heavily fragmented and are projected to experience additional significant fragmentation in the foreseeable future .

dramatic population declines and local extirpations have already occurred and future fragmentation and habitat degradation is expected to result in remnant , isolated , and dysfunctional populations of greater sage grouse that are in danger of extinction in the foreseeable future .

the sage - grouse was once abundant in 16 western states .

its current range includes portions of 11 states: california , colorado , idaho , montana , nevada , north dakota , oregon , south dakota , utah , wyoming , and washington .

multiple sources point to a severe decline in the number of sage - grouse ; fws estimates that sage - grouse population numbers may have declined between 69% and 99% from historic to more recent times .

fws also cites data from the western states sage and columbia sharp - tailed grouse technical committee , which estimated the decline between historic times and 1999 to have been about 86% .

the increasing threats and declining sage - grouse populations eventually led to eight proposals to list the species or portions of the species under esa .

 ( see " chronology of petitions and fws sage - grouse action ," below. ) .

in making its decision , fws was required to consider the general requirements for listing a species ( see " how does esa work ? .

below ) and the minimum requirements for conservation agreements to be considered adequate to avoid listing .

the specific decision not to list the sage - grouse is discussed below in " why did fws decide not to list sage - grouse ? .

esa is intended to protect plants and animals from becoming extinct .

it authorizes creating a list of protected species , either endangered ( defined as being in danger of extinction ) or threatened ( defined as likely to become endangered in the foreseeable future ) .

esa prohibits taking these species , with limited exceptions .

in addition , it prohibits federal agencies from jeopardizing the continued existence of listed species and from destroying or adversely modifying listed species' designated critical habitats .

fws is the federal agency that manages most species under esa .

the secretary of the interior , acting through fws , is charged with deciding whether to list a species .

esa specifies that a listing decision is to be based on five criteria: 1 .

the present or threatened destruction , modification , or curtailment of a species' habitat or range .

2 .

overutilization for commercial , recreational , scientific , or educational purposes .

3 .

disease or predation .

4 .

inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms .

5 .

other natural or man - made factors affecting a species' continued existence .

in making a listing determination , fws is charged with relying "solely on the basis of the best scientific and commercial data available. .

fws may list a species independently , or citizens may petition the agency to make a listing .

when a petition is filed , certain deadlines are imposed by statute .

fws must determine and publish a decision in the federal register within 90 days of the filing of the petition on whether the petition presents substantial evidence in support of a listing .

within 12 months of filing the petition , fws must publish a notice on whether listing is warranted .

a final decision must be made one year after the 12-month notice .

fws has the option of publishing a determination at the time of a 12-month finding that a listing is "warranted but precluded" due to limited fws resources .

if the adequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms provides the rationale not to list a species , those mechanisms must meet certain criteria , described below .

this section provides a brief chronology of major sage - grouse protection actions , beginning with petitions filed in 1999 to list the sage - grouse for protection under esa and ending with the fws decision in 2015 not to list the species .

major events are listed below and followed by discussion .

between 1999 and 2005 , eight petitions were filed to protect sage - grouse in all or portions of the species' range .

some petitions were rejected because they were not considered substantive enough to be eligible .

in 2004 , fws found that three of the petitions ( received from 2002 to 2003 ) were substantive — that is , the petitions presented substantial evidence in support of the listing .

in 2005 , fws determined that listing was not warranted .

this determination was challenged , questioning the scientific basis for the decision not to list the species .

in a 2007 court decision , the district court for the district of idaho held that the deputy assistant secretary of the department of the interior wrongfully interfered with the listing decision and that fws did not use the best science as required by esa .

the case was remanded to the agency , and in 2008 fws issued a notice of status review for the species .

in 2010 , fws found that "that the inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms is a significant threat to the greater sage - grouse now and in the foreseeable future" and announced that "listing the greater sage - grouse ( rangewide ) is warranted , but precluded by higher priority listing actions .

we will develop a proposed rule to list the greater sage - grouse as our priorities allow. .

fws assigned the species a listing priority number of 8 ( out of 12 , with 1 being the highest priority ) .

in a separate court settlement in 2011 , fws agreed to make a decision on whether to list the sage - grouse by the end of fy2015 .

a plaintiff not involved in that settlement sued , arguing that fws was not making expeditious progress in listing the species , as required under esa , but the court held otherwise .

that plaintiff , western watersheds project , had sued to force listing of the sage - grouse prior to the compromise deadline , but the court held that "despite troubling aspects of the fws decision process," the warranted but precluded finding was not arbitrary or capricious .

as part of a court - ordered settlement agreement concerning prior decisions on sage - grouse , fws filed a work plan in 2011 that committed either to publish proposed rules to list the species or to find that listing was not warranted for sage - grouse by september 30 , 2015 .

on december 16 , 2014 , the president signed the consolidated and further appropriations act , 2015 , which included a provision to prohibit funding to issue a proposed rule for sage - grouse before september 30 , 2015 .

on september 22 , 2015 , fws announced its decision not to list the sage - grouse under esa , based on the adequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms to protect the species .

this decision was published in the federal register on october 2 , 2015 .

in response to the 2010 fws finding that sage - grouse warranted esa listing , federal , state , and private landowners undertook many and varied actions to conserve the species and prevent listing .

secretary of the interior sally jewell later referred to the federal , state , and private collaborative actions to preserve sage - grouse as the most comprehensive conservation effort in the nation's history .

as a result , in september 2015 , fws concluded that sage - grouse met the esa standard of having adequate existing regulatory mechanisms , at several levels .

these collaborative , governmental , and nongovernmental efforts are discussed below .

although controversy over sage - grouse conservation began decades ago with the question of whether the species was depleted enough to need protection , the current debate has turned to the validity of the fws decision not to list the species and the impacts of the protections that avoided esa listing , especially the revised blm and fs land management plans .

among the issues that have been raised by various parties are the following: the efficacy of state management and whether management of federal lands for sage - grouse conservation should be made subordinate to state management ; the variation among states in protecting the species from recurring threats , and in some cases the failure to limit activities that pose the greatest risk in a given state , such as energy development in wyoming or geothermal development in nevada ; whether restrictions on grazing will be implemented soon enough to reduce nest trampling from cattle ; whether the decision not to list the species was predicated on the best available science ; whether federal land management plans to protect sage - grouse habitat disregard the mandates of blm and fs for multiple use and sustained yield ; and whether any relaxation of land management plans in a manner to favor economic development might increase the possibility that fws would revisit its decision not to list the species .

for these and other reasons , states and interest groups have filed lawsuits .

in addition , a number of bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress to address aspects of sage - grouse conservation on specific lands .

provisions in various bills overlap considerably but include preventing delay of a future listing of the species ( eg , h.r .

4739 ; h.r .

4909 ( §2864 ) / s. 2943 ( §2864 ) ) ; exempting certain vegetative management practices designed to benefit sage - grouse from the nepa ( eg , h.r .

1793 / s. 468 ) ; allowing states to develop their own sage - grouse management plans ( eg , h.r .

1997 / s. 1036 ) ; allowing state preemption of federal land management plans regarding sage - grouse ( eg , h.r .

1997 / s. 1036 ) ; reversing prior land withdrawals made to protect sage - grouse ( eg , h.r .

4739 ; h.r .

4909 ( §2864 ) / s. 2943 ( §2864 ) ) ; and exempting sage - grouse provisions from judicial review ( eg , h.r .

4739 ) .

