federal highway and public transportation programs are funded mainly by taxes on motor fuel that flow into the highway trust fund ( htf ) .

the tax rates , set on a per - gallon basis , have not been raised since 1993 , and motor fuel tax receipts have been insufficient to support the transportation programs authorized by congress since fy2008 .

increases in vehicle fuel efficiency and wider use of electric vehicles raise questions about the long - term viability of motor fuel taxes as a means of funding surface transportation .

economists have long favored mileage - based user charges as an alternative source of highway funding .

under the user charge concept , motorists would pay fees based on distance driven and , perhaps , on other costs of road use , such as wear and tear on roads , traffic congestion , and air pollution .

the funds collected would be spent for surface transportation purposes .

the concept is not new: federal motor fuel taxes are a form of indirect road user charge insofar as road use is loosely related to fuel consumption .

some states have charged trucks by the mile for many years , and toll roads charge drivers based on miles traveled and the number of axles on a vehicle , which is used as a proxy for weight .

recent technological developments , as well as the evident shortcomings of motor fuel taxes , have led to renewed interest in the user charge concept , including establishment of a pilot program in legislation enacted in 2015 .

a road user charge system would involve assessing owners of individual vehicles on a per - mile basis for the distance the vehicle is driven .

depending upon the details of such a program , a basic per - mile charge could be adjusted based on any number of factors , such as the time of day a trip is taken , the place of travel , the weight of the vehicle , and the emissions of the vehicle's engine .

most studies of road use charging envision a single national system that would distribute revenue to the htf and directly to the states , which currently impose their own taxes on motor fuels for transportation purposes .

existing motor fuel taxes might be discontinued , phased out , or diverted to other uses as a user charge system takes effect .

proposed systems generally involve three functional components: 1 .

metering: determining the number of miles traveled on roads subject to the user charge and any other information needed to determine fees owed .

2 .

billing: communication of mileage and fees owed , issuance of bills , and collection of the revenue .

most charging proposals envision that fees would be charged to the vehicle owner's credit or bank card , as occurs on many toll roads today .

3 .

enforcement: assuring that motorists have been charged correctly and have paid their fees .

enforcement actions could include checks for tampering with on - board units ( obus ) that might be used to collect data , checks of obus against odometer readings , and legal measures to collect unpaid charges .

if some motorists were allowed to continue to pay motor fuel taxes rather than distance - based user charges , authorities would need to verify that such taxes were being paid .

if a road user charge were to have multiple objectives , enforcement could become more complex .

for example , if the system were to have lower charges for trucks with low - emissions engines than for trucks with high - emissions engines , it would be necessary to verify that each truck is using an obu that identifies its emissions level correctly .

there are numerous ways in which a nationwide road user charge could be structured and collected .

one key issue in implementation would be whether individual vehicle owners could opt out — and , if so , how they would contribute to the cost of building and maintaining surface transportation infrastructure .

one of the advantages of the federal motor fuels tax is that nearly all of the revenue is collected from roughly 850 registered taxpayers when the fuel is removed from the refinery or tank farm .

this has been the case since 1986 , when the u.s. treasury shifted its collection of the gas tax to the refinery "rack" to reduce tax administration problems and curb fuel tax evasion .

the federal government has no need to assess taxes at 111,000 gasoline stations or charge millions of vehicle owners individually .

tax administration costs are generally estimated to be less than one cent per dollar of revenue .

the road user charge would reverse this by taking a small and simple tax administration problem and making it large: a mileage - based road user charge that encompasses all private vehicles could require as many as 256 million points of collection .

a road user charge at the federal level could raise significant questions about federal - state relations .

if congress were to create a road user charge and order state officials to implement it directly in statute , the charge could be subject to legal challenges under legal precedents limiting federal authority over state officials .

providing states with financial incentives to implement distance - based road user charges , rather than mandating that they do so , may obviate such concerns .

on december 4 , 2015 , president barack obama signed the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ; p.l .

114-94 ) , which authorized federal surface transportation programs for five years .

section 6020 of the fast act authorized $95 million over the life of the bill to provide grants to states to "demonstrate user - based alternative revenue mechanisms that utilize a user fee structure to maintaining the long term solvency of the highway trust fund. .

any state or group of states may apply for funding .

the state matching share is 50% .

the government accountability office ( gao ) called for establishment of such a pilot program in 2012 .

the objectives of the program include testing the design , acceptance , and implementation of two or more future user - based alternative mechanisms ; improving their functionality ; conducting outreach to increase public awareness ; and minimizing the administrative costs of potential mechanisms .

the grant awardees are to address the potential hurdles to the adoption of user - based alternative mechanisms , the protection of personal privacy , the use of independent and private third - party vendors to collect fees , market - based congestion mitigation , equity concerns , ease of compliance , and the reliability and security of technology .

one important issue such a pilot program would need to study is the ability of a distance - based charging system to deal with vehicles crossing jurisdictional lines .

currently , states impose motor fuel taxes at varying levels , and in some cases regions within states impose additional taxes on fuel .

an eventual national user charge scheme would need to be able to determine the distance a vehicle has driven in each jurisdiction and assess the appropriate per - mile charge levied by that jurisdiction , if any , in addition to the federal charge .

to test this capability , the pilot will likely need to equip and track the actual movements of several thousand vehicles over several years as well as billing and collecting revenue from the users .

the cost of a pilot study has been estimated to be $2,000 to $4,000 per participant .

at that cost , the $95 million of federal funds , matched with a like amount of state funds , could provide enough funds for a pilot program with 45,000 to 90,000 participants .

however , section 6020 ( e ) requires that the secretary of transportation consider geographic diversity in awarding grants for the pilot program .

if this provision is understood to require that funds be disbursed across many states , relatively small numbers of users will be able to participate in any single state , potentially limiting the value of the findings .

several states have conducted trials of mileage - based road user charge systems .

it is important to note that nearly all of these tests have been small in scale , so none of them sheds much light on the potential administrative costs of running a large - scale system .

also , few of the trials to date have addressed interstate issues , such as those that might arise if different states were to impose different systems .

perceptions of privacy risks have had an impact on studies of road user charges at the state level .

virtually all the outreach in connection with state - run studies identified privacy concerns both during participant recruitment and in follow - up surveys .

the concerns included the use of a gps device to track vehicle movements and possible disclosure of drivers' personal information to law enforcement agencies or private companies .

because of these concerns , oregon and nevada decided not to use gps - based systems in any future pilot studies .

 ( privacy also developed as a major concern in the netherlands , where dutch officials suspended plans to implement a road user charge due to negative media coverage of the program's potential to compromise personal privacy. ) .

a number of foreign countries have imposed distance - based road user charges .

these generally take different approaches from the charging schemes that have been proposed for the united states .

two fundamental differences are worth special note .

first , of the road user charge schemes that are currently in operation , only new zealand's taxes automobiles .

the other schemes tax only large commercial vehicles .

although proposals have been made in some european countries to bring automobiles under mileage - based road user charges , no such measures have been implemented to date .

second , whereas discussion in the united states has emphasized the potential of road user charges to generate revenue , their adoption elsewhere has been based principally on environmental concerns , particularly the desire to reduce emissions of particulates and greenhouse gases and to minimize citizens' exposure to noise and vibration from heavy vehicles .

within the european union ( eu ) , it could be difficult for a single country to effectively enforce more traditional economic measures to meet environmental objectives , such as high taxes on diesel fuel and on high - emissions engines , because owners are free to register their trucks in any eu member state .

part of the attraction of road user charges is that they apply to all trucks passing through a country regardless of residence or fueling location .

in addition , road user charges have the advantage of forcing foreign operators to cover a significant share of highway maintenance costs .

since january 1 , 2001 , switzerland has imposed "performance - related fees" on heavy goods vehicles .

the fees were approved by swiss voters in a 1998 referendum and apply to all vehicles weighing more than 3.5 metric tons ( about 7,700 pounds ) carrying goods on public roads .

part of the purpose of the system was to reduce road damage and environmental harm caused by the large number of foreign trucks transiting switzerland on trips between italy and northern europe .

switzerland has made significant investments in improving rail freight infrastructure , and the fees are meant to encourage shippers to send their goods by rail .

the fees are based on three factors: the total weight of the loaded vehicle , the emissions of the engine , and the number of kilometers driven .

as examples , a 10-ton delivery truck with an older engine would pay 0.31 swiss francs per kilometer driven ( approximately $0.52 per mile ) , and a 35-ton over - the - road truck with the most modern engine would pay 0.80 swiss francs per kilometer ( $1.33 per mile ) .

a limited number of vehicles — including public safety vehicles , buses , and farm equipment — are exempt from the fees .

a heavy vehicle registered in switzerland must be equipped with an obu , which must be installed by an approved installer .

if the truck is pulling a trailer , the driver uses a chip card to input trailer data into the device before departure .

the obu is mounted behind the windshield , so enforcement personnel can observe lights indicating whether the device is operating and trailer information has been entered .

the obu is linked to the tachograph , which all heavy goods vehicles in western europe have been required to use since the 1980s to record distance and driving time .

the obu is automatically switched off by a microwave beacon at the border crossing if the vehicle leaves switzerland , and it is automatically turned on in the same way when the vehicle reenters .

the system does not employ real - time data collection .

instead , the vehicle owner must download the data from the obu on a periodic basis and forward them to the swiss customs administration , which is responsible for collecting payment .

the system therefore does not generate information about a specific vehicle's itinerary except when it leaves or enters the country .

vehicles registered in other countries are not required to have obus to use swiss roads .

as an alternative , the driver may stop at a border crossing , register the vehicle , and receive an identification card .

each time the truck enters switzerland , the driver inserts the card in a terminal at the border crossing and enters the vehicle's weight and odometer reading .

the same information is provided upon exit from switzerland , when the driver must charge the cost of kilometers traveled to an approved card or a swiss customs account or pay in cash .

the swiss road user charge system appears to be less costly than others , notably the german system ( see below ) , as it does not track vehicles' movements in real time .

according to the swiss authorities , installation of the system cost the government 290 million swiss francs ( approximately $290 million ) .

annual operating costs are said to be 5% to 6% of receipts .

each truck owner must bear the cost of purchasing an obu ( estimated to be 1,000 swiss francs ) and having it installed ( 300-700 francs ) .

the german charging system covers all trucks weighing more than 7.5 metric tons ( 16,535 pounds ) using 12,174 kilometers ( 7,565 miles ) of expressways and 2,300 kilometers ( 1,429 miles ) of four - lane roads linked to expressways .

in 2018 the charging system is to be expanded to all federal motorways .

the toll - collection system is complex , in part because eu law prohibits germany from requiring foreign truckers to install obus that allow a truck's location to be identified by gps .

the obus contains mobile telephone equipment that automatically communicates the vehicle's position ( as determined by gps ) to toll collect , the private contractor that operates the system .

drivers of trucks without obus must pay the toll by credit card or direct debit either on the internet or at kiosks installed at gas stations and highway rest stops .

because the toll varies with the number of axles and engine emissions , the german system requires an extensive surveillance effort , including overhead cameras , roadside measurement stations , and random checks of trucking companies to ensure that each vehicle has paid the correct toll .

the toll rates vary from €0.125 per kilometer ( $0.21 per mile ) for a truck with a low - emissions engine and three or fewer axles to €0.214 per kilometer ( $0.344 per mile ) for a truck with four or more axles and an engine with the highest allowable emissions level .

there is no adjustment for an increased number of axles beyond four .

the road user charge in germany is assessed on the basis of kilometers rather than ton - kilometers , as in switzerland .

this fee structure gives operators an incentive to load their vehicles to the maximum permissible weight .

maximum loading may be desirable from an environmental perspective , as it encourages efficient truck use , but it may be less desirable from the perspective of road maintenance , as highway damage caused by a truck increases with the weight on each axle .

in 2015 , germany raised €4.3 billion ( $4.9 billion ) from truck road user charges .

foreign - registered trucks accounted for 40.1% of the kilometers subject to the charge .

poland was by far the largest source of foreign trucks paying the road user charge , accounting for more than 13.6% of all travel covered by the charge .

direct taxes on german - registered trucks were reduced by as much as €929 per year when the charge was introduced .

approximately €150 million per year raised from the charge is distributed to german states in compensation for revenue forgone when previous truck taxes were reduced .

toll collect does not disclose operating costs .

however , the u.s. gao determined that the german government paid the system operator roughly $664 million per year — or about 13% of average annual revenue — to manage the system from 2007 through 2011 .

in addition , about $740 million is spent annually to assist german trucking firms in complying with the system .

the german government does not consider this to be part of the cost of operating the system , but it does reduce by roughly 15% the revenues available to be used for other purposes .

the 2011 law now governing the german truck road user charge system includes significant provisions intended to protect privacy .

the system operator is prohibited from disclosing data on any vehicle's toll payments , route , time of travel , registration number , number of axles , and engine characteristics , and such data may not be transferred to any other party .

except when a vehicle is under investigation for toll evasion , the system operator must destroy data communicated by the obus immediately upon payment .

data and photographs from surveillance devices must be destroyed as soon as the operator confirms that the road user charge has been paid or that the vehicle is not subject to charge .

austria's mileage - based road user charge system , inaugurated in 2004 , requires all trucks and buses weighing more than 3.5 metric tons to pay by the kilometer for use of expressways and certain other high - speed roads .

unlike the swiss and german systems , the austrian system provides for three different size classifications for vehicles with two axles , three axles , and four or more axles .

rates for vehicles with four or more axles are more than twice those for two - axle vehicles with engines of similar vintage .

a three - axle truck with a recent engine pays €0.2198 per kilometer ( $0.40 per mile ) , and a four - axle truck with an older engine may pay as much as €0.4473 per kilometer ( $0.82 per mile ) .

the austrian system does not rely on gps but uses a microwave transponder mounted behind the truck windshield to communicate with toll - collection devices on road - spanning gantries .

it is technically compatible with the swiss system , so trucks with swiss obus are able to travel on austrian roads .

trucks equipped with german obus may also use them in austria .

however , austrian transponders will not work in switzerland or germany .

the transport ministers of austria's federal states have proposed extending mileage - based road user charges to all federal and state highways — in part to address complaints that heavy trucks are using these roads to avoid paying the user charges and in part to produce additional revenue for state governments .

such a change would require austria to shift from its microwave - based system to a gps - based system such as germany's , at considerable cost .

several other eu member states also impose mileage - based road user charges on trucks .

each has a different schedule .

poland has separate rate scales for trucks weighing between 3.5 and 12 metric tons , trucks weighing over 12 metric tons , and buses , with different per - kilometer rates within each vehicle class depending upon engine emissions .

rates per kilometer on national highways are 20% less than those on expressways .

the czech republic uses a microwave system similar to austria's .

road user charges are based on the number of axles rather than vehicle rate , but engines are divided into three emissions classes rather than four , as in poland .

user charges on express roads are more than twice those on other highways , and charges on friday afternoon are significantly higher than on other days of the week .

slovakia uses a gps - based system similar to germany's .

for the moment , it is the most extensive anywhere , covering 17,770 kilometers of expressways , highways , and local roads .

hungary implemented a gps - based charging system in 2013 , but the european commission concluded that its charges were disproportionate to the cost of the infrastructure .

the government has reportedly agreed to review the charges every six months and adjust them as required .

the european commission , the governing body of the eu , adopted a directive in 2004 requiring that all future electronic tolling systems within the eu be interoperable .

this directive applies to road user charging systems as well as systems with more traditional toll structures .

it does not require any changes in toll systems that were in place at the time the directive took effect .

an eu directive adopted in 2011 requires that road user charges for motorways reflect the environmental burdens caused by trucks .

new zealand first imposed road user charges on all diesel vehicles and on all vehicles over 3.5 metric tons in 1977 .

the charges were based on distance driven and a nominal vehicle weight , as opposed to the actual weight of a vehicle on each trip .

the charges were applied to diesel passenger cars as well as heavy goods vehicles .

the policy decision to include diesel cars was taken because new zealand does not assess a road tax on diesel fuel , as more than one - third of all diesel fuel sold in the country is used for off - road purposes .

drivers of vehicles powered by gasoline , compressed natural gas , and liquid petroleum gas pay a road tax collected at the wholesale level and are not subject to road user charge .

revenue from both the road user charge and the road tax , as well as from an annual registration fee on all vehicles , is expended on surface transportation .

the actual charges assessed on individual vehicles are based on a cost - allocation model that aims at forcing individual users to pay the long - run marginal social cost of their use of new zealand's road network .

the most significant of these costs is road wear .

the charge for a heavy truck with five axles , for example , is lower than for a heavy truck with three or four axles , because distributing the vehicle weight across more axles reduces the amount of road wear caused .

in practice , however , it has been difficult for new zealand authorities to adjust charges for road wear without compromising simplicity and ease of enforcement .

for example , wide tires are known to reduce the pavement wear caused by a heavy vehicle , but adjusting individual vehicles' charges based on the width of their tires would make the charging system more complex and compliance more difficult to monitor .

road users subject to the road user charge must purchase distance licenses in units of 1,000 kilometers .

the license , a placard that must be displayed on the passenger side of the windshield , specifies the vehicle odometer readings at the start and end of its validity .

each vehicle subject to the charge is required to have a hub odometer installed on the left - hand side of one axle , and police and new zealand transport agency inspectors can readily check the hub odometer to determine whether the license is valid .

the cost for a standard passenger car is 62 new zealand dollars per 1,000 kilometers ( us$0.07 per mile ) .

this is approximately the same cost per mile paid in the form of petrol excise duty by a gasoline vehicle with fuel efficiency of 25 miles per gallon .

a four - axle tractor - trailer combination must pay 361 new zealand dollars per 1,000 kilometers ( us$0.41 per mile ) .

the new zealand transport agency estimates that the road user charge represents about 10% of truckers' total costs .

the agency also assesses a transaction fee of 4.80 new zealand dollars ( us$3.35 ) each time a license is purchased online , with higher charges for licenses purchased from machines at service stations and over - the - counter at retailers .

continuous licensing is required , so a driver must be in possession of a new license at the time the previous 1,000-kilometer allotment has been used .

