as of june 16 , 2016 , the world health organization ( who ) reported that 60 countries worldwide had experienced mosquito - borne transmission of zika , 46 of which had never had zika cases before ( see figure 1 ) .

the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) has concluded that zika causes microc ephaly ( a serious birth defect involving brain damage ) and is associated with guillain - barré syndrome ( gbs , a neurological condition ) and other neurological and autoimmune conditions .

latin america and the caribbean have been most affected by this outbreak ( figure 1 ) .

since february 2016 , new cases in the southern parts of the region have decreased , but an increase in new cases is expected in the caribbean during the summer months as mosquitoes hatch and bite .

the united states will likely experience an increase in travel - associated cases and possibly local transmission .

policymakers are concerned about the spread of zika into the continental united states , as well as the potential that visitors traveling to the olympics in brazil in august could contract the virus and bring it back to their home countries .

in february 2016 , who director - general margaret chan announced that the international health regulations ( 2005 ) emergency committee on zika virus had determined that the zika outbreak was a public health emergency of international concern ( pheic ) .

shortly thereafter , president barack obama requested that congress provide almost $1.9 billion in emergency appropriations to fund domestic and international responses to the outbreak .

a conference agreement on zika funding was approved by the house but remains pending in the senate .

as congress considers funding the zika request and then exercises oversight over u.s. zika responses in latin america and the caribbean , members may consider issues such as the following: balance between u.s. bilateral and multilateral zika responses .

although u.s. health assistance ( bilateral and regional ) to latin america in general has declined , u.s. support for the pan american health organization ( paho ) has increased .

while considering the president's zika request and the fy2017 budget request , congress may discuss how much support to provide for multilateral responses in the region led by paho .

u.s. health programs in latin america as a part of u.s. policy toward the region .

on average , roughly 10% - 20% of the funds provided by the state department and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) for latin america between fy2009 and fy2016 have been aimed at health programs .

the who has recommended that women and men in countries with local transmission of zika be correctly informed and oriented to consider delaying pregnancy .

congress may evaluate reproductive health and family planning funding in the region given the who recommendation and the limited access to sexual education and contraception in the region .

regional a pportionment and components of global health budget .

less than 5% of all u.s. global health funds are provided to latin america , and the majority of these funds are for hiv / aids programs .

on average , health indicators in the region — particularly those related to maternal and child health , family planning , and reproductive health — are better than in other low - and middle - income countries , although inequities exist .

congress might reexamine the apportionment of global health funding and consider whether investments in the region are sufficient to meet emerging health concerns .

f unding for pandemic preparedness .

the united states committed to support 30 countries ( including haiti and peru ) and the caribbean community ( caricom ) in bolstering their ability to respond to disease outbreaks through the global health security agenda ( ghsa ) .

congress included almost $600 million in emergency ebola appropriations to the cdc in support of ghsa and $50 million in fy2016 appropriations to usaid for pandemic preparedness activities .

congress might consider funding levels for those programs and where those funds are allotted .

investments in research and development of neglected diseases .

in recent years , aedes mosquitoes have caused three disease outbreaks ( dengue , chikungunya , and zika ) in latin america and the caribbean , all of which have been imported into the united states , with the latter being only travel - associated at the time of this report .

these and other diseases lack vaccines to prevent transmission , treatment regimens , and effective vector control tools .

congress might evaluate options to address threats from new and reemerging diseases , including those that are mosquito - borne .

this report provides background information on the zika virus , discusses challenges faced by governments and implementing partners in the latin america and caribbean region that are attempting to control the ongoing outbreak , and analyzes the above issues in the context of the u.s. zika response .

zika was discovered in the zika forest of uganda in 1947 .

from that time until 2007 , when the first large zika outbreak was recorded , zika virus infection primarily caused mild symptoms ( fever , skin rash , conjunctivitis , muscle and joint pain ) that resolved within one week .

in 2007 , the first large zika outbreak was recorded on the micronesian island of yap .

household surveys detected 185 cases .

scientists are studying the virulence of the zika virus and the extent to which human activity affects global spread .

retrospective studies of a 2013-2014 outbreak in french polynesia linked zika infection with gbs for the first time .

the current outbreak , which began in brazil , has been accompanied with a spike in microcephaly and gbs cases , as well as other neurological and autoimmune disorders .

as of june 16 , 2016 , who has reported more than 1,600 cases of zika - related microcephaly worldwide — almost all in brazil .

in addition , 13 zika - affected countries have recorded an increased incidence of gbs .

congress is considering a range of domestic and international responses to the zika outbreak .

in the global context , as summarized above ( see " congressional action on the budget request " ) , members are debating the appropriate response to the outbreak .

in the international context , congress may consider how to balance support for u.s. bilateral and multilateral zika responses .

u.s. foreign assistance to latin america and the caribbean has been declining since fy2011 , and usaid has been phasing out many global health programs in the region .

the zika outbreak may prompt broader discussions about whether to bolster u.s. global health investments in the western hemisphere , including in reproductive health .

discussions about controlling the zika outbreak may also focus on u.s. support for global pandemic preparedness efforts , as well as research and development for diagnostics , treatments , and prevention measures for certain neglected diseases .

the future of the zika supplemental funding request is uncertain at this time due to a number of controversial measures that are in the conference report .

some observers are concerned that there may not be enough time for the house and senate to resume negotiations to reconcile their responses to the zika outbreak before they adjourn in july .

in the meantime , u.s. agencies are using reprogrammed funds to complement current efforts by latin american governments , paho , the private sector , and other donors .

the size and scope of u.s. - funded initiatives to address zika in latin america and the caribbean is also uncertain .

appendix a .

supporting documentation appendix b. online resources on zika viru .

