the agriculture appropriations bill — formally known as the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act — provides funding for all of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) except the forest service , which is funded in the interior appropriations bill .

the food and drug administration ( fda ; department of health and human services ) .

in the house , the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) .

in the senate , the financial services bill contains cftc appropriations .

in even - numbered fiscal years , cftc appears in the enacted agriculture appropriation .

jurisdiction is with the house and senate committees on appropriations and their respective subcommittees on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies .

the bill includes mandatory and discretionary spending , but the discretionary amounts are the primary focus during the bill's development .

the scope of the bill is shown in figure 1 .

the federal budget process treats discretionary and mandatory spending differently .

discretionary spending is controlled by annual appropriations acts and receives most of the attention during the appropriations process .

the annual budget resolution process sets spending limits for discretionary appropriations .

agency operations ( salaries and expenses ) and many grant programs are discretionary .

mandatory spending — though carried in the appropriation and usually advanced unchanged — is controlled by budget rules ( eg , paygo ) during the authorization process .

spending for so - called entitlement programs is set in laws such as the farm bill and child nutrition reauthorizations .

in fy2017 , discretionary appropriations are 14% ( $20.9 billion ) in the agriculture appropriations act ( p.l .

115-31 ) .

mandatory spending carried in the bill comprised $133 billion , about 86% of the $153 billion total .

within the discretionary total , the largest discretionary spending items are for the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) ; rural development ; agricultural research ; fda ; foreign food aid and trade ; farm assistance program salaries and loans ; food safety inspection ; conservation ; and animal and plant health programs ( figure 1 ) .

the main mandatory spending items are the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , and other food and nutrition act programs ) , child nutrition ( school lunch and related programs ) , crop insurance , and farm commodity and conservation programs paid through usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) .

snap is referred to as an "appropriated entitlement" and requires an annual appropriation .

the nutrition program amounts are based on projected spending needs .

in contrast , the ccc operates on a line of credit .

the annual appropriation provides funding to reimburse the treasury for using the line of credit .

the fy2017 appropriation for agriculture and related agencies was enacted on may 5 , 2017 , as part of the consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

115-31 , division a ) .

the fiscal year started on october 1 , 2016 , under continuing resolutions ( crs ) that lasted for seven months .

in regular action , the house and the senate appropriations committees reported their fy2017 agriculture appropriations bills ( h.r .

5054 , s. 2956 ) in april and may 2016 , with some of the earliest subcommittee action in two decades ( table 1 , figure 2 ) .

no further action on the individual bills occurred until they were incorporated into the omnibus appropriation .

the last time an agriculture appropriations bill was enacted as a stand - alone measure was for fy2010 ( in calendar 2009 ) .

an agriculture appropriations bill has not cleared a floor vote in either chamber since the fy2012 bill , when it was the vehicle for a three - bill "minibus" measure .

committee action for fy2017 was somewhat earlier than in recent years .

the $20.877 billion discretionary total enacted in the fy2017 agriculture appropriation is officially $623 million smaller than the fy2016 discretionary appropriation ( in terms of the amount that counts against the budget limit , the "302 ( b ) " subcommittee allocation ; see table 2 ) .

it achieves this primarily by increasing budgetary offsets over the fy2016 level through greater rescissions of prior appropriations and greater scorekeeping adjustments primarily from "negative subsidies" from loan programs that charge fees .

consequently , the budget authority provided to agencies in the major titles of the bill actually increases by $462 million ( the top of the shaded bars in figure 3 ) .

mandatory spending carried in the bill — mostly determined in separate authorizing laws — increases $13.5 billion over fy2016 .

all of this increase is in farm programs , including a $14.4 billion increase in the reimbursement to the commodity credit corporation for higher than expected payments for farm commodity revenue support programs ( table 3 ) .

this increase is automatic based on farm bill formulas and does not affect discretionary spending limits .

table 2 compares house - and senate - proposed amounts to other years by title .

figure 3 illustrates changes in discretionary spending by title over 10 years .

table 3 compares amounts at the agency level , the basis for the rest of the report .

appendix a offers a 20-year historical perspective on trends from fy1996 to fy2016 .

usda was created in 1862 and carries out a range of activities through about 17 agencies and a dozen administrative offices staffed by nearly 100,000 employees .

about 95% of its funding is in the agriculture appropriation , covering about two - thirds of those employees .

the remainder is the forest service and is funded by the interior and related agencies appropriations bill .

this report is organized in the order that the agencies are listed in the appropriations bills .

in addition to the usda agencies mentioned above , the agriculture appropriations subcommittees have jurisdiction over appropriations for three related agencies: 1 .

the food and drug administration ( fda ) of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , 2 .

the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) — in the house agriculture appropriations subcommittee only , and 3 .

the farm credit administration ( fca ) , which does not receive an appropriation but rather oversight via a limit on its spending from fees paid to the agency .

agriculture appropriations acts in recent years have contained over $1 billion in net offsets that effectively reduce the cost of appropriations in the rest of the bill , though the net offset in fy2016 was somewhat smaller at $770 million because of one - time additional spending .

these reductions occur in title vii general provisions through rescissions and changes in mandatory program spending ( chimps ) , and in separate congressional budget office ( cbo ) scorekeeping adjustments .

other appropriations are also made but are relatively small compared to the reductions .

limitations and rescissions are used to score budgetary savings that help meet the discretionary budget allocation .

by offsetting spending elsewhere in the bill , they help provide relatively more to regular discretionary accounts ( or help avoid deeper cuts ) than might otherwise occur .

for fy2017 , the enacted appropriation benefits from over $1.8 billion of net reductions through general provisions and scorekeeping adjustments ( table 14 ) .

this is an increase of nearly $1.1 billion of such reductions , which lets the act show an official reduction in its total spending , even though the amount provided to agencies increases ( figure 3 ) the general provisions title also contains many important policy - related provisions that affect how the executive branch carries out the appropriation and authorizing laws , many of which have no budgetary effect .

some of these policy - related provisions are discussed earlier in this report under the relevant agency heading .

for fy2017 , the enacted appropriation contains $743 million in savings attributable to chimps , of which $380 million are from programs authorized in the 2014 farm bill .

these totals are smaller than compared with fy2016 ( table 15 ) .

the programs affected by chimps typically include conservation , rural development , bioenergy , and some smaller nutrition assistance programs .

chimps have not affected the farm commodity programs or the primary nutrition assistance programs ( such as snap ) .

mandatory programs are usually not part of the appropriations process , since formulas and eligibility rules are set in multi - year authorizing laws ( such as the 2014 farm bill ) .

funding is usually assumed to be available based on the statute and without appropriations action .

however , for more than a decade , appropriators have placed limits on mandatory spending authorized in statutes such as the farm bill ( table 15 ) .

chimps are usually reductions to mandatory spending authority , but they may also be increases in spending authority .

although many chimps have an effect for one year , rescissions may be made to mandatory spending programs to permanently cancel budget authority ( also considered a chimp here and by cbo ) .

when appropriators limit mandatory spending , they do not change the authorizing law .

however , their action has a similar effect through chimps — but usually only for the one year to which the appropriation applies .

appropriators put limits on mandatory programs by using language such as this: "none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this or any other act shall be used to pay the salaries and expenses of personnel to carry out section [...] of public law [...] in excess of $[...]. .

limits usually appear in title vii , general provisions , of the agriculture appropriations bill .

historically , most allocations to spend budgetary resources originated from the appropriations committees .

the division over who should fund certain agriculture programs — appropriators or authorizers — has roots dating to the 1930s .

variable outlays for the farm commodity programs were difficult to budget and resembled entitlements .

mandatory funding — through the ccc — was created to remove the unpredictable funding issue from the appropriations process , and those decisions generally rested with the authorizing committee .

the dynamic further changed after the 1996 farm bill , when mandatory funds were used for programs that had usually been discretionary .

appropriators had not funded some programs as much as authorizers had desired , and authorizing committees wrote farm bills to more broadly use the mandatory funding at their discretion .

tension arose over who should fund certain activities .

some question whether the ccc should be used for outlays that are not uncertain .

rescissions are a method of permanently cancelling the availability of funds that were provided by a previous appropriations law .

when scoring a bill to determine its budget effect , a rescission results in budgetary savings .

as a budgetary offset , rescissions can allow more spending in an appropriations bill .

but unlike a chimp , a rescission can prevent an unobligated budget authority from being reallocated or repurposed by future appropriations since the cancellation is permanent .

often rescissions relate to the unobligated balances of funds that were appropriated a year or more ago that still remain available for a specific purpose ( eg , buildings and facilities funding that remains available until expended for specific projects , or disaster response funds for losses due to a specific hurricane ) .

for fy2017 , the enacted appropriation rescinds $854 million from two discretionary programs , primarily the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) , as discussed in the section " wic: general provisions and committee report language . .

the general provisions title contains appropriations for activities that are not part of regular agency appropriations .

these sometimes include supplemental or disaster appropriations and may be offset in scorekeeping adjustments by emergency spending designations .

the appropriations for fy2017 contain $206 million for disaster programs from the continuing resolutions ( further offset by a disaster designation ) , as well as $29 million of disaster programming through the regular appropriation .

the regular appropriation also contains $237 million of other appropriations for various accounts ( table 17 ) .

scorekeeping adjustments are a final part of the accounting of the appropriations bill that are not necessarily shown in the tables published by the appropriations committees .

these adjustments are critical , however , for the bill to reach the desired total amount that complies with the 302 ( b ) spending limit for each subcommittee .

some of these amounts are not necessarily specified by provisions in the bill but are related to program operations , such as direct and guaranteed loan programs .

cbo calculates and reports these scorekeeping adjustments in unpublished tables .

the "negative subsidy" from various usda loan programs has increased in recent years .

negative subsidies effectively reflect "income" to the government when a loan program operates at lower cost than it receives in appropriations via the collection of fees or better - than - expected loan repayment .

these negative subsidies have become larger in recent years and are helping to offset more of the regular appropriation .

prior to fy2013 , these negative subsidies were cumulatively less than $100 million .

in fy2017 , these negative subsidies are scored to be a total of $534 million .

appendix a .

historical trends this appendix offers a 20-year historical perspective on trends in agricultural appropriations from fy1997 to fy2017 .

comparisons are made using nominal and real data across ( 1 ) mandatory versus discretionary spending , ( 2 ) nutrition spending compared to the rest of the bill , and ( 3 ) agriculture appropriations relative to the entire federal budget , economy , and population ( figure a - 1 through figure a - 7 , table a - 2 through table a - 4 ) .

historical trends in the appropriations are also summarized as compounded annualized percentage changes over various time periods ( table a - 1 ) .

a shorter , 10-year comparison across the major titles in the agriculture appropriation is shown in figure 3 earlier in the report , and agency - level data are presented for a four - year period in tables throughout the report .

appendix b .

budget sequestration sequestration is a process of automatic , largely across - the - board reductions that permanently cancel mandatory and / or discretionary budget authority and is triggered when spending would exceed statutory budget goals .

the current requirement for sequestration is in the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) .

table b - 1 shows the rates of sequestration that have been announced so far and the amounts of budget authority that have been cancelled from accounts in the agriculture appropriations bill .

although the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-67 ) raised spending limits in the bca to avoid sequestration of discretionary accounts in fy2014 and fy2015 — and the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-74 ) did it again for fy2016 and fy2017 — they do not prevent or reduce sequestration on mandatory accounts that originated in the bca .

in fact , the original fy2021 sunset on the sequestration of mandatory accounts has been extended three times to pay for avoiding sequestration of discretionary spending in the near term or as a general budgetary offset for other bills .

1 .

first , congress extended the duration of mandatory sequestration by two years ( until fy2023 ) as an offset in the bipartisan budget act of 2013 .

2 .

second , congress extended it by another year ( until fy2024 ) to maintain retirement benefits for certain military personnel ( p.l .

113-82 ) .

3 .

third , congress extended sequestration on non - exempt mandatory accounts another year ( until fy2025 ) as an offset in the bipartisan budget act of 2015 .

some farm bill mandatory programs are exempt from sequestration .

the nutrition programs and the conservation reserve program are statutorily exempt , and some prior legal obligations in crop insurance and the farm commodity programs may be exempt as determined by the office of management and budget ( omb ) .

generally speaking , the experience since fy2013 is that omb has ruled most of crop insurance as exempt from sequestration , while the farm commodity programs have been subject to it .

regarding the 2014 farm bill , the first farm commodity program payments from the 2014 farm bill began in october 2015 , and usda indicated that they would be subject to the 6.8% reduction applicable to fy2016 .

since enactment of the bca , omb has ordered budget sequestration on non - exempt , non - defense discretionary accounts only once , in fy2013 ( table b - 1 ) , and on mandatory accounts annually in fy2013-fy2017 ( table b - 2 ) .

