f ollowing the housing crash and financial crisis that began to unfold in 2007 , the united states experienced the longest and deepest recession since the great depression .

the "great recession" that began in december 2007 could be explained after the fact based on the disruptions to the financial system caused by the crisis .

what has followed since the economy returned to expansion in june 2009 , however , posed a greater surprise .

the standard macroeconomic model , consistent with the general economic record since world war ii , predicted that the large decline in gross domestic product ( gdp ) that the united states experienced during the great recession would be offset by rapid catch - up growth in the subsequent expansion that began in june 2009 , leaving the average growth rate unchanged in the long run .

instead , the current expansion has featured the lowest growth rate of any post - war expansion .

the growth rate since the crisis has averaged one - quarter to one - half the average since world war ii , depending on the measure used .

nor does this slower growth appear to be a transient blip of no greater relevance , as the current expansion is already longer than average and has not experienced a period of growth acceleration at any point in the expansion .

nor is the relatively slow growth unique to the united states — all major advanced economies have had a similar experience since 2007 .

this report summarizes the u.s. economic growth record and reviews a number of explanations forwarded by economists for why this expansion has featured slow growth .

some explanations focus on short - term factors that would not be expected to persist , while others focus on long - term changes to the economy .

the report will not discuss labor market conditions , except in the context of how they contribute to the pace of gdp growth .

given the important influence economic growth has on living standards , economists have devoted considerable amounts of research to identify the determinants of growth .

the determinants of growth differ depending on the time scale policymakers are concerned with .

in the short term , the growth of the u.s. economy is largely dependent on the business cycle — fluctuating between periods of high and low growth over a matter of months and years .

the business cycle's influence on growth is mainly manifested through changes in the level of total spending in the economy .

recessions coincide with a decline in total spending below the productive capacity of the economy .

in expansions , total spending rises until spending matches the economy's productive capacity , called "full employment. .

external "shocks" to the economy — some positive , some negative , some large enough to cause recessions or short - term expansions — also play a large role in determining growth from quarter to quarter .

for example , large movements in energy prices can influence consumer spending , which can translate to short - term changes in overall output .

while inadequate spending was the defining feature of the "great recession" and influenced the shape of the recovery ( as will be discussed below ) , that factor is of waning importance as the expansion continues .

at this point , the unemployment rate has rapidly declined since 2013 and is now close to many economists' estimate of full employment ( although other labor market indicators suggest some slack remains ) .

in the longer run , these short - term business cycle fluctuations smooth to reveal long - term trends , and growth in output depends on growth in the resources and knowledge used to produce output .

economists typically place the main sources of long - term growth into one of three categories: increases in physical capital , increases in the quality and quantity of labor employed ( human capital and labor supply ) , and improvements in productivity .

the link between these factors and growth is discussed at length in the appendix .

research indicates that the degrees to which these three factors contribute to long - term growth differ , sometimes significantly , over time .

while changes in the long - term sources of growth are typically of a lesser concern during recessions , over long enough time horizons they become dominant .

before returning to analyze in more detail how these short - term and long - terms factors may explain why the current expansion is relatively weak , the next section provides a review of the growth record of the u.s. economy since world war ii .

to study the u.s. growth record , the analysis below examines data on three different measures of ( real ) economic activity: gdp , gdp per capita , and output per hour ( labor productivity ) .

these terms are defined in the following text box .

figure 1 shows the average annual growth rate of u.s. gdp , gdp per capita , and output per hour over each five - year period spanning 1948 to 2015 ( the average is shown for the midpoints of these periods , which cover 1950 to 2013 ) .

while the recent lower - than - average economic performance is partly attributable to the financial crisis , it has persisted into the current expansion .

as shown in figure 1 , growth has declined by all three measures since the five - year period centered on 1998 and troughed during the financial crisis .

as shown in figure 1 , even in the most recent five - year period , which excludes the financial crisis and the great recession , growth was still relatively low compared to the rest of the post - war period .

only two other periods were comparably slow to the latest period — the five - year periods centered on 1956 and 1981 .

both periods included deep recessions , and in both cases , growth bounced back quickly , in contrast to the current situation .

in line with existing research on economic growth , this section examines the performance of the economy from 1948 to 2015 across the following distinct time periods: 1948 to 1973 , 1974 to 1995 , 1996 to 2000 , 2001 to 2007 , and 2008 to 2015 .

because the focus of the report is on slow growth since 2008 , more recent data are divided into shorter time periods than earlier data to highlight recent developments .

it should be noted that some of the more recent time periods utilized may be too short to fully smooth out the effects of the business cycle , which could have temporarily boosted or suppressed average growth for the period ( an issue that will be discussed in greater detail later in the report ) .

the two earliest periods , by contrast , span multiple business cycles .

while the difference in length makes for something of an "apples to oranges" comparison , dividing the data into these periods is useful for telling a straightforward story .

by all measures , average growth was relatively high from 1948 to 1973 and relatively low from 1974 to 1995 .

it was high again from 1995 to 2000 , and depending on the measure did or did not return to a slow growth period from 2001 to 2007 .

then , since 2008 , growth has been markedly lower than in any other period since 1948 .

as the expansion nears completion of its seventh year since the recession and continues to experience slower - than - average growth , economists have offered a number of explanations for the relatively slow recovery .

slow growth in the immediate aftermath of the crisis could be attributed to deleveraging and financial disruptions caused by the crisis , but those problems were of a temporary nature .

permanent damage from the crisis , called hysteresis , would be expected to leave the level of gdp permanently lower , but should not affect the long - term growth rate .

subsequent shocks to the economy during this expansion , called headwinds , could also be temporarily holding back growth , but over time , there is no reason to think that unlucky events would continually outweigh lucky ones .

secular stagnation is an explanation for the slowdown of a more long - lasting nature , but is distinct from an explanation based on changes in the structural factors that are the sources of long - term growth .

an explanation based on structural factors would suggest a more permanent slowdown .

as the duration of the slowdown persists , explanations based on temporary factors become less compelling and permanent factors become more compelling — particularly as the labor market approaches full employment .

it should be noted that while this report presents these explanations as distinct and contrasting , they are not mutually exclusive , and some economists combine elements from more than one in their diagnoses .

all of the following explanations are discussed in the context of the u.s. economy , but as the growth slowdown is prevalent throughout advanced economies , these explanations may be equally relevant abroad .

further , the fact that the slowdown is global dampens demand for u.s. exports , making it harder for the u.s. economy to escape its own slowdown .

by any of the standard measures , economic growth has been markedly slower since 2008 than it was during the four other distinct growth episodes since 1948 .

less than a decade is still too short , however , to be confident that , absent policy changes , the slowdown will persist .

all of the explanations for the current growth slowdown have aspects that are compelling , but none is able to provide a comprehensive explanation that disproves the others .

given the complexities of the economy , it is perhaps unsurprising that there is not one simple explanation for the slowdown .

but if the slowdown has a number of distinct causes , it implies that there is unlikely to be one "silver bullet" policy response that can reverse it .

further , the potential capacity of government policy to reverse the slowdown is arguably limited for the following reasons .

first , the worldwide nature of the slowdown suggests that its cause is partly beyond u.s. control and if there were an easy policy solution , some country would likely have hit upon it by now .

second , the nature of some of the causes of the slowdown , such as the aging of the population , is hard for policymakers to influence , particularly in the short run .

finally , the longer growth record suggests that growth is relatively steady over long periods of time despite large changes in policy , society , and the economic environment .

when there has been a long - lasting change , it has largely been because of changes in productivity growth .

policymakers and economists have struggled to predict , explain , or influence productivity growth .

in the long run , changes in productivity growth are largely driven by technological breakthroughs that are , by their nature , hard to predict .

because productivity growth is affected by nearly every aspect of government policy , there is no simple policy change to significantly raise it .

at the same time , economists generally agree that efficient and sustainable fiscal policies , stable monetary policies , and an environment conducive to innovation are keys to long - term economic growth .

this appendix provides an overview of why long - term growth depends on labor , capital , and productivity in the context of economic growth theory .

physical capital physical capital refers to the man - made resources , such as machines , computers , equipment , factories , and infrastructure , workers use to produce goods and services .

greater amounts of capital increase the productive capabilities of workers , which in turn , increases the productive capacity of the economy .

for example , giving each member of a construction crew their own tools will result in more buildings being built than if the crew had to share a single set .

recent figures suggest that there is around $280,000 worth of physical capital per worker in the united states .

this is nearly three times the amount of capital per u.s. worker in 1950 .

therefore , it should not be surprising that worker productivity , and also gdp per capita , has increased in the post - world war ii period .

over time the amount of capital an economy has will depend primarily on its rate of ( net ) investment .

the higher a country's investment rate , all else equal , the faster its capital stock will grow .

and the faster its capital stock grows , the more capital workers will have and the faster the productive capacity of the economy will expand .

thus , ensuring that a nation's investment rate is adequate to build its capital stock has important ramifications for the economic capabilities of a nation .

while investment leads to increases in the capital stock , it comes at a cost .

investment involves a diversion of resources away from the production of goods and services that , in turn , could be enjoyed today .

specifically , to increase investment a certain amount of an economy's resources must be directed toward the production of capital , and although investment is expected to reap a return , that return may not be realized for some time .

thus , investment comes at the cost of lower current consumption today in exchange for potentially greater production and consumption in the future .

economic growth theory also emphasizes that investment's impact on long - run growth becomes smaller and smaller as the capital stock grows .

this results from the diminishing returns larger capital stocks produce , holding the labor supply and productivity constant .

that is , successive additions to the stock of physical capital eventually yield steadily smaller and smaller increases in worker productivity to the point where there will be little growth - boosting effect remaining .

referring back to our previous example , once each crew member has been equipped with their own set of tools , additional investment will yield a smaller and smaller return — perhaps it may help to keep an extra toolbox on hand to address the occasional lost or broken tool , but beyond that further redundancy results in little extra output .

in the end , investment may elevate growth over the medium term , but not the long term .

human capital and labor supply the productivity of the workforce can also be increased by improving the skills of workers , a process commonly referred to by economists as human capital investment .

typically , increases in human capital occur through formal education and on - the - job skill development .

a greater stock of human capital allows workers to be more productive , which , like physical capital , increases the production potential of the overall economy .

human capital also often complements increases in physical capital and the development of new technologies .

for example , a worker with little experience operating a cutting - edge machine will not find the new technology very useful until she has also acquired the skills ( human capital ) needed to operate it .

likewise , increases in the human capital stock that are associated with more researchers , scientists , and engineers will also likely have a positive influence on the creation of technological knowledge and exert an indirect influence on the growth of worker productivity .

human capital is similar to physical capital in that it is also produced by diverting resources ( students , teachers , schools , libraries , etc. ) .

from the production of goods for current consumption .

for example , an individual can spend four years obtaining a bachelor's degree after high school , accumulating further human capital , or she could begin working immediately after high school and producing goods for consumption .

therefore , the accumulation of human capital is also a form of investment which dictates the need to make a trade - off between lower current consumption and greater future production potential .

also , like physical capital , the accumulation of human capital is subject to diminishing returns — the degree to which individuals' productive abilities increase with each additional year of school becomes smaller as the amount of schooling or training is increased .

not only is the stock of human capital an important determinant of economic growth , so too is the size of the workforce — more workers can produce more goods and services .

productivity multifactor productivity refers to the ability of economic agents to combine capital and labor to produce goods and services .

improvements in productivity are an indication that the economy is more efficiently employing its resources in the production process .

productivity increases result from a number of sources including the generation of new technologies , production processes , and ideas , but also from improvements in the institutional and regulatory environment within which the economy operates .

used in this sense , productivity serves as a catch - all for the factors that affect growth but that do not fit neatly into the category of items that augment the nation's physical and labor inputs .

while numerous factors may affect productivity , it is often advances in technological knowledge that receive the most attention .

technological knowledge has a special property that makes it distinct from the other physical inputs in the production process .

specifically , knowledge and ideas , unlike the physical inputs of capital and labor , are non - rivalrous — one person's use of a new idea does not result in any less of that idea being available for others to use .

for example , an engineer in chicago who is building a bridge using the pythagorean theorem does not prevent engineers in new york city from simultaneously using the theorem to build a sky scraper .

non - rivaly is an innate property of knowledge and ideas .

this is not to say that they cannot be granted excludability .

governments can , and in fact often do , give a person or company exclusive legal right of use to non - rivalrous goods via patents .

the non - rivalrous character of ideas leads to a crucial distinction between the returns to the physical inputs of capital and labor , and ideas .

recall previously the discussion about how capital and labor eventually run up against diminishing returns .

this implies that , in the long run , the influence of capital and labor on per capita growth falls to zero .

non - rivalry of ideas , however , allows for the possibility that an economy can continue to build its stock of ideas and never run up against this limitation .

that is , the constant generation of ideas can potentially generate long - run sustainable growth .

there is debate among economists about that rate of future idea discovery .

if , as some have argued , we should not expect steady idea discovery , then the prospects for growth are diminished .

