the issue of whether or not to allow video cameras into the courtroom has been discussed and debated by members of congress , the legal community , journalists , and the public since the introduction of newsreel films in the early 20 th century .

technological advances have shifted some of the considerat ions in this ongoing dialogue , as newsreel cameras gave way to television cameras and internet video .

increasingly , new technology makes video recording less disruptive , accessible to more people , and able to be distributed quickly , if not instantaneously .

most state courts , and several international supreme courts , allow video cameras to record and televise , or otherwise broadcast , their proceedings under certain circumstances .

although the u.s. supreme court does not allow cameras of any sort in its chamber , a few federal circuit and district courts do allow video recording of their proceedings , and the judicial conference of the united states continues to consider expanding the use of cameras in the lower federal courts .

some judges who have experience with video cameras in their chambers support the use of video recording or broadcasting in the courts ; other judges have reservations , typically related to the effects cameras might have on the proceedings .

the public generally tends to support televising u.s. supreme court proceedings .

in this context , members of congress have introduced measures to enable , or expand , the use of video cameras in the federal courts .

typically , since the mid - 1990s , a handful of bills have been introduced each session .

several bills reflecting four distinct proposals have been introduced in the 114 th congress addressing cameras in the federal courts .

due to the assortment of considerations in this policy debate , the provisions of these cameras in the courtroom bills vary on several dimensions , balancing concerns about preserving judicial integrity and due process with other goals , like improved public education , media access , or government transparency .

this report is not intended to provide a legal analysis of court cases relevant to the use of video cameras in federal courtrooms .

the following sections of this report provide information about the current judicial policies and attitudes related to video camera use in the u.s. supreme court , federal circuit courts , and federal district courts ; summaries of the major debates and considerations for policymakers on the subject of courtroom cameras , including the appropriateness of congressional action , standards for public and media access to the courts , and potential effects on courtroom proceedings ; descriptions of the four legislative proposals currently before the 114 th congress , including the cameras in the courtroom act ( h.r .

94 and s. 780 ) , the sunshine in the courtroom act ( h.r .

917 and s. 783 ) , the transparency in government act ( h.r .

1381 ) , and the eyes on the courts act ( h.r .

3723 ) ; and complementary policy measures that might accomplish similar objectives .

this section describes the current policies that the u.s. supreme court and the federal circuit and district courts have adopted regarding video cameras in their courtrooms , along with the attitudes supreme court justices and other federal judges have expressed toward expanding video use .

video broadcasting can be treated as one of several means by which the courts provide information about their proceedings to the public and the press .

as such , the other policies the federal courts have in place related to public and media access are also briefly discussed where relevant .

there are many factors involved in the cameras in the courtroom debate that might be relevant to policymakers considering related legislation .

in addition to the more particular arguments related to cameras in the courtroom , members of congress may first want to evaluate the implications of congressional action in this area , given its potential effects on interbranch relations with the judiciary .

members may also wish to consider more practical considerations relating to how these policies might be introduced and implemented .

examples from past , current , and proposed cameras - in - the - courtroom programs may help illustrate potential benefits and drawbacks of these initiatives , and they may also illustrate how different values or concerns may be balanced .

in the modern history of congress , there have been a number of legislative attempts to allow or require video cameras in federal courtrooms .

this section provides an overview of the current bills before the 114 th congress related to video cameras in the federal courts .

table 1 provides a side - by - side comparison of these bills , their current legislative status , and key components .

many of these current legislative initiatives are identical or substantively similar to past bills — when applicable , comparisons will be made between the current and previous versions of bills ( introduced in the 110 th - 113 th congresses ) .

this section will be updated as necessary to reflect current legislative developments .

legislation intended to expand video broadcasting in the federal courts can reflect a number of legislative goals , including greater judicial transparency , public education about the courts , improved public access to proceedings , or expanded media access to the courts .

as the debate surrounding cameras in the courtroom continues almost 100 years after it began , it is important to consider what underlying goals these policy measures are intended to achieve .

policymakers may want to consider whether there are complementary measures that could achieve similar goals through other means .

historically , the issue of cameras in the courtroom has been framed as a matter of expanding media access to the courts .

in the era before electronic broadcasting , the press served as an indispensable intermediary between the public and the courts .

unless citizens could personally witness trial proceedings , they had to rely upon the reports and accounts that were created by the media .

if journalists are still viewed as critical intermediaries , and one of the goals of adding cameras to the courtroom is to improve journalists' ability to cover its proceedings , there may be other policy measures that might help fulfill this objective .

at the supreme court level , for example , other measures could improve the court's communications with journalists .

the court could revise its press credentialing requirements to include more internet - based news outlets , use email or social media to announce decisions , distribute email copies of opinions to members of the press corps , allow reporters to use tablets or smartphones for note - taking , or provide wireless internet in the courthouse ( if not the courtroom ) .

these initiatives may help fulfill the goal of improved media access to the supreme court and other federal courts , without the possible downsides associated with introducing cameras to the chambers .

the public still learns about major events from the media , but the internet has fostered a growing expectation that more complete information about a story or an event will be readily available online .

primary source documents and raw video footage of political proceedings or newsworthy events are commonly available on the internet , contributing to the sense that information about today's current events does not have to be mediated by the press .

thus , the contemporary cameras - in - the - courtroom debate today may be framed in part as a means to improve direct public access to information about court proceedings .

this objective could be fulfilled by improvements to existing forms of public information , like introducing same - day audio recording releases or live - streamed audio from the supreme court .

other suggested measures , like providing closed - circuit cameras to broadcast exclusively to a larger venue outside the courtroom , could still face some of the potential challenges that policies to televise or broadcast proceedings more broadly face .

because records of proceedings are available and the courtrooms are not closed to the public or the press , it can be argued that the courts may already meet a sufficient standard of transparency and access , and legislative action may not be necessary .

lack of congressional action would not preclude the federal judiciary from setting its own policies that could expand the use of cameras in the courtroom .

recent actions taken by the courts , such as the supreme court's measures to improve the timely release of audio recordings and the judicial conference's 2011-2015 pilot program on cameras in the courtroom , may suggest that the courts themselves may be inclined to take measures to improve access to their proceedings .

international , state , and local courts have expanded the use of video cameras to record and / or broadcast their proceedings over the last 20 years , and the federal judiciary has experimented with video cameras in the federal circuit and district courts as well .

where cameras are permitted in courtrooms , many safeguards have been implemented to try to maintain judicial integrity and the rights of courtroom participants .

in many courtrooms where cameras operate today , they typically do so without notable opposition or legal challenge .

proponents argue that these measures help improve transparency and accountability in the courts , better meet the needs of modern journalists , and improve public access to information about the courts .

during the same time period , legislative attempts to expand the use of video cameras in the federal courts have frequently been introduced but have not been enacted .

even as video technology has changed and become more commonplace , fundamental concerns persist about potentially negative effects of video cameras in the courtroom .

although many bills include provisions to help alleviate these concerns , the important role that the judiciary plays in american society leads some to approach any changes in this area with caution .

since many of the debates on cameras in the courtroom center around differing constitutional interpretations , some maintain that congress should defer to the judiciary's position on these questions .

the results of the judicial conference's 2011-2015 pilot program may be released at one of its 2016 meetings .

once they are released , the judicial conference could decide to change its position or policies regarding cameras in the courtroom .

these findings may also provide congress with more information about the potential benefits and drawbacks of video broadcasting from the federal courts .

this report will be updated as needed to reflect any subsequent developments .

