spending programs and tax expenditures are the two primary ways that the federal government provides benefits to the public .

though each type of intervention increases net budget deficits , differences in the budget process , saliency , and targeting of each may have ramifications for usage across different types of services .

this report briefly describes spending programs and tax expenditures , observes a few ways that they differ , and discusses how those distinctions may inform the relative use of each type of intervention across the government portfolio .

differences in the construction of spending and tax expenditure programs have direct ramifications for their treatment in the legislative process , for budget outcomes , for targeting and enforcement , and for the distribution of benefits .

this section examines these differences and discusses how those distinctions may influence the use of each intervention across the budget process .

the following tables identify the largest spending and tax expenditure programs in eight categories of federal activity: ( 1 ) defense and international affairs ; ( 2 ) general science , space and technology , natural resources and the environment , and agriculture ; ( 3 ) commerce and housing , community and regional development , and transportation ; ( 4 ) education , training , employment , and social services ; ( 5 ) health , including medicare ; ( 6 ) income security ; ( 7 ) social security and veterans' benefits ; and ( 8 ) administration of justice and general governance .

for the purposes of this study , spending programs will be distinguished by type ( i.e. , discretionary or mandatory ) and by budget subfunction , in accordance with the march 2016 cbo baseline .

expenditure items will be identified as they appear in two december 2015 jct publications .

these tables do not include three types of federal interventions: net interest ( budget function 900 ) , federal allowances ( budget function 920 ) , or undistributed offsetting receipts ( budget function 950 ) .

net interest , the largest of the three functions , is omitted from this analysis because it is a function of previous spending and tax expenditure decisions in the other categories , and thus does not afford congress with the control provided by other types of programs .

allowances and undistributed receipts are not included here because the nature of those types of programs makes their beneficiaries hard to determine , rendering it difficult to make comparisons with tax expenditure programs .

importantly , while spending and tax expenditure programs both increase net deficits , the mechanisms that allocate resources for each program type are different .

specifically , spending programs rely on funds that are collected by the federal government , while tax expenditures are typically financed through forgone revenues , or money not collected due to the creation of the program .

this difference may have policy implications that are not addressed in this report .

budget functions 050 and 150 cover activities related to national defense and international affairs , respectively .

table 1 shows the projected costs of operations classified as national defense and international affairs , as estimated by cbo and jct .

defense and international affairs spending programs devote most of their outlays to military activities .

other spending activities include engagement in international relations and nonmilitary defense programs .

in contrast , the largest tax expenditure programs devote resources to foreign - based individuals and households with interests in the united states , while also offering some tax benefits to active military servicemembers .

national defense and international diplomacy are some of the more notable public goods typically regulated by governments .

programs that call for more frequent congressional action ( such as discretionary spending programs and expiring tax expenditures ) may also be useful for defense and international affairs activities , as the location and intensity of resource demands may be highly dependent on international events that are not always foreseeable .

budget functions 250 , 270 , 300 , and 350 are devoted to government activities related to science and technology , energy , natural resources , and agriculture , respectively .

table 2 shows the cbo and jct projections of the cost of such programs .

both spending programs and tax expenditures devote the most resources in this area to support scientific and technological research and for agricultural services .

these interventions also offer a wide range of programs , as the amount of resources devoted to "other" policies is greater than the combined resources spent on the largest three programs in each case .

the complementary nature of spending programs and tax expenditure programs in the science and technology , energy , natural resources , and agriculture sectors may reflect an intention to offer support to both government agencies and private firms in these areas .

budget functions 370 , 400 , and 450 capture government activities related to commerce and housing , transportation , and community and regional development , respectively .

table 3 provides information on the costs of these programs as estimated by cbo and jct .

the largest shares of spending resources are devoted to air and ground transportation programs .

spending programs in these areas are also related to providing assistance in response to unexpected events .

meanwhile , a variety of tax expenditures are used to offer incentives for activities related to homeownership , business activity , and community development .

the combined resources devoted to tax expenditures listed as "other" in table 3 are larger than any single tax expenditure .

budget function 500 is devoted to government activities related to education , training , employment , and social services .

table 4 provides the projected costs of these programs in fy2016 , as estimated by cbo and jct .

federal spending resources in these areas are focused mostly in the education sector , particularly in higher education financing ( state and local governments are responsible for much of the policies for elementary and secondary schools ) .

conversely , tax expenditure programs for budget function 500 activities provide much of their resources to supporting social services .

compared with total federal spending levels , interventions in these areas are more likely to come from tax expenditure programs .

budget functions 550 and 570 are devoted to government activities related to health ( excluding medicare ) and medicare , respectively .

table 5 shows the projected resources allocated to health and medicare programs in fy2016 , as estimated by cbo and jct .

spending programs devote the vast majority of their health resources to medicare and other health services , with the mandatory components of budget subfunctions 571 and 551 alone accounting for more than $1 trillion worth of projected fy2016 outlays .

tax expenditure programs are targeted to incentivize health insurance enrollment and to encourage certain types of health care consumption .

budget function 600 is devoted to government activities related to income security .

table 6 provides cbo and jct estimates for the resources devoted to income security programs .

federal spending on income security programs is used to finance payments to current and former federal employees and to certain low - income households .

tax expenditure resources are devoted primarily to private retirement contributions , and to income support for low income families .

budget functions 650 and 700 are devoted to government activities related to social security and veterans' benefits , respectively .

cbo and jct estimates of the cost of those programs in fy2016 are shown in table 7 .

nearly 80% of the resources devoted to any type of federal program in these budget categories are spent as outlays on social security .

other federal spending is allocated to income security and health care programs for veterans .

tax expenditure programs use the internal revenue code to devote resources to social security and railroad retirement benefits and to exclude certain benefits for military veterans from taxation .

budget functions 750 and 800 are devoted to government activities related to administration of justice and general governance , respectively .

table 8 shows cbo and jct estimates of resources devoted to those programs .

federal spending programs for budget function 750 and 800 are primarily focused on funding government services , including law enforcement , judicial , and fiscal activities .

tax expenditures in these areas devote the majority of their resources to exempting certain state and local government activities from federal taxation .

