the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) was established in 1967 as part of the newly formed u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) .

congress made it responsible for investigating all civil aviation accidents and certain accidents in other modes of transportation , with the intent of identifying safety improvements to prevent future accidents .

in 1974 , congress passed the independent safety board act of 1974 ( in p.l .

93-633 ) , making the ntsb completely independent of dot .

as an independent agency , the ntsb can carry out unbiased investigations and make recommendations regarding safety regulations and oversight practices of dot without inherent conflicts of interest .

the ntsb's main functions are determining the causes of accidents and recommending safety improvements that could prevent such accidents from recurring .

additionally , the ntsb provides assistance to victims' families in major airline and passenger rail disasters and serves as a board of appeals for certain transportation regulatory actions by the federal aviation administration ( faa ) and the u.s. coast guard .

the agency has no authority to require implementation of its recommendations .

it does not regulate or oversee safety practices in the transportation sector ; those responsibilities are assigned to dot ; dot modal agencies including faa and the federal railroad administration ; and other federal and state agencies .

49 u.s.c .

ยง1138 charges the government accountability office ( gao ) with carrying out evaluations and audits of the ntsb's operations and activities with respect to information management and security , resource management , workforce development , procurement and contracting , management practices , and management challenges in completing accident investigations .

in general , the ntsb has been responsive to gao findings , and in the past has fully implemented gao recommendations .

from 2006 through 2008 , gao made 21 specific recommendations to ntsb , and in 2012 gao found that all of these had been effectively implemented and closed .

in 2013 , gao revisited ntsb management and operational practices , finding that the ntsb had made improvements , but needed to continue its efforts to further improve training center utilization , close - out processes for safety recommendations , interagency communications , financial management , and workforce diversity management .

in particular , gao recommended that senior leaders at the ntsb develop a specific strategy for maximizing the utility and utilization of the ntsb's cost accounting system .

current issues that may arise in the context of proposed legislation reauthorizing the ntsb , or in the course of more general congressional oversight , include the adequacy of staffing resources and management of the ntsb academy .

current safety issues relevant to the ntsb mission include the recoverability of vehicle recorders involved in aviation and maritime accidents , privacy of data collected aboard transportation vehicles or in the course of investigations , and the potential use of recorder data for purposes other than accident investigation and reconstruction .

additionally , legislation considering railroad safety introduced in the 114 th congress directly addresses ntsb funding and resources for railroad accident investigations .

in 2008 , the ntsb had requested a staff increase of roughly 22% starting in fy2008 , an increase it believed was necessary to adequately carry out its mission .

over the past decade , ntsb staffing has increased by roughly half that amount , about 12% above the fy2007 headcount of 378 .

additionally , the ntsb has developed a five - year strategic human capital plan .

that plan endeavors to address gaps in mission - critical competencies , assure leadership succession , and increase workforce diversity .

despite the increased staffing , the ntsb has cited limited resources as a factor in the extended duration of a number of accident investigations and as the reason for its failure to investigate some pipeline accidents and a large number of railroad accidents , especially fatal grade crossing and trespasser accidents that the ntsb is statutorily mandated to investigate .

in consideration of the hundreds of annual fatalities that result from railroad trespassing and grade crossing accidents , congress may debate whether the statutory requirement for the ntsb to investigate all fatal railroad accidents is appropriate or whether additional staffing is needed to meet this requirement .

congress may also consider options to enhance the ntsb's ability to recruit and retain field investigators and specialists in critical science and engineering fields , as well as professionals with unique operational experience in the various transportation modes .

the ntsb has raised specific concerns about potential staffing shortages due to retirements and emerging skill gaps in certain management and mission - critical occupations .

data on the ntsb's abilities to meet its statutory requirements for accident investigation suggest that ongoing staffing challenges are most acute in its office of railroad , pipeline , and hazardous materials .

the national transportation safety board amendments act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-424 ) gave the ntsb authority to enter into agreements for facilities , technical services , and training in accident investigation theory and practice .

in 2000 , the ntsb awarded a 20-year contract for a training site to the george washington university ( gwu ) .

construction of the ntsb training center , located on the loudon county campus of gwu in ashburn , va , was completed in august 2003 .

the costs and benefits of the facility have been a long - standing concern .

p.l .

109-443 required the ntsb to develop and implement a plan to attain financial self - sufficient operation of the training center .

however , the training center has not been able to achieve self - sufficiency , and consistently operates at a deficit .

the primary purpose of the training center is to train ntsb staff and transportation industry personnel who may assist the ntsb with accident investigation and in responding to the victims of transportation disasters and their families .

the center also provides a facility to host forums and focused meetings on specific transportation safety topics .

however , revenues from fees associated with training and transportation safety - related meetings have proven inadequate to cover the costs of the facility .

in recent years , the ntsb has increased its reliance on leases and rentals of both its classroom and nonclassroom space for purposes not related to transportation safety , but it has not been able to fully recover training center costs .

a gao study of ntsb finances and business practices in 2006 concluded that "... [the] ntsb may have difficulty increasing revenues or decreasing external training costs enough to ever fully offset the training center's costs. .

also , the gao report noted that the ntsb has been in violation of the anti - deficiency act because it negotiated the lease on the ntsb academy facility as an operating lease instead of a capital lease , and did not obtain budget authority for the full term of the 20-year lease .

language to remedy this situation was not included in the ntsb reauthorization legislation .

possible remedies identified by the gao include obtaining a deficiency appropriation for the full amount of the lease , renegotiating the lease contract , terminating the lease , or obtaining authority to obligate lease payments on an annual basis .

gao concluded that vacating the space may be the most cost - effective strategy ; however , the potential benefits derived from this facility were not fully considered in gao's analysis .

because past reauthorization legislation did not address ntsb academy management practices , weighing the costs and benefits of maintaining the training center remains a specific issue for congressional oversight and possible legislation .

in a july 2013 review , gao found that the ntsb had improved its utilization of the training center .

classroom utilization increased from less than 20% prior to fy2007 to above 60% since fy2009 .

additionally , the ntsb has leased some of its unutilized nonclassroom space .

the increased utilization and lease revenue has resulted in improved cost recovery , with the annual operating deficit falling from $6.3 million in fy2004 to the $2 million - $2.5 million range in fy2013-fy2015 .

nonetheless , the facility still fails to recoup all of its operating costs .

although the utilization and operating costs of the training center may be of interest during oversight hearings , the ability of congress to make significant changes before the expiration of the ntsb's existing lease agreement may be limited .

data and voice recorders have served as important investigative tools in aviation since they were first introduced in the 1960s .

presently , two main issues exist regarding data recorders .

the first involves the ability of investigators to recover accident recorders promptly following mishaps , particularly submerged aircraft and ship recorders .

the second issue concerns privacy , particularly when it comes to public disclosures and non - accident related uses of recorder data .

recovery of recorders has proven challenging after several recent accidents: air france flight 447 crashed off the coast of brazil in june 2009 , sinking to a depth of about 13,000 feet , where the recorders remained until they were recovered and their data downloaded in may 2011 ; egyptair flight 804 crashed in the mediterranean sea on may 19 , 2016 , but its recorders were not recovered until june 16 , 2016 , and then required extensive repair before data could be extracted ; and malaysia airlines flight 370 remains missing after disappearing during a flight from kuala lumpur , malaysia , to beijing , china , on march 8 , 2014 .

the recorders have not yet been found or recovered .

in january 2015 , the ntsb issued aviation safety recommendations a - 15-1 through - 8 urging that aircraft used for overwater flights be capable of transmitting data on impact location and underwater location and carry recorders or transmitters allowing for the recovery of essential flight data parameters without the need for underwater retrieval .

the ntsb urged faa to work with icao and foreign aviation authorities to harmonize technologies and regulations pertaining to location broadcasts and flight data transmissions from accident aircraft .

the ntsb also sought protections to prevent disabling of flight recorder devices , as well as the installation and use of cockpit image recorders .

the safe aviation and flight emergency tracking act of 2015 ( h.r .

753 ) would require faa to issue regulations that certain large passenger aircraft be equipped with a means to provide continuous tracking information and technology , such as automatic deployable flight recorders , that would enable timely and cost effective recovery of the flight data and cockpit voice recorders .

while the bill is similar to the january 2015 ntsb safety recommendations , it does not cite them specifically .

also , the october 2015 sinking of the u.s. - flag cargo vessel el faro in the atlantic ocean raised concerns over the ability to locate and recover maritime voyage data recorders .

the el faro and its data recorder , which was affixed to its mast , sank to a depth of about 15,000 feet .

the recorder was recovered in august 2016 , 10 months after the accident .

in general , under the international convention for the safety of life at sea ( solas ) , certain passenger vessels and large cargo vessels making international voyages are required to carry voyage data recorders .

the recorders can be either retrievable fixed - mount units , like the one carried on el faro , or float - free units .

revised regulations implemented in 2014 stipulate that new ships and newly installed recorders must consist of both a retrievable fixed - mount unit and a float - away component in addition to onboard long - term data storage , but ships with previously installed units have not been required to upgrade .

newer recorders must also capture additional parameters and capture data for greater lengths of time .

while the ntsb has not made specific recommendations regarding the recovery or survivability characteristics of maritime voyage data recorders , concerns over data recovery may prompt congressional interest in potential options to assist investigators in the recovery of data from vessels lost in deep water .

event recorders are assisting accident investigators across all modes of transportation , including rail , trucking , and passenger cars .

the increasing ability to collect data , voice , and video recordings of accident events is , however , raising questions about privacy and the potential use of these data outside the scope of investigative proceedings .

the driver privacy act of 2015 ( s. 766 ) would prohibit access to data recorded or transmitted by an event data recorder installed in a passenger motor vehicle by someone other than the owner or lessee of the vehicle , unless retrieved when authorized by a court or other judicial or administrative authority in a manner that comports with standards for admission as evidence ; with the owner's or lessee's consent for any specified purpose , including vehicle diagnostics , service , or repair , or enrollment in a subscription service ; pursuant to an ntsb or dot investigation or inspection , provided that personally identifiable information is not disclosed , except for the vehicle identification number , which may be disclosed to the manufacturer ; for the purpose of assessing or facilitating emergency medical response to a motor vehicle crash ; or for traffic safety research so long as personally identifiable information is not disclosed .

the bill would also require the national highway traffic safety administration to complete a study , provide a report to congress , and promulgate regulations concerning the appropriate amount of time event data recorders should capture and record for retrieval vehicle - related data needed to investigate the causes of motor vehicle crashes .

the may 2015 derailment of an amtrak passenger train in philadelphia , pa , and a number of derailments of freight trains hauling flammable fuels have prompted increased interest in railroad accident investigations and the implementation of safety recommendations pertaining to railroad safety .

as previously noted , the ntsb has stated that it lacks adequate resources to investigate all railroad accidents that it is required by statute to investigate .

while specific ntsb reauthorization legislation has not been introduced in the 114 th congress , the comprehensive transportation and consumer protection act of 2015 ( s. 1732 ) specifies specific authorization of appropriations to the ntsb for railroad accident investigations of $6.3 million in fy2016 ; $6.4 million in fy2017 ; $6.5 million in fy2018 ; and $6.6 million in fy2019 .

the bill would also address several ntsb railroad safety recommendations .

it would require the development of specific plans for positive train control systems , and would establish authority for awarding grants to implement these plans .

it would also direct dot to carry out a study examining the possible effectiveness of positive train control systems and related technologies on reducing highway - rail grade crossing accidents .

