member - constituent communications serve a vital role in representative government .

if information about legislative activity cannot easily flow from members to constituents , citizens will be less capable of drawing policy judgments regarding congressional actions .

likewise , if constituents cannot easily communicate their preferences to members , congressional action is less likely to reflect the interests of the governed .

constituent communication is one of the basic building blocks of a representative democracy .

throughout american history , concerns about this vital democratic connection have underpinned the existence of the franking privilege , which for much of the 19 th century allowed not only members to send mail without personal cost , but also constituents to send mail to congress free of charge .

technological changes during the 19 th and early 20 th centuries — most notably the rise of mass newspapers , the invention of the telephone , and advances in transportation that allowed members to travel more easily — aided members and constituents in exchanging information with each other .

until the late 20 th century , most member - constituent interactions consisted of four forms of communication — postal mail ; telephone calls ; press releases , including through newspapers and other media ; and face - to - face meetings .

although members continue to use these traditional modes of interaction , the use of new electronic communications technology is dramatically increasing .

for example , prior to 1995 , there were virtually no email exchanges between members and constituents .

more recently , the volume of emails received by the house of representatives has come to dwarf the volume of postal mail , while the amount of postal mail sent to congress has continued to decline .

member official websites , blogs , youtube channels , and facebook pages — all nonexistent 20 years ago — also receive significant traffic .

in less than 20 years , the entire nature of member - constituent communication has been transformed , perhaps more than in any other period in american history .

the rise of such electronic tools has altered the traditional patterns of communication between members and constituents .

electronic technology has reduced the marginal cost of member - constituent communications ; unlike postal letters , members can reach large numbers of constituents for a fixed cost , and constituents can reach members at virtually no cost .

the relay of information from capitol hill to the rest of the country ( and vice versa ) has been reduced to at times an instantaneous exchange .

as soon as something happens in congress , it can be known widely in real time .

members can now reach large numbers of citizens who are not their own constituents .

these changes have wide - ranging implications for the work of congress .

they are altering how members organize their personal offices and influencing how members manage their legislative activities on and off the floor .

and , perhaps most importantly , they are changing the nature of representation in the united states , as members can more easily engage wider political and policy constituencies , in addition to their core interactions with their geographic constituencies .

this report is divided into five parts .

first , it discusses the role of constituent communications in a representative democracy , and briefly reviews the historical development of constituent communications in the united states .

second , it reviews the current nature of electronic communications in congress .

third , it discusses how existing laws , rules , and regulations might apply to social media .

fourth , it discusses some of the strategic opportunities and challenges social media presents to member offices .

finally , it presents some concluding observations that cover both the public nature of social media and the changing nature of representation .

since the continental congress , constituents have been communicating with their elected representatives .

how communication occurs , however , has changed significantly .

changes in congressional communications technology and use can be considered in three groups: 1. historical communications ( eg , postal mail , telephone calls , press releases , and face - to - face meetings ) , 2. electronic communications ( eg , email and websites ) , and 3. social media ( eg , web 2.0 , twitter , facebook , and other social media platforms ) .

the rise electronic communication has altered the traditional communication between members and constituents .

unlike postal letters , members can reach large numbers of constituents for a fixed cost , and constituents can reach members at virtually zero cost .

likewise , information gets from capitol hill to the rest of the country much more quickly , to the point that as soon as something happens in congress , it can be known everywhere in real time .

finally , members can easily reach large numbers of citizens who are not their own constituents .

both the house and the senate have adopted formal social media policies to guide representatives and senators on the appropriate use of official resources in support of their offices' social media policy .

the house and senate policies , however , are not identical and treat the adoption of individual social media platforms in different ways .

as social media continues to evolve , regulations may continue to evolve as well .

as was discussed above under " the nature of electronic communications ," the decision to adopt and use social media as a constituent communications tool has important implications for member office operations .

the cost , speed , and scope of social media present members with new opportunities to communicate with constituents and wider audiences .

the nature of electronic communications presents unique challenges for members of congress .

these include challenges in the areas of office operations , communications strategies , and constituent representation .

since the continental congress , individual citizens have been corresponding with their elected representatives .

over time , how these communications took place and the expectations for response have changed .

as the speed of communications has increased and the real and marginal costs decreased , the type of information that members of congress can communicate and the scope of individuals they communicate with have increased .

as this report has discussed , the volume of information that is sent and received by members' offices and the ability for representatives and senators to communicate with more than just their geographic constituencies have created unique challenges and opportunities for constituent communications .

the nature of communications between members of congress and constituents is evolving .

in light of the constant change , several potential implications exist for the continued use of social media as a communications tool .

these include the public nature of social media and further consequences for representation .

a major difference exists between engaging in online conversations versus traditional in - person discussions or written letters or emails .

whereas postal mail and email are private conversations between the senders , most social media posts are available for public inspection by anyone who visits the users "wall," "feed," or timeline .

additionally , hidden costs may be associated with adopting social media .

for example , one study reiterates that the decision to use third - party social media software requires data to be owned by the third - party , not by the government entity establishing the account .

further , as one observer noted , "agencies cannot opt out of revisions of the technology .

they cannot hire contractors to outsource changes or request customization of services to platforms to accommodate government needs .

public managers in charge of social media accounts are therefore exposed to constant changes of the platforms and at the same time have to deal with emergent citizens and employee behavior that challenge government's one - directional communication paradigm. .

the location of congressional data on non - congressional servers is a potential concern .

to address these concerns the house and senate have established policies for the use of third - party websites and the linkage of official house.gov or senate.gov webpages to those services .

finally , privacy concerns beyond who "owns the data" exist in the online world .

information posted to social media sites potentially exists for everyone to see , even those for whom the information was not intended .

both the house and the senate have developed privacy policies to help guide representatives and senators on the content of websites and to remind users that information posted to sites is considered public information .

these policies could impact how a representative or senator chooses to use social media and whether twitter , facebook , or other platforms are helpful to a member with his or her representational responsibilities .

the decision to adopt and use social media has broader implications than just the ability to disseminate information or to gauge constituent positions on policy issues .

for individual members , there are clear benefits to using social media .

engaging with individuals on social media provides the potential for a higher political profile both inside and outside the house or senate .

this could translate into greater opportunity to influence public policy .

while there is little hard empirical evidence , analysts have suggested that some members are beginning to alter their representational strategies , leveraging the power of social media to engage broader audiences to advance their policy and political goals .

the interaction of such "surrogate" representation and traditional district and state representation may be a subject of interest as social media evolves .

certain things , of course , have not changed .

first , only people in a district or state can vote for a member of congress .

second , district offices have to be in the district and franked mail still can only be sent to the district .

so , while members might use electronic communications to expand their "constituencies," they will likely always be primarily tied to a geographic district or state .

nevertheless , the evolving use of social media may make the relationship between national and local issues more complex .

