in recent years , members of both chambers have introduced legislation that would reauthorize , amend , add , or eliminate programs and activities undertaken by the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) .

this report briefly summarizes samhsa's major programs and activities and describes the agency's organizational structure .

this report does not address specific legislation that would amend samhsa's statutory authorities ; however , it points to the sections of statute relevant to each of samhsa's programs and activities , which may be helpful as congress considers potential changes .

the appendix provides an overview of samhsa's budget , excerpted from crs report r44375 , samhsa fy2017 budget request and funding history: a fact sheet .

more detailed descriptions and funding levels for samhsa's programs and activities are available in samhsa's annual budget request .

samhsa's major programs and activities include two block grants , numerous discretionary grants and other activities known as programs of regional and national significance ( prns ) , several other grant programs , and data collection and related activities .

samhsa is organized in four centers supported by headquarters offices , regional administrators , and advisory councils and committees .

samhsa estimates that it will support 665 full - time employee equivalents in fy2016 and fy2017 .

most ftes ( more than 500 ) are attributed to a category in samhsa's budget that does not correspond to a specific center or office .

samhsa carries out most of its programs and activities through three statutorily established centers focusing on mental health services , substance abuse treatment , and substance abuse prevention .

samhsa's fourth center — which is not explicitly established in statute — focuses on activities such as collecting data and providing analytic support .

the center for mental health services ( cmhs ) has primary responsibility for promoting prevention and treatment of serious mental illness ( smi ) among adults and serious emotional disturbance ( sed ) among children .

cmhs is responsible for leading efforts to increase access to mental health services and improve their quality .

phsa title v , part b , subpart 3 establishes cmhs , lists the director's duties , and authorizes various programs .

the csat director's duties include administering the community mental health services block grant ( mhbg ) , the projects for assistance in transition from homelessness ( path ) program , and the protection and advocacy for individuals with mental illness ( paimi ) program .

phsa section 561 requires the hhs secretary , acting through the cmhs director , to award grants under the children's mental health services program .

currently all other cmhs programs fall under the category of mental health prns .

the center for substance abuse treatment ( csat ) has primary responsibility for promoting community - based treatment and recovery services for individuals with substance use disorders .

csat is responsible for leading efforts to increase access and decrease barriers to effective treatment ; closing the gap between demand and capacity for treatment ; promoting evidence - based practices ; and strengthening treatment systems ( among other responsibilities ) .

phsa title v , part b , subpart 1 establishes csat , lists the director's duties , and authorizes various programs .

the csat director's duties include administering the substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant .

currently all of csat's other programs and activities fall under the category of substance abuse treatment prns .

the center for substance abuse prevention ( csap ) has primary responsibility for preventing misuse ( and underage use ) of alcohol , tobacco , prescription drugs , and illegal drugs .

csap is responsible for leading the development of effective prevention policies , programs , and services , and enabling states , local communities , and organizations to adopt such policies , programs , and services ( among other responsibilities ) .

phsa title v , part b , subpart 2 establishes csap , lists the director's duties , and authorizes various programs .

currently all of csap's programs and activities fall under the category of substance abuse prevention prns .

csap works with csat to administer the substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant ( sabg ) , which includes a 20% set - aside for prevention .

the center for behavioral health statistics and quality ( cbhsq ) has primary responsibility for collecting and analyzing behavioral health statistics .

it is one of three units within executive agencies that have statistical work as their principal mission .

cbhsq is responsible for designing and implementing data collection and analysis projects , advising the samhsa administrator and the hhs secretary on behavioral health statistics , and working with other agencies to develop federal health statistics policy ( among other responsibilities ) .

unlike samhsa's other centers , cbhsq is not explicitly established in statute ; however , some of its activities are explicitly authorized ( albeit without explicit authorizations of appropriations ) .

for example , phsa section 505 requires the hhs secretary , acting through the samhsa administrator , to collect specified data relevant to mental illness and substance abuse .

cbhsq's data collection programs include the national survey on drug use and health ( nsduh ) and the behavioral health services information system ( bhsis ) , among others .

cbhsq maintains a data archive and conducts research on behavioral health access , cost , quality , outcomes , policy , and practices .

cbhsq also maintains the national registry of evidence - based programs and practices ( nrepp ) .

cbhsq is responsible for agency - wide initiatives such as efforts to develop the behavioral health workforce .

key offices within samhsa's headquarters are described briefly below .

the office of the administrator is responsible for managing and directing the agency , leading policy and program development , and working with the office of the secretary in hhs ( among other responsibilities ) .

the office of policy , planning , and innovation is responsible for determining the approach to identify and adopt policies and practices that improve outcomes of behavioral health services ; collaborating with other agencies to facilitate adoption of data - driven policies and practices ; and responding to requests under the freedom of information act ( among other responsibilities ) .

the office of behavioral health equity is responsible for coordinating samhsa's efforts to ensure equitable access to high - quality behavioral health care and to reduce disparities in health outcomes ; strategically focusing investments in underserved populations ; and supporting behavioral health workforce development ( among other responsibilities ) .

the office of tribal affairs and policy is responsible for supporting agency efforts to implement the tribal law and order act of 2010 ( title ii of p.l .

111-211 ) and working on behavioral health issues affecting tribal communities in collaboration with tribal governments , tribal organizations , other samhsa offices and centers , and other federal agencies ( among other responsibilities ) .

the office of communications is responsible for guiding the agency's strategic communications plan , managing its online presence , interacting with the media , and consulting with other centers and offices on outreach and engagement strategies ( among other responsibilities ) .

the office of financial resources is responsible for all functions of the chief financial officer , including advising the samhsa administrator on alignment between legislation , agency policies , and the agency's budget , financial management , and program priorities ; providing the financial , cost , and performance information necessary to manage programs ; reducing waste , fraud , and abuse ; and improving asset management ( among other responsibilities ) .

the office of management , technology , and operations is responsible for administrative services , human resources management , and information technology ( among other responsibilities ) .

hhs has 10 regional offices to ensure that "the department maintains close contact with state , local , and tribal partners and addresses the needs of communities and individuals served through hhs programs and policies. .

samhsa's regional administrators represent samhsa within their regions ; promote behavioral health initiatives ; collaborate with other federal agencies ; provide support ( eg , technical assistance ) to stakeholders ; and periodically report on relevant trends , issues , and policies .

to help draw advice from mental health and substance abuse professionals and members of the public , samhsa has several advisory councils and committees: samhsa national advisory council cmhs national advisory council csat national advisory council csap national advisory council drug testing advisory board advisory committee for women's services tribal technical advisory committee phsa sections 501 and 222 ( respectively ) require the samhsa administrator to "establish such peer review groups and program advisory committees as are needed" and allow the hhs secretary to "appoint such advisory councils or committees ... as [she] deems desirable ... for the purpose of advising [her] in connection with any of [her] functions. .

some of the advisory councils and committees are explicitly required in statute .

phsa section 502 requires the hhs secretary to appoint an advisory council for samhsa and each of its three statutorily established centers ( cmhs , csat , and csap ) .

phsa section 501 requires the samhsa administrator to appoint an associate administrator for women's services , who must establish an advisory committee for women's services .

hhs has a tribal consultation policy , under which each division within hhs ( including samhsa ) must have "an accountable consultation process to ensure meaningful and timely input by tribal officials in the development of policies that have tribal implications" ( among other requirements ) .

samhsa's tribal technical advisory committee is also consistent with a 2000 executive order and a 2004 presidential memorandum .

samhsa's budget and appropriations fall under four categories: ( 1 ) mental health , ( 2 ) substance abuse treatment , ( 3 ) substance abuse prevention , and ( 4 ) health surveillance and program support .

the first three of these categories correspond to samhsa's three statutorily established centers ; however , the fourth category does not correspond to the remaining center .

cbhsq ( $120 million in fy2016 ) does not appear as a line item in samhsa's budget ; it is funded by a set - aside in the sabg , a portion of the appropriation for health surveillance and program support , transfers from the phs evaluation tap ( described below ) , and transfers from the prevention and public health fund ( described below ) .

the following is excerpted from crs report r44375 , samhsa fy2017 budget request and funding history: a fact sheet .

funding sources the total amount of funding available to samhsa ( i.e. , total program level ) traditionally includes discretionary budget authority provided in annual appropriations acts , public health service ( phs ) program evaluation set - aside funds , prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) transfers , and data request and publications user fees .

also , samhsa's fy2017 budget request proposes new mandatory spending that , if enacted , would be in addition to the budgetary resources described below .

discretionary budget authority .

the main source of funding for samhsa is the discretionary budget authority it receives through the annual appropriations process .

samhsa is funded through the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( labor - hhs - ed ) appropriations act .

phs program evaluation set - aside funds .

the phs evaluation tap allows the hhs secretary to redistribute a portion of eligible phs agency appropriations for program evaluation across hhs .

in the annual labor - hhs - ed appropriations acts , congress specifies the maximum percentage for the set - aside and directs specific amounts of funding from the tap to a number of hhs programs .

prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) transfers .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) established the prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) and provided it with a permanent annual mandatory appropriation .

pphf funds are to be transferred by the hhs secretary for prevention , wellness , and public health activities .

pphf funds are available to the hhs secretary on october 1 of each year , when the new fiscal year begins .

the administration's annual budget proposal for the pphf reflects its intended distribution and use of the funds .

data request and publications user fees .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .

113-76 ) , authorized samhsa to collect fees "for the costs of publications , data , data tabulations , and data analysis completed under [phsa title v] and provided to a public or private entity upon request , which shall be credited to this appropriation and shall remain available until expended for such purposes. .

fy2017 budget request and funding history table a - 1 presents samhsa's fy2017 budget request in the context of samhsa's funding history since fy2014 .

program - level funding is shown in bold for each major budget account .

phs evaluation funds , pphf transfers , and one of the proposed new mandatory spending programs are shown as "non - adds" in parentheses .

all three proposed new mandatory spending programs , phs evaluation funds , pphf transfers , and user fees are subtracted from program - level funding to show discretionary budget authority .

