interest in the eastern mediterranean as a natural gas resource base has been growing since israel made its first large - scale natural gas discovery in 2009 .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

the tamar field off the israeli coast was the first of a series of large - scale natural gas discoveries in the region .

significant subsequent discoveries have been made in israel ( leviathan ) , cyprus ( aphrodite ) , and egypt ( zohr ) , while lebanon has been actively trying to assess its resources .

in 2010 , the united states geological survey ( usgs ) estimated that there could be up to an additional 122 trillion cubic feet of undiscovered natural gas resources in the levant basin , which underlays a large portion of the eastern mediterranean sea .

the usgs report also indicated that there could be up to 1.7 billion barrels of recoverable oil in the levant basin , making future oil discovery possible .

however , the downturn in global oil and natural gas prices , starting in mid - 2014 , has constrained the development of resources and made markets more competitive .

projects that are deemed costly , difficult , or problematic have been put on hold in many circumstances .

many companies no longer have the financial resources or motivation to develop resources in challenging environments .

for the eastern mediterranean , this has meant a slowdown in developing some of the natural gas that has been discovered , delaying the exploration for new discoveries , and requiring greater effort to find markets for the region's natural gas .

europe , given its proximity to the eastern mediterranean , is the most logical market for eastern mediterranean natural gas production .

in the aggregate , though , european natural gas consumption has generally been in decline since 2010 , offsetting some of the decline in european production .

imports to europe rose by more than 10% in 2015 , negating the drop in imports from 2011 to 2014 .

should eastern mediterranean natural gas enter the european natural gas market , it will face strong competition from europe's traditional suppliers — russia , norway , and algeria — as well as from u.s. liquefied natural gas ( lng ) exports , which started in 2016 .

for the most part , the eastern mediterranean countries either do not use natural gas as a fuel ( i.e. , cyprus and lebanon ) or are essentially self - sufficient in natural gas ( i.e. , israel and syria ) ( see figure 2 and table 1 ) , except for greece and turkey , which are heavily dependent upon imports .

egypt , which has large natural gas resources , started importing natural gas in 2015 to meet its subsidized demand ( table 1 data is from 2014 and shows egypt as a net exporter of natural gas ) .

egypt's situation may change in the medium term if it can curb its subsidies for natural gas or change its policies to promote more natural gas development .

development of the region's natural gas resources could meet the potential growing needs of most of the countries in table 1 , and add some diversification of supply for turkey .

for this to occur , many geopolitical hurdles would need to be overcome and new infrastructure would have to be built .

although the relatively recent discoveries are large for the region , they represent only a small amount globally .

the natural gas reserves of the countries represented in table 1 are less than 1.5% of the world's reserves .

regional production in 2014 was under 2% of global production , while consumption was over 3% .

cyprus is politically and territorially divided between the greek cypriot republic of cyprus and turkish cypriot administered area of northern cyprus .

efforts by the republic of cyprus and other eastern mediterranean countries — most notably israel — to agree on a division of offshore energy drilling rights without a plan for unification of the island have been opposed by turkey and turkish cypriots .

the republic of cyprus appears to anticipate considerable future export revenue from drilling in the aphrodite field , a natural gas field off cyprus's southern coast .

however , contention on this issue appears to have been deemphasized in negotiations between greek and turkish cypriots , which have resumed via u.n. mediation following the election of mustafa akinci as turkish cypriot leader in april 2015 .

cyprus is heavily dependent on foreign oil imports to meet its energy needs ( see figure 3 ) .

most electricity in cyprus is generated by oil - fired power plants .

domestically using gas from the aphrodite field could help relieve some of this dependence and natural gas could supplant oil as the primary fuel for power generation .

however , using natural gas for power generation would require new infrastructure to be built , especially natural gas - fired fueled power plants .

relieving dependence on oil imports for power generation could help cyprus reduce carbon emissions .

the egyptian government's attempt to spark economic growth in order to stave off public unrest has had mixed results .

in 2015 , egypt's economy grew at its fastest rate ( 4.2% ) since 2010 .

on the other hand , egypt's government is facing a shortage of dollar - denominated currency , which is affecting its ability to import food and fuel .

additionally , tourism receipts in 2015 have declined because of terrorism fears , as have revenues from transit fees from the suez canal , a major source of foreign exchange .

although egypt is a large producer of natural gas , it became a net importer in 2015 , primarily because of government policies subsidizing domestic consumption .

the country's budget outlays have benefitted by the drop in prices for its imports of natural gas and oil .

natural gas is the largest source of energy in egypt , accounting for just under half of primary energy consumption ( see figure 4 ) .

in addition , natural gas fueled 77% of egypt's electricity generation in 2013 .

oil is also a major component of egypt's domestic energy mix .

egypt is a major producer of both natural gas and oil , and has yet to begin utilizing large quantities of renewable energy .

rivalries in the wider middle east region have exacerbated recurring challenges for lebanon , which have contributed to a divided government and a weakened business environment .

a politically and communally diverse cabinet , led by prime minister tammam salam since early 2014 , has not made major steps toward development of lebanon's energy resources .

lebanon is almost entirely dependent on oil imports for its energy consumption ( see figure 5 ) .

lebanon does not currently consume any natural gas .

repeated attacks on the arab gas pipeline from egypt , which has supplied lebanon with gas in the past , have made it infeasible for lebanon to import natural gas .

israeli officials routinely express optimism that the economic promise of israel's energy resources can attract the industrial help it needs to be realized , and this optimism may prove justified .

however , given that israel does not have a significant offshore exploration and production ( e&p ) sector , it relies on the expertise of international companies .

the obstacles posed by antitrust deliberations , along with other energy industry concerns about israel's regulatory regime pertaining to domestic consumption requirements and possible price ceilings could create difficulties for future development .

israel has 6.4 tcf of proven reserves , which are the second largest in the eastern mediterranean region behind egypt .

after making significant natural gas discoveries in 2009 and 2010 , israel began to focus its future energy needs on natural gas , including discussions on exporting natural gas regionally and globally .

israel has begun to integrate natural gas into its energy mix , comprising almost 30% of its 2015 primary fuel needs .

although the united states is essentially independent in its natural gas resources , it has expressed interest in the eastern mediterranean natural gas resources , particularly in the development of israel's resources .

congress and the obama administration have undertaken a variety of efforts in regard to the region's natural gas .

in may 2016 , senators murkowski and cantwell sent a letter to the secretary of energy , ernest moniz , regarding the establishment of the u.s. - israel energy center .

the creation of the center was included in the u.s. - israel strategic partnership act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-296 ) .

in addition to the creation of the center , the act stated , " ... united states - israel energy cooperation and the development of natural resources by israel are in the strategic interest of the united states. .

both the united states and israel , albeit on a different scale , have undergone major transformations in their energy sectors , especially in natural gas development .

the new law ( in section 12 ) highlights these changes and encourages closer ties in the energy sector between the two countries .

additionally , h.r .

5066 was introduced during the 114 th congress , which would authorize the president to provide assistance to israel in protecting its offshore natural gas fields .

in may 2016 , the state department's u.s. special envoy and coordinator for international energy affairs , amos hochstein , delivered the keynote address at lebanon's third forum on oil and gas .

according to press accounts , hochstein encouraged lebanese officials to take advantage of their country's hydrocarbon potential .

the state department has been actively engaged in mediating the maritime dispute between lebanon and israel .

additionally , hochstein visited cyprus in november 2014 to discuss energy development , including cyprus' exclusive economic zone ( eez ) and issues it is having with turkey .

