the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) was created by the national flood insurance act of 1968 ( nfia ) .

the nfip received a short - term reauthorization through december 8 , 2017 , a second short - term reauthorization through december 22 , 2017 , and a third short - term reauthorization through january 19 , 2018 .

the nfip lapsed between january 20 and january 22 , 2018 , and received a fourth short - term reauthorization until february 8 , 2018 .

the nfip lapsed for approximately eight hours during a brief government shutdown in the early morning of february 9 , 2018 , and was then reauthorized until march 23 , 2018 .

the nfip received a sixth reauthorization until july 31 , 2018 , a seventh reauthorization until november 30 , 2018 , an eighth reauthorization until december 7 , 2018 , a ninth reauthorization until december 21 , 2018 , and a tenth reauthorization until may 31 , 2019 .

the last long - term reauthorization of the nfip was by the biggert - waters flood insurance reform act of 2012 ( hereinafter bw - 12 ) , from july 6 , 2012 , to september 30 , 2017 .

congress amended elements of bw - 12 , but did not extend the nfip's authorization further , in the homeowner flood insurance affordability act of 2014 ( hfiaa ) .

the nfip is managed by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , through its subcomponent the federal insurance and mitigation administration ( fima ) .

as of october 2018 , the nfip had more than 5.1 million flood insurance policies providing over $1.3 trillion in coverage .

the program collects about $3.6 billion in annual premium revenue .

nationally , as of january 2019 , about 22,355 communities in 56 states and jurisdictions participated in the nfip .

according to fema , the program saves the nation an estimated $1.87 billion annually in flood losses avoided because of the nfip's building and floodplain management regulations .

this report provides introductory information on key components of the nfip , ranging from floodplain mapping to the standard flood insurance forms .

this report will be updated as significant revisions are made to the nfip through legislation or administrative action .

however , this report does not provide detail on current or future legislative issues for congress , which are covered in a separate report .

crs also has a separate report on flood insurance and other federal disaster assistance programs .

in the original nfip statute , congress stipulated that "a program of flood insurance can promote the public interest by providing appropriate protection against the perils of flood losses and encouraging sound land use by minimizing exposure of property to flood losses. .

congress had found that postdisaster flood losses , and the subsequent federal disaster relief assistance to help communities recover from those flood losses , had "placed an increasing burden on the nation's resources" and that as a matter of national policy "a reasonable method of sharing the risk of flood losses is through a program of flood insurance which can complement and encourage preventive and protective measures. .

at the time of establishment of the nfip , as is generally still the case today , it was found that "many factors have made it uneconomic for the private insurance industry alone to make flood insurance available to those in need of such protection on reasonable terms and conditions. .

thus , the nfip essentially has two interrelated policy purposes that can be summarized as 1. to provide access to primary flood insurance , thereby allowing for the transfer of some of the financial risk of property owners to the federal government , and 2. to mitigate and reduce the nation's comprehensive flood risk through the development and implementation of floodplain management standards .

a core design feature of the nfip is that communities are not required to participate in the program by any law or other regulation .

rather , communities in the united states voluntarily participate in the nfip generally as a means of securing access to the primary flood insurance offered by the nfip .

essentially , the nfip is structured so that the availability of primary flood insurance through the nfip ( purpose #1 from above ) is tied to the adoption and enforcement of floodplain management standards by participating communities ( purpose #2 ) .

fema is only allowed to provide flood insurance to "those states or areas ( or subdivisions thereof ) " where "adequate land use and control measures" have been adopted that "are consistent with the comprehensive criteria for land management and use developed" by the nfip .

thus , communities that participate in the nfip , and therefore whose residents may access the nfip's primary flood insurance , also adopt through local or state laws minimum floodplain management standards that are described in fema regulations .

the nfip accomplishes the goal of reducing comprehensive flood risk primarily by requiring participating communities to collaborate with fema to develop and adopt flood maps called flood insurance rate maps ( firms ) .

enact minimum floodplain standards based on those flood maps .

in addition , premiums collected from the sale of insurance in the nfip finance a flood mitigation assistance ( fma ) grant program that reduces overall flood risk .

this section of the report briefly discusses each of these means of reducing comprehensive flood risk .

fema enforces two regulatory conditions — probation and suspension — for removing a participating community from the nfip .

whether or not a particular community has either been placed on probation or suspended can be found using the nfip's community status book .

notably , a community cannot be removed from the nfip because of increased or excess flood insurance claims and losses .

rather , probation and suspension only occur if the community fails to uphold its obligations related to floodplain management .

a community can be placed on probation by fema if it is found that it is failing to adequately enforce the floodplain management standards it has adopted .

as established by regulations , probation can result in a fee of $50 being charged to all policyholders in the community while the community is given time to rectify fema's concerns regarding their implementation of the floodplain management standards .

ultimately , if the community does not correct its cited deficiencies after given time periods described in regulations , the community will be suspended from the nfip by fema .

a community can also be involuntarily suspended from the nfip for either failing to adopt an approved floodplain map and an approved set of floodplain management standards within the time periods required by regulations ; or repealing or revising its floodplain management standards to a level below the minimum standards set forth in regulations .

a suspended community may be reinstated to the nfip once the relevant errors or deficiencies provoking the suspension have been resolved to meet fema's specification .

communities that have been suspended or those communities that do not participate in the nfip can face significant consequences .

primarily , members of these communities are not able to purchase primary flood insurance through the nfip , which may result in significant uninsured property risk in that community .

however , communities may elect not to participate in the nfip because they have very little flood risk to begin with , given their particular geography or climate .

in addition , if a community does not participate in , or has been suspended from , the nfip but has been previously mapped by fema for flood hazards , it is difficult for the community and policyholders to access other forms of federal assistance for areas in the floodplain .

for example , by law , no federal assistance may be provided for acquisition or construction purposes in an area that has been identified as having special flood hazards unless the property is covered by flood insurance .

likewise , federally backed mortgages still require flood insurance for properties in the sfha , so these property - owners would be required to obtain such insurance in the private market .

a community is allowed to leave the nfip at its will , but the potential consequences of that decision are similar to those if the community has been suspended .

the funding for the nfip is primarily maintained in an authorized account called the national flood insurance fund ( nfif ) .

generally , the nfip has been funded through three methods: receipts from the premiums of flood insurance policies , including fees and surcharges ; direct annual appropriations for specific costs of the nfip ; and borrowing from the u.s. treasury when the balance of the nfif has been insufficient to pay the nfip's obligations ( eg , insurance claims ) .

this section of the report briefly discusses each of these three methods of nfip funding .

the statute for the nfip does not contain a comprehensive expiration , termination , or sunset provision for the whole of the program .

rather , the nfip has multiple different legal provisions that generally tie to the expiration of key componen ts of the program .

unless reauthorized or amended by congress , the following will occur after may 31 , 2019: the authority to provide new flood insurance contracts will expire .

flood insurance contracts entered into before the expiration would continue until the end of their policy term of one year .

the authority for nfip to borrow funds from the treasury will be reduced from $30.425 billion to $1 billion .

other activities of the program would technically remain authorized following may 31 , 2019 , such as the issuance of fma grants .

however , the expiration of the key authorities described above would have varied , generally serious effects on these remaining nfip activities .

