every year , congress considers numerous pieces of legislation that would create or modify federal government programs and activities .

in many instances , the scope , duration , and area of focus intended for a program are factors that may influence how it will be funded .

the reverse can also be the case — that how congress seeks to fund a program can inform how it is structured .

once a program is established , the way in which it is funded continues to be relevant to congress for at least two reasons .

first , how a program's funding is structured may lead the population that it serves , as well as other stakeholders , to make certain assumptions about how stable its level of benefits or services will be in future years .

second , how often — and in what type of legislation — funding decisions are made creates different opportunities for congress to exercise its power of the purse .

the legislative framework for establishing and funding the activities of the federal government is based on a fundamental distinction between two types of laws ( and provisions within those laws ) — "authorizations" and "appropriations. .

a uthorizations provide legal authority for the government to act , usually by establishing , continuing , or restricting a federal agency , program , policy , project , or activity .

a ppropriations provide both the legal authority to obligate the government to make future payments from the treasury , and also the ability to subsequently make those payments .

under the congressional budget process , a funding mechanism for a particular program or purpose generally can be distilled to two essential elements — the type of funding that is provided and the source of that funding .

the funding type can be distinguished based on whether an authorization or appropriations act controls the level of spending .

in the case of mandatory spending , an authorization act not only establishes the program but also requires certain payments to be made , and thus determines the level of funding for that program .

for discretionary spending , in general , an authorization act establishes the program but the decision of how much to fund that program , if at all , is subsequently made by appropriations laws .

the funding source for either mandatory or discretionary spending may be the general fund of the treasury , which is where revenue and other collections made by the federal government are generally deposited .

in some cases , spending also may be funded through a dedicated revenue source or other types of collections that result from the business - like activities that the federal government undertakes ( referred to for the purposes of this report as dedicated collections ) .

the funding source within a funding mechanism may be established through either authorization or appropriations laws .

when seeking to understand how a particular program or activity is funded , the extent to which the funding mechanism involves an authorization act , an appropriations measure , or both is significant for a variety of reasons .

for instance , appropriations acts are enacted annually , whereas authorizations may be enacted as needed , on a multiyear or permanent basis .

in addition , congress has chosen to vest control over authorizations and appropriations in separate committees , so that the house and the senate appropriations committees have exclusive jurisdiction over annual appropriations acts , and the other legislative committees in each chamber have jurisdiction over authorizations .

as a result , funding mechanisms ( and the elements within them ) that involve appropriations acts will generally be subject to a different schedule , committee process , and method of legislative review than funding mechanisms that involve authorization acts .

the range of options that exists for funding government programs and activities has resulted in a variety of approaches across the federal budget .

the purpose of this report is to discuss these approaches and illustrate them with examples of how they have been applied in practice .

the first part of the report describes the two general funding types — discretionary and mandatory — based on the contrasting roles that authorizations and appropriations play for each type .

it also discusses how both approaches might be used to fund a single purpose ( "mixed approaches" ) .

the second part of the report explains the various budget process options that exist for the source of funds .

the report concludes by summarizing the general issues for congress when it evaluates a funding mechanism , both those that are proposed and those that already exist .

while this report describes general budget process principles as to how programs are funded , it is not exhaustive as to all possible variations that occur in practice .

in addition , while it summarizes the implications of mandatory and discretionary funding mechanisms in terms of the general budget process framework that governs them , it does not describe the budget rules that enforce that framework .

though these budget enforcement rules are outside the scope of this report , they may play a significant role in the funding mechanism that congress prefers for a particular program .

other issues that are also outside the scope of the report are types of budget authority , periods of availability for funding , and specific budget execution implications of each option ( such as program operations when funding lapses ) .

under the congressional budget process , funding mechanisms are generally classified as either discretionary or mandatory spending .

the distinction between these two approaches relates to what type of law controls the authority to obligate the federal government to make payments ( as illustrated in figure 1 ) .

the discretionary spending approach creates general or specific authority for an activity through an authorization law , but it leaves the decision as to how much that activity will actually be funded , if at all , to the annual appropriations process .

in other words , the authorization law for a discretionary spending activity neither funds that activity nor requires that funding for that activity be provided in the future .

instead , appropriations laws are what control discretionary spending .

in contrast , mandatory spending for an activity is controlled by an authorization act , usually because that activity is established and funded in the same law .

alternatively , a mandatory spending activity might be created in an authorization law that also contains provisions that legally require that funding be provided in the future .

while appropriations that finance these types of funding requirements are provided in appropriations laws , they are not technically controlled by those laws .

this alternative approach is often referred to as "appropriated mandatory" spending .

the following section explains the contrasting roles of authorizations and appropriations in discretionary and mandatory funding mechanisms .

this discussion includes a number of examples of funding mechanisms for various federal government programs to illustrate both basic principles and variation in practice .

because , in practice , certain programs are funded by more than one type of mechanism , this section also explains and illustrates mixed approaches .

finally , each discussion of the different funding types concludes with a general summary of their implications for budgetary decisionmaking within congress , and how each navigates tradeoffs between frequent congressional review and funding predictability .

in general , funding mechanisms have two categories of funding sources ( as illustrated by figure 2 ) .

the first is the general fund of the treasury ( gf ) , which is the default place where federal government collections are deposited and thereafter are available to be used by the treasury to meet spending obligations .

the second category is dedicated collections that fund specific programs or activities and are not deposited into the gf .

those collections may be authorized on a permanent basis or for a specified period of time .

both types of funding sources may be used to fund either mandatory or discretionary spending .

in the case of dedicated collections , the authority to make the collections and the authority to expend them may be controlled by the same law or by different laws .

this section explains the two types of funding sources and how they fit within the framework of discretionary and mandatory spending .

examples of each of these funding source types are included to illustrate the variety of options that exist across the federal government .

because a program may have more than one type of funding source , this section also includes a discussion of mixed sources .

the general implications of each type of funding source for budgetary decisionmaking in congress , and their tradeoffs between frequent congressional review and funding predictability , are also summarized .

as discussed and illustrated throughout this report , how congress chooses to structure a funding mechanism in a particular context may be based on a number of budget process and programmatic considerations .

the congressional budget process considerations for funding mechanisms are generally related to the relative roles that authorizations and appropriations may assume in spending decisionmaking .

whether congress prefers that control over spending be vested in one , the other , or both processes depends on a number of factors .

for instance , what congress views to be the optimal time interval for budgetary decisions — annual , multiyear , or as needed — may influence whether discretionary or mandatory funding is provided .

another issue is the budget process context in which spending should be decided — whether it should be in competition with other programs that are funded through the appropriations process , or whether it should be funded through a mandatory funding mechanism that is evaluated separately as part of the authorization process .

congress also may assess the potential funding sources for a program in light of budget process considerations .

the use of the gf as a funding source indirectly associates that funding mechanism with broader budgetary decisions about the amount of general revenue that the government collects .

in contrast , the decision to establish a dedicated funding source might have the effect of narrowing the context for budgetary decisionmaking so that it focuses more specifically on that program .

in such instances , congress must decide whether the authorization process or the appropriations process is better suited to control the dedicated funding source , and whether the timing of decisionmaking should match that of the spending with which it is associated .

when selecting a funding mechanism , congress also may take into account programmatic considerations , particularly the level of stability or predictability in funding that best supports how a program is intended to function .

to some extent , this may depend on the purpose of the program , such as whether it directly or indirectly provides benefits to individuals , provides services to a specific population , or supports general government activities .

other considerations may include the extent to which program needs from year to year are expected to vary or be difficult to predict .

ultimately , congress has a range of options , from structuring the funding mechanism so that it guarantees funding to meet whatever program needs arise to providing funding in such a way that the program is required to adapt to set funding levels that vary from year to year .

program needs also might be a factor in determining the most appropriate funding source for a program .

in some cases , user fees or other dedicated collections to support a program might be an option .

in others , congress might seek to set up a special tax or revenue stream to provide a stable source of budgetary resources for the future .

or , congress might prefer that the program be funded through the gf .

for all of these options , the time interval for which the funding source is established also affects the extent to which the funding mechanism for a program promotes either funding predictability for the program that it funds , or regular congressional review .

in summary , some of the many factors that congress may take into consideration when it is assessing potential funding mechanisms for a new or existing program include the nature of the government program or service to be provided ; whether funding stability or a guarantee of budgetary resources to meet whatever needs arise is important for the purposes or operation of the program ; whether the program could adapt and still fulfill its mission if year - to - year funding levels are variable ; how accurately the future funding needs of the program can be forecast ; how often , and by what types of legislative vehicles , the parameters of the program ( including its funding ) should be reevaluated by congress ; what funding sources besides the gf could be used for the program ; whether a program's dedicated funding source and spending from that source should be evaluated on the same or different schedules , and in the same or different legislative vehicles ; and whether congressional control over various aspects of the funding itself , including the source of the funding , should be vested in one or more authorization committees , vested in the appropriations committees , or split between both types of committees .

this report has discussed some of the inherent tensions that exist between how frequently congress makes funding decisions for a program and how stable that funding is for the program .

however , policymakers may perceive these tensions differently and have differing perspectives as to how they should be reconciled .

the actual funding mechanism that is chosen in a particular instance may be the result of a compromise between congress and the president or within congress itself .

as policymakers' perceptions of these tensions evolve and change over the course of a program's existence , the funding mechanism also may be altered to better reflect the needs of the program and the needs of congress in budgetary decisionmaking .

 table a - 1 and table a - 2 summarize the examples of various funding types and funding sources that were discussed in this report .

for further information about each of these examples , please see the relevant portion of the report: office of apprenticeship , pp .

4-5 , 19 child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) , pp .

5-6 , 17 violence against women family research and evaluation , p. 6 state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , p. 10 technical assistance for tribal child welfare programs , pp .

10-11 social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) , pp .

11 , 21-22 social services block grant ( ssbg ) , p. 12 supplemental security income ( ssi ) , p. 13 health center program , pp .

16-17 child care and development fund ( ccdf ) , child care entitlement to states , p. 17 maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting ( miechv ) , pp .

19-20 immigration examinations fee account , pp .

20-21 manufactured housing standard program , pp .

22-23 health surveillance and program support , extraordinary surveillance activities , pp .

23-24 medicare part a and b , pp .

24-25 prescription drug user fee act ( food and drug administration ) , pp .

25-2 .

