the transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies ( thud ) appropriations subcommittees are charged with drafting bills to provide annual appropriations for the department of transportation ( dot ) , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) , and six small related agencies .

title i of the annual thud appropriations bill funds dot .

the department is primarily a grant - making and regulatory organization .

its programs are organized roughly by mode of transportation , providing grants to state and local government agencies to support the construction of highways , transit , and intercity passenger rail infrastructure , while overseeing safety in the rail , public transportation , commercial trucking and intercity bus , and maritime industries .

the federal aviation administration ( faa ) is exceptional among dot's large sub - agencies in that the largest portion of its budget is not for grants but for operating the u.s. air traffic control system .

in support of that task , it employs over 80% of dot's total workforce , roughly 46,000 of dot's approximately 56,000 employees .

title ii of the annual thud appropriations bill funds hud .

the department's programs are primarily designed to address housing problems faced by households with very low incomes or other special housing needs .

these include several programs of rental assistance for persons who are poor , elderly , and / or have disabilities .

three rental assistance programs — public housing , section 8 housing choice vouchers , and section 8 project - based rental assistance — account for the majority of the department's funding .

two flexible block grant programs — the home investment partnership program and community development block grants ( cdbg ) — help communities finance a variety of housing and community development activities designed to serve low - income families .

other , more specialized grant programs help communities meet the needs of homeless persons , including those with aids .

hud's federal housing administration ( fha ) insures mortgages made by lenders to home buyers with low down payments and to developers of multifamily rental buildings containing relatively affordable units .

title iii of the thud appropriations bill funds a collection of agencies involved in transportation or housing and community development .

they include the access board , the federal maritime commission , the national transportation safety board , the amtrak office of inspector general ( ig ) , the neighborhood reinvestment corporation ( often referred to as neighborworks ) , the u.s. interagency council on homelessness , and the costs associated with the government conservatorship and regulation of the housing - related government - sponsored enterprises , fannie mae and freddie mac .

the surface transportation board , formerly an agency of dot , was made independent of dot in 2015 legislation , and now appears in title iii of the thud bill .

 table 1 shows funding trends for dot and hud over the period fy2010-fy2016 , omitting emergency funding and other supplemental funding .

the purpose of table 1 is to indicate trends in the funding for these agencies ; thus emergency supplemental appropriations are not included in the figures .

 table 2 provides a timeline of legislative action on the fy2017 thud appropriations bill .

 table 7 presents account - level funding information for hud , comparing fy2016 with the fy2017 obama administration budget request and congressional action .

it is followed by a brief summary of key highlights .

for an expanded discussion , see crs report r44495 , department of housing and urban development ( hud ) : fy2017 appropriations , coordinated by maggie mccarty .

according to press reports , the trump administration has recommended a $1.5 billion reduction in funding from the fy2016 level for the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program .

h.r .

5394 , as reported by the house appropriations committee , would provide the following for hud: $47.95 billion in gross appropriations , which is approximately $1 billion more in appropriations than was provided in fy2016 but about $1 billion less than was requested by the obama administration .

$38.7 billion in net budget authority , reflecting savings from offsets and other sources , which is about $84 million more than fy2016 .

level funding for community development block grants ( cdbg ) relative to fy2016 , which is a $200 million increase over the obama administration's requested funding level .

funding increases , to cover the cost of renewing subsidies in the section 8 tenant - based ( housing choice voucher ) and project - based rental assistance accounts ( +$560 million and +$281 million relative to fy2016 ) .

no funding for new incremental vouchers .

for hud the senate bill ( the substitute amendment to h.r .

2577 , as passed by the senate ) would provide the following: $48.4 billion in gross appropriations , which is approximately $1.5 billion more in appropriations than was provided in fy2016 but about $500 million less than was requested by the obama administration .

$39.2 billion in net budget authority , reflecting savings from offsets and other sources , which is $890 million more than fy2016 ( $1.5 billion more in appropriations and $610 million more in savings from offsets , excluding disaster funding ) .

level funding for community development block grants ( cdbg ) relative to fy2016 , which is a $200 million increase over the obama administration's requested funding level .

funding increases , largely to cover the cost of renewing subsidies in the section 8 tenant - based ( housing choice voucher ) and project - based rental assistance accounts ( +$800 million and +$281 million relative to fy2016 ) .

proposes funding for new incremental vouchers for youth aging out of foster care and homeless veterans .

the obama administration's fy2017 budget request for hud included the following: $48.9 billion in gross appropriations , which is $1.9 billion more in gross appropriations than was provided in fy2016 , excluding disaster funding .

$39.7 billion in net budget authority , reflecting savings from offsets and other sources , which is $1.3 billion more than fy2016 ( $1.9 billion more in appropriations and $600 million more in savings available from offsets ) .

increases in funding for most hud programs , including funding for new incremental section 8 housing choice vouchers .

a 7% funding cut for cdbg , with a proposal to revisit the way funding is distributed to communities .

 table 8 shows appropriations levels for the various related agencies funded within the transportation , hud , and related agencies appropriations bill .

the surface transportation board was transferred from the dot title to the related agencies title starting with fy2017 .

u.s. interagency council on homelessness ( usich ) .

the house appropriations committee - passed bill would reduce funding for the usich by $1.5 million , from $3.5 million in fy2016 to $2 million in fy2017 .

the law establishing the usich provides that it will sunset on october 1 , 2017 .

the committee report ( h.rept .

114-606 ) notes that funding is reduced in anticipation of the sunset date , states that funding could be better used to serve individuals experiencing homelessness directly , and encourages member agencies to establish working relationships that will extend beyond the usich's sunset .

the obama administration's budget requested that the sunset date be extended until october 1 , 2020 .

the senate appropriations committee - passed bill would extend the sunset date to october 1 , 2018 .

neighborworks america .

neither the house committee - passed bill nor the senate - passed bill would provide funding for foreclosure mitigation counseling administered by the neighborhood reinvestment corporation , commonly known as neighborworks america .

funding for foreclosure mitigation counseling has been provided to neighborworks america in each year since fy2008 ; this funding was intended to be temporary , and both the house and senate committee reports note that home foreclosure rates have been declining in recent years .

the obama administration's budget also did not request funding for foreclosure mitigation counseling for neighborworks america for fy2017 .

both the house committee - passed bill and the senate - passed bill ( and the obama administration's budget request ) would continue to provide funding to neighborworks america for broader community reinvestment activities , and would continue to provide other funding for housing counseling activities to hud .

