the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) , authorizes the operation of programs and activities that make federal financial assistance available to individuals who are pursuing a postsecondary education and to institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

it also authorizes a number of other activities and functions .

while the hea was last comprehensively reauthorized in 2008 under the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ; p.l .

110-315 ) , it has been amended on numerous occasions since then .

amendments to the hea in the 114 th congress include those made under the federal perkins loan program extension act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-105 ) , and the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

on wednesday , june 22 , 2016 , the house committee on education and the workforce marked up and ordered reported the following five bills that would amend selected hea programs and activities: h.r .

5528 , the simplifying the application for student aid act ; h.r .

3178 , the strengthening transparency in higher education act ; h.r .

3179 , the empowering students through enhanced financial counseling act ; h.r .

5529 , the accessing higher education opportunities act ; and h.r .

5530 , the hbcu capital financing improvement act .

this report identifies and describes how the proposals made in these five bills would amend the programs and activities authorized under the hea .

each bill is described separately .

under federal student aid need analysis procedures , a student's calculated ability to pay for higher education is known as the "expected family contribution" ( efc ) .

the efc is determined by a formula that considers the income and assets of the student and , if applicable , the student's parents or spouse .

information to calculate the efc is collected via the free application for federal student aid ( fafsa ) .

if applicable , family members who have submitted their income tax returns for the applicable tax year prior to completing the fafsa may be able to import tax information to the fafsa using the internal revenue service data retrieval tool ( irs - drt ) .

h.r .

5528 would make several changes to the fafsa completion and submission process with the intent of reducing respondent burden in completing the form .

finally , the bill would make technical changes to the calculation of the annual adjustment percentage for federal pell grants .

the hea was amended by the heoa to establish a number of provisions that require the reporting and publication of detailed information about institutions of higher education and their offerings , the students who attend them , and college costs and prices .

current requirements include the reporting and publication of this information on the college navigator website , the development of net price calculators and multi - year tuition calculators , and the publication of college affordability and transparency lists and state higher education spending charts .

h.r .

3178 would establish a college dashboard as the successor to the college navigator website , and would revise the information required to be reported on it .

the bill would also repeal the requirement to publicize college affordability and transparency lists and state higher education spending charts , revise the requirements applicable to net price calculators , and repeal the requirement for multi - year tuition calculators .

the hea requires that title iv - participating ihes make available loan entrance and loan exit counseling to certain direct loan ( dl ) borrowers , which generally provides borrowers with information relating to their direct loan terms and conditions , and with debt management strategies in the case of exit counseling .

the provision of this loan counseling is intended to provide borrowers with information about the federal student aid debt they may incur and the consequences of doing so .

h.r .

3179 would make numerous amendments to the current loan counseling requirements , with the intent of enhancing the timing , frequency , and content of the counseling to enable borrowers to make sound borrowing decisions .

title v - a of the hea authorizes the developing hispanic serving institutions ( hsis ) program , which provides grants to institutions of higher education with large undergraduate hispanic enrollments ( hispanic - serving institutions ; hsis ) to support and expand educational opportunities for hispanic students and to enhance the academic offerings and institutional stability at hsis .

h.r .

5529 would make changes to the authorized uses of grant monies awarded to hsis under the program with the intent of potentially increasing the number of hispanic physicians in the workforce and expanding the types of educational offerings at hsis , while achieving a zero budget score .

hea title iii - d authorizes the historically black college and university ( hbcu ) capital financing ( cap fin ) program , which is a loan guarantee program that offers federal assistance to approximately 100 hbcus in obtaining low - cost capital financing for campus maintenance , renovation , and construction projects .

h.r .

5530 would make several changes to the program's operations , support , and congressional oversight .

under the hbcu cap fin program , rather than directly providing capital financing loans to hbcus , ed contracts with a private , for - profit corporation to act as the designated bonding authority ( dba ) and to operate the program .

the dba issues taxable bonds on behalf of hbcu borrowers , and ed guarantees full payment on the qualified bonds issued by the dba .

bond proceeds are then used by the dba to provide low - interest loans to eligible hbcus .

hbcus must use at least 95% of an hbcu cap fin loan to complete statutorily authorized capital projects .

the remaining 5% of the loan must be deposited into a pooled escrow account , which is used to cover any delinquencies or defaults by an institution in the program .

if no institution defaults during the period in which the participating hbcu has an outstanding loan , the hbcu will receive its portion of the escrow after final loan repayment .

h.r .

5530 would replace all references to the "pooled escrow" account with the phrase "bond insurance fund. .

it has been reported that the pooled escrow account component of the hbcu cap fin program presents a problem for some state institutions because , under the laws of their state , they are prohibited from assuming the liability of another institution .

replacing the term "pooled escrow" with the term "bond insurance fund" is intended to maintain the current form and functionality of the pooled escrow account , while increasing access to the hbcu cap fin program for those hbcus for which the pooled escrow account component is a barrier to participation under state law .

in support of the hbcu cap fin program goals , the hea authorizes the secretary to provide technical assistance to eligible hbcus to prepare them to obtain and maintain a capital improvement loan , including an hbcu cap fin loan .

h.r .

5530 would authorize the secretary to provide financial counseling to eligible hbcus , along with the currently authorized technical support .

finally , hea title iii - d establishes the hbcu capital financing advisory board , which is tasked with advising ed on the capital needs at hbcus and how those needs can be met through the program .

h.r .

5530 would amend the hea to direct the hbcu capital financing advisory board to annually submit to the authorizing committees a report describing the loans currently in the program and administrative and legislative recommendations for addressing issues related to construction financing for hbcus .

