under the outer continental shelf lands act ( ocsla ) , as amended , the department of the interior ( doi ) must prepare and maintain forward - looking five - year plans — referred to by doi as "five - year programs" — that indicate proposed public oil and gas lease sales in u.s. waters over a five - year period .

in preparing each program , doi must balance national interests in energy supply and environmental protection .

the lead agency within doi responsible for the program is the bureau of ocean energy management ( boem ) .

boem's development of a five - year program typically takes place over two or three years , during which successive drafts of the program are published for review and comment .

all available leasing areas are initially examined , and the selection may then be narrowed based on economic and environmental analysis to arrive at a final leasing schedule .

at the end of the process , the secretary of the interior must submit each program to the president and to congress for a period of at least 60 days , after which the proposal may be approved by the secretary and may take effect with no further regulatory or legislative action .

as required by the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , the planning process includes a programmatic environmental impact statement ( peis ) .

the peis examines the potential environmental impacts from oil and gas exploration and development and considers a reasonable range of alternatives to the proposed plan .

public comments from stakeholders , including state governors , companies , individuals , and public interest organizations , are addressed in both the peis and the five - year program itself .

because of the stages of review and comment required under both the ocsla and nepa , the administration could not revise a finalized program — for example , to add new sales — without restarting the program development process .

however , scheduled sales could potentially be canceled ( but could not be added ) during implementation of the program , based on requirements for environmental review that are associated with each individual sale .

on november 18 , 2016 , boem released the third and final version of its oil and gas leasing program for 2017-2022 .

former secretary of the interior sally jewell issued a record of decision approving the final program on january 17 , 2017 .

the final program was revised from a march 2016 proposed program ( pp ) and a january 2015 draft proposed program ( dpp ) .

the final program schedules 11 lease sales on the ocs: 10 in the gulf of mexico region , 1 in the alaska region , and none in the atlantic or pacific regions ( see table 3 ) .

three sales proposed in earlier versions of the program — one in the atlantic and two off of alaska — were not ultimately included in the program .

the leasing decisions in boem's five - year programs may affect the economy and environment of individual coastal states and of the nation as a whole .

accordingly , congress has typically been actively involved in the planning process for the five - year programs .

under the ocsla , congress's review of boem's final program does not include approval or disapproval of the program .

however , members of congress may influence the program in other ways .

members may convey their views on the administration's proposals by submitting public comments on draft versions of the program during formal comment periods , and they may evaluate the program in committee oversight hearings .

more directly , members may introduce legislation to set or alter a program's terms .

the 114 th congress pursued all these types of influence with respect to the proposed program for 2017-2022 .

the first two sections of this report discuss the history and legal framework for boem's five - year offshore oil and gas leasing programs .

subsequent sections outline boem's development process , briefly summarize previous programs , and analyze the program for 2017-2022 .

the final section of the report discusses the role of congress , with a focus on congressional oversight and legislation related to the 2017-2022 program .

for a status report on the 2017-2022 program and discussion of issues for congress , see crs report r44692 , five - year program for federal offshore oil and gas leasing: status and issues in brief .

in 1953 , congress enacted two laws that addressed jurisdiction and rights off the coasts of the united states , including rights to regulation of subsurface oil and natural gas exploration and production .

the first of these acts , the submerged lands act , provides that coastal states are generally entitled to an area extending 3 geographical miles from their officially recognized coasts ( or baselines ) .

the second , the ocsla , defined the ocs as "all submerged lands lying seaward of" state coastal waters that are subject to the jurisdiction and control of the united states .

the ocsla has as its primary purpose "expeditious and orderly development [of ocs resources] , subject to environmental safeguards , in a manner which is consistent with the maintenance of competition and other national needs. .

as offshore activities expanded in the years following adoption of the ocsla , congress sought a means by which to allow for expedited exploration and production in order to achieve national energy goals while also providing for environmental protection , opportunities for state and local governments affected by offshore activity to have their voices heard , and a competitive bidding and leasing process .

the product was the outer continental shelf lands act amendments of 1978 .

this legislation added a number of new provisions to the ocsla , including section 18 , which mandates the creation and maintenance of an ocs leasing program to "best meet national energy needs for the five - year period following its approval or reapproval. .

these five - year programs , which include schedules for lease auctions , have provided the framework for ocs oil and gas exploration and production ever since the first one was adopted by doi in 1980 .

although the 1978 amendments were the last major overhaul to the ocsla , congress has taken other actions since that time that have altered the scope of offshore oil and gas exploration and production .

the deep water royalty relief act of 1995 attempted to encourage exploration and production in deep water by providing relief from otherwise applicable royalty payment requirements for some deepwater oil and natural gas production .

the gulf of mexico energy security act of 2006 directed the leasing of certain regions of the gulf of mexico for oil and gas exploration and production and placed a moratorium on leasing in other regions .

it also created a mechanism for sharing revenues from leasing in the region with gulf states and the land and water conservation fund .

also , starting in 2008 , congress removed language from annual interior appropriations legislation that had been in place to bar leasing and related activities in certain ocs regions .

these legislative actions helped to shape subsequent five - year programs .

the statutory framework governing boem's development of a five - year offshore oil and gas leasing program includes the ocsla as well as other federal statutes , particularly nepa and the coastal zone management act ( czma ) .

boem's development of a five - year program typically takes place over two or three years , during which successive drafts of the program are published for review and comment .

the drafts are also submitted to state governors and federal agencies and , in later stages , to congress and the president ( see discussion of consultation requirements in the " legal framework " section , above ) .

each step of the process involves additional public comment and environmental review .

after the program takes effect , individual lease sales also undergo environmental review and public comment , as do companies' exploration and development plans on leased tracts .

figure 1 outlines the steps from development of the five - year program to actual oil and gas production in an individual well .

because of the analysis and review undertaken at each stage of drafting the five - year program , the successive drafts represent a winnowing process .

the initial draft proposed program ( dpp ) examines all of the agency's available planning areas for oil and gas leasing , analyzing them according to factors in section 18 of the ocsla and considering public input , in order to develop an initial schedule of proposed lease sales .

in the next version of the plan , the proposed program ( pp ) , only those areas listed in the initial schedule undergo further analysis and environmental review .

on the basis of this more targeted analysis , boem might remove proposed sales but would not add new sales .

the same is true for the final version of the plan — the agency may remove proposed sales at the final stage but may not add new sales without reverting to an earlier stage of the process and undertaking new environmental reviews .

the steps of the process are discussed in greater detail below .

step 1 .

request for information .

boem initiates development of a new five - year program by publishing in the federal register a request for information ( rfi ) from interested parties concerning regional and national energy needs for the next five - year period ; leasing interests of possible oil and gas producers ; environmental concerns ; and concerns of state and local governments , tribes , and the public , among other issues .

the rfi for the 2017-2022 leasing program was published on june 16 , 2014 , and was followed by a comment period during which the agency received more than half a million comments .

step 2 .

draft proposed program / notice of intent for peis .

on the basis of its analysis and the public comments received in the rfi , boem publishes a draft proposed program ( dpp ) that represents the initial proposal for lease sales in the upcoming five - year period .

the dpp is the first of three decision documents leading up to boem's eventual final program .

the dpp analyzes all ocs planning areas available for leasing and identifies a preliminary list of areas proposed for lease sales over the next five years .

it also contains a preliminary schedule for the proposed sales .

boem published its dpp for 2017-2022 on january 29 , 2015 , with a comment period that closed on march 30 , 2015 .

boem received more than 1 million comments on the dpp .

when the dpp is published , boem also issues a notice of intent ( noi ) to publish a programmatic environmental impact statement ( peis ) for the proposed lease areas and seeks public input ( through a scoping process ) on the issues that should be analyzed in the peis .

the noi for the 2017-2022 program was published on january 29 , 2015 , along with the dpp .

step 3 .

proposed program / draft peis .

after further analyzing the lease sale areas proposed in the dpp according to the required factors in section 18 of the ocsla , and taking into account the public comments received on the dpp , boem publishes a proposed program ( pp ) for the five - year period .

this second version of the program refines the proposed locations and timing for ocs oil and gas lease sales .

boem submits the pp to congress , state governors , and relevant federal agencies and also solicits public comment on the program .

boem published the pp for 2017-2022 on march 15 , 2016 , with a comment period that closed on june 16 , 2016 .

the pp is accompanied by a draft peis analyzing the ocs areas that were identified for leasing at the dpp stage .

the comment period for the 2017-2022 draft peis closed on may 2 , 2016 .

step 4 .

proposed final program / final peis .

the final document published by boem is the pfp , which is based on additional analysis of the factors in section 18 of the ocsla , along with analysis of the public comments received on the pp .

the pfp is announced in the federal register and submitted to the president and congress for a period of at least 60 days .

although congress does not have an approval role for the pfp , the 60-day review period could allow for legislation to be introduced that would influence the outcome of the program .

boem published the pfp for 2017-2022 on november 18 , 2016 .

along with the pfp , boem publishes a final peis that concludes the analysis of the areas proposed for leasing .

the final peis is submitted to the president and congress along with the pfp .

boem released the final peis for the 2017-2022 program on november 18 , 2016 .

step 5 .

approval of pfp by secretary of the interior .

at least 60 days after boem submits the pfp to the president and congress , the secretary of the interior may approve the pfp , which then becomes final .

the secretary publishes a record of decision for the final program .

former secretary of the interior sally jewell issued a record of decision approving the final program for 2017-2022 on january 17 , 2017 .

since 1980 , eight distinct five - year programs and a revised version of one program have been submitted to congress .

following the 60-day review period required by the ocsla , each of these five - year programs has taken effect as an approved program .

this section briefly discusses the previous submissions , dating back to 1980 , as shown in table 1 .

the five - year programs have reflected the offshore oil and gas leasing policies of different presidential administrations , along with input from states , members of congress , and other stakeholders .

2012-2017 program .

the obama administration submitted the 2012-2017 five - year program to congress under the direction of former secretary of the interior ken salazar .

the program reflected obama administration policies on offshore energy development in the aftermath of the deepwater horizon oil spill and subsequent management reforms .

the submission consisted of 15 proposed lease sales from august 2012 through august 2017 , including 12 sales in the gulf of mexico and 3 sales in the alaska region .

two of the three alaska sales were later canceled .

as of late november 2016 , 11 lease sales had been held .

2007 - 2012 program .

the george w. bush administration prepared and submitted the 2007-2012 five - year program to congress under the direction of former secretary of the interior dirk kempthorne .

this submission reflected the bush administration's policies on domestic energy production and environmental protection .

the program went into effect in july 2007 with a schedule of 21 sales .

doi subsequently revised the schedule in accordance with a 2009 court order .

the obama administration resubmitted the program to congress in 2010 , replacing the original lease sale schedule with a schedule consisting of 16 sales , and approved the leasing program after the 60-day review period .

eleven of the 16 sales were held .

this five - year program expired in june 2012 .

2002 - 2007 program .

the 2002-2007 ocs oil and gas leasing plan was submitted to congress in 2002 under former secretary of the interior gale norton .

this submission was consistent with the george w. bush administration's policies on energy production .

the proposal consisted of a schedule of 20 lease sales , 15 of which were held before the program expired in june 2007 .

1997 - 2002 program .

the five - year program for the 1997-2002 period was submitted to congress in 1996 under former secretary of the interior bruce babbitt .

the submission was consistent with national energy policies established during the clinton administration .

the submission listed 16 sales , 12 of which were held before the program expired in june 2002 .

1992 - 1997 program .

the five - year program for the 1992-1997 period was presented to congress in 1992 under former secretary of the interior manuel lujan .

planning was consistent with george h. w. bush administration policies on energy production .

a schedule of 18 sales was submitted .

twelve sales were held before the program expired in june 1997 .

1987 - 1992 program .

this five - year program was presented to congress in 1987 under former secretary of the interior donald hodel .

the program reflected reagan administration policies .

the approved lease sale schedule contained 42 sales , 17 of which were held before the program expired in june 1992 .

1982 - 1987 program .

this submission was presented to congress in 1982 under former secretary of the interior james watt .

it was consistent with the reagan administration's national energy policies .

the plan consisted of 41 sales , 23 of which were held before the program expired in june 1987 .

1980 - 1982 program .

the original section 18 submission for domestic oil and gas leasing was envisioned during the passage of the 1978 amendments to the ocsla and was prepared starting in october 1978 .

consistent with president carter's "energy message" of april 5 , 1979 , the program was presented to congress in april 1980 under the direction of former secretary of the interior cecil d. andrus .

the proposal took effect as an approved plan in june 1980 .

under this plan , doi proposed 36 sales , 12 of which were held .

this program was succeeded by the 1982-1987 program .

lease sales held prior to 1980 .

the domestic program for oil and gas leasing prior to 1980 encompassed almost 30 years of federal government lease sales conveying more than 3,000 tracts from october 1954 through september 1980 .

in november 2016 , boem released the third and final version of its offshore oil and gas leasing program for 2017-2022 .

the final program schedules 11 lease sales in particular regions and planning areas of the ocs .

boem identifies four ocs regions , comprising a total of 26 planning areas ( see figure 2 and figure 3 ) .

the four regions are the gulf of mexico region , the alaska region , the atlantic region , and the pacific region .

the 2017-2022 final program schedules lease sales in two of these regions ( gulf of mexico and alaska ) .

the sections below discuss boem's decisions for each region — and the market conditions , resource estimates , and other factors affecting the proposals — in greater detail .

congress can influence the administration's development of a five - year program in a number of ways .

members of congress may convey their views on the administration's proposal by submitting public comments on a draft program during the formal comment periods , or they may evaluate the program in committee oversight hearings .

more directly , members may introduce legislation to set or alter a program's terms .

congress also has a role under the ocsla of reviewing each five - year program once it is finalized , but the ocsla does not require that congress directly approve the final program in order for it to be implemented .

the 114 th congress pursued all these types of influence with respect to the proposed program for 2017-2022 .

the 115 th congress could also address the 2017-2022 program — for example , through legislation to alter its terms — or could choose not to do so .

members of congress , along with other stakeholders such as state governors , interested agencies and organizations , and members of the public , may submit comments on draft versions of five - year programs .

for the 2017-2022 program , boem received 15 comments from members of congress on its initial request for information ( rfi ) , 12 comments from members on the dpp , and 5 comments from members on the pp .

some of these comments came from one or a few members , and others had many signers ( in some cases , 150 members or more ) .

some comments opposed the inclusion of certain regions in the program , whereas others supported the proposed lease sales or sought an expansion of lease areas and a higher number of sales .

the comments also addressed related issues such as seismic testing in the atlantic .

boem takes the public comments into account when developing successive drafts of a five - year program .

each draft contains an appendix summarizing the substantive comments that boem received on the previous version , including those from members of congress , and explaining boem's response to each .

boem may revise the program to partially or fully adopt a suggestion , or may explain why it declined to do so .

the house or senate may hold oversight hearings to evaluate a proposed five - year oil and gas leasing program .

such hearings help to inform members in their legislative decisionmaking concerning the program and provide an opportunity for boem to hear members' views .

after boem released the dpp for 2017-2022 , the house held a hearing on the program on april 15 , 2015 .

members and witnesses addressed issues such as the overall number of lease sales proposed for the program , whether leasing should occur in the atlantic and arctic , and whether seismic surveying should occur in the atlantic , among others .

on may 19 , 2016 , the senate energy and natural resources committee held a hearing on the pp version of the program .

members and witnesses discussed , among other issues , the pp's proposal for targeted rather than area - wide lease sales in alaska and the factors that contributed to boem's decision to remove its earlier - proposed atlantic lease sale from the 2017-2022 program .

through legislation , congress may direct specific terms for an upcoming program or modify a program that is currently in effect .

legislation could , for example , remove a scheduled lease sale , add a new lease sale , or make broader changes to the program .

the 114 th congress considered legislation that would have affected the 2017-2022 program , including the following bills , none of which was enacted .

h.r .

1487 and s. 791 would have required the secretary of the interior to use an earlier - proposed bush administration draft program for 2010-2015 ( which was not adopted ) as the final oil and gas leasing program for the years fy2015-fy2020 .

this earlier - proposed program would have held 31 lease sales , although h.r .

1487 and s. 791 direct that 3 of them would not be part of the fy2015-fy2020 program .

the bills also would have required boem to conduct , within a year of enactment , a previously proposed sale in the atlantic region that was removed from the final 2012-2017 program .

the bills would have further required that boem conduct a lease sale at least every 270 days for any ocs planning area for which there is a commercial interest in purchasing leases .

additionally , the bills would have declared the fy2015-fy2020 program to be approved under nepa , with no further environmental review needed .

h.r .

1663 would have deemed boem's dpp for 2017-2022 ( the initial draft released in january 2015 ) to be approved by the secretary as the final program and would have added lease sales to the program .

lease sales would have been added for the chukchi sea , beaufort sea , and bristol bay in the alaska region ; for all previously leased areas off the coast of virginia ; and for any other ocs area estimated to contain more than 5 billion barrels of oil or 50 trillion cubic feet of natural gas .

the bill also would have declared the final program to be approved under nepa .

in addition , the bill contained other offshore provisions , such as state revenue - sharing provisions .

h.r .

3682 would have amended the ocsla to provide , among other things , that boem five - year programs must make available for leasing at least 50% of the available unleased acreage in each ocs planning area considered to have the largest undiscovered technically recoverable oil and gas resources .

it also would have provided that the programs must include any ocs planning area estimated to contain more than 2.5 billion barrels of oil or 7.5 trillion cubic feet of natural gas .

in addition , the bill would have required boem to develop its five - year programs with the specific goal of increasing production by at least 3 million barrels of oil per day and 10 billion cubic feet of natural gas per day by 2032 .

the bill also would have amended the ocsla to allow the secretary to add additional areas to an approved leasing program under certain conditions .

boem would have been required to finalize a leasing program for 2016-2021 that complied with these provisions .

boem also would have been required to conduct a specific previously proposed lease sale in the atlantic region that was removed from the final 2012-2017 program , as well as lease sales off of south carolina and southern california .

the bill contained other offshore energy provisions as well , such as those concerning revenue sharing with the states and the organization of the doi ocean energy agencies .

h.r .

4749 would have directed the secretary to conduct a lease sale off of north carolina no later than two years after the bill's enactment , with subsequent lease sales in this area each year in the ensuing five - year period .

the bill provided for military protections and revenue sharing with coastal states .

s. 1276 and s. 2011 would have amended the ocsla with the same requirements as in h.r .

3682 for boem to lease areas with the largest undiscovered technically recoverable resources , including areas with certain amounts of oil and gas , as described above .

additionally , the bills would have reduced the portion of the eastern gulf of mexico that is under a congressional leasing moratorium and would have added eastern gulf lease sales to the 2017-2022 program .

the bills also contained state revenue - sharing and other offshore energy provisions .

the senate committee on energy and natural resources held a hearing on s. 1276 on may 19 , 2015 , and reported s. 2011 on september 9 , 2015 .

s. 1278 would have required boem to conduct lease sales in alaska's cook inlet planning area and a portion of the beaufort sea planning area in fy2016 and each fiscal year thereafter .

in addition , the bill would have required that each five - year leasing program include at least three lease sales in each of the beaufort and chukchi sea planning areas .

the bill also would have required boem to extend existing leases in the beaufort and chukchi seas to cover 20 years if the holder desires , and it would have required revenue sharing with the state of alaska .

the senate committee on energy and natural resources held a hearing on s. 1278 on may 19 , 2015 .

s. 1279 would have required the secretary to include the south atlantic planning area in the 2017-2022 program and to conduct one lease sale in that area during fy2021 and two during fy2022 .

the bill contained provisions addressing potential conflicts with military operations in the area , consultations with state governors , and geological and geophysical surveys of resources , among other matters .

the senate committee on energy and natural resources held a hearing on s. 1279 on may 19 , 2015 .

s. 3203 would have required the secretary to include , in a leasing program prepared for fy2017 through fy2023 , two lease sales in the beaufort planning area , two in the chukchi planning area , and two in the cook inlet planning area .

the bill also would have provided for increased revenue sharing with the state of alaska and would have made certain changes to lease terms for the alaska region .

the senate committee on energy and natural resources held a hearing on s. 3203 on september 22 , 2016 .

under the ocsla , the final version of each five - year program must be submitted to congress for a period of 60 days before the secretary of the interior can approve and implement the program .

however , congress does not directly approve or disapprove the program during this period .

instead , either during or outside the 60-day period , congress could introduce legislation to alter the program .

for example , in the 112 th congress , during the 60-day review period for the current five - year leasing program ( for 2012-2017 ) , representative doc hastings introduced h.r .

6082 , which would have replaced the submitted program with a congressionally developed plan containing additional lease sales , including 13 sales in the gulf of mexico , 7 sales in the alaska region , 6 sales in the atlantic , and 3 sales in the pacific .

the bill passed the house but did not become law .

as discussed above , bills under consideration in the 114 th congress would have made changes to the lease sale schedule for the 2017-2022 program .

legislation to alter the program could potentially be considered in the 115 th congress .

