title iv of the higher education act ( hea ) authorizes a group of federal student aid programs .

eligibility for many of these aid programs is contingent on student need .

student need is defined as the difference between a school's cost of attendance ( coa ) and the student's expected family contribution ( efc ) .

a student's efc is determined by a group of formulas in part f of title iv .

the formulas define the applicable family unit and establish a process to calculate the efc for the upcoming award year on the basis of the income and assets of the student and , if applicable , the student's parents or spouse .

the efc formulas in the hea are also known as the "federal methodology. .

this report will discuss the efc formulas and how current law and the department of education ( ed ) consider the financial resources and other characteristics of a student's family in calculating the efc .

this report will not discuss the application of the efc in determining and packaging student aid .

the next section of this report will discuss how ed collects and processes information from prospective students using the free application for federal student aid ( fafsa ) .

the following section will discuss how the information from the fafsa is used to determine the student's dependency status and applicable efc formula .

the subsequent sections will describe how each of these formulas translates the financial characteristics of a student's family into an efc .

the fafsa is the data collection instrument for information used to calculate the efc .

the efc is calculated on the basis of information provided on the fafsa by the student on income , assets , and other characteristics .

students who do not meet the "independent student" criteria in statute must report information on their parents .

students who are married must report information on their spouses .

information from the fafsa is shared with state agencies and institutions of higher education to help determine federal and non - federal aid .

some questions gather information that is relevant to state and institutional aid programs but not relevant to federal aid programs .

responses to these questions do not affect the efc and corresponding federal aid .

data from the fafsa are used to determine a student's dependency status and the applicable formula within that dependency status .

this is typically a two - step process .

the first step is determining the student's dependency status .

if the student meets the criteria to be classified as independent , the efc calculation will only consider the financial resources of the student and , if applicable , the student's spouse .

if the student does not meet the criteria for an independent student , the student is classified as dependent and the efc formula will consider the financial resources of both the student and the student's parents .

the second step is determining the applicant's eligibility for a simplified needs test ( snt ) .

if the applicant is eligible for the snt , the student's efc will be determined on the basis of a reduced number of income - based factors and assets will not be considered in efc calculations .

some applicants who are eligible for the snt may be further eligible for an "automatic zero" efc .

if an applicant is not eligible for the snt , the efc will be determined on the basis of the full formula , which considers both income and assets .

as noted previously , the efc formulas consider the income and assets of the student and , if applicable , the income and assets of the student's parents or spouse .

in the simplest terms , the efc is a specified portion of the applicant's "available" income and assets in excess of allowable "protections. .

to calculate available income ( or assets ) it is necessary to calculate total income ( or assets ) and then subtract the allowable protections .

figure 2 illustrates the major steps in the calculation of the efc for each dependency status .

there is some variation in the steps based on dependency status: for dependent students , separate contributions are calculated on the basis of the student's financial resources and the financial resources of the student's parents .

these contributions are then added together for the final efc .

for parents of dependent students ( but not dependent students themselves ) and independent students with dependents , there is an intermediate calculation of "adjusted available income" ( aai ) .

aai is the sum of available income and the contribution from assets .

the aai is used as the base to calculate the parents' or independent student's final contribution .

for dependent students and independent students without dependents , contributions from income and assets are calculated separately and then added together .

there is no aai step for these students .

for parents of dependent students with more than one child in college , the parental contribution is divided by the number of students in college before being added to the contribution of the student for the final efc .

similarly , independent students from families with more than one college student have their final contributions divided by the number of family members in college .

table 1 provides brief descriptions of the major factors used in the efc formulas .

this table is followed by a more thorough description of the efc formula for each dependency status .

detailed descriptions of the factors used in the efc formulas are in appendix a of this report .

notably , there is no difference in what financial resources are considered for students and relevant family members of each dependency status , though there are differences in how these financial resources are treated .

for example , total income has the same definition across dependency statuses , but the process to determine how much of an applicant's income contributes to the efc varies across dependency statuses .

the efc formula for dependent students is different than the formulas for independent students in that it considers the financial resources of both the student and the student's parents .

under this formula , one contribution is calculated for the student's parents and a second contribution is calculated for the student .

the sum of the two contributions is the applicant's efc .

this section describes the full formula for dependent students .

as noted previously , however , not all applicants are subject to the full formula .

dependent students with parental income and other characteristics that qualify for the simplified needs test are only subject to the income component of the efc formula ( not the assets component ) .

applicants who qualify for the simplified needs test with parental income that qualifies them for the automatic zero are not subject to the formula and receive a zero efc .

detailed definitions for terms in italics in this section are provided in appendix a of this report .

the calculation of the efc for an independent student without dependents considers the financial resources of the student and , if applicable , the student's spouse .

for the purposes of calculating total income and total assets of a married student , the couple is considered a single unit .

this section describes the full formula for independent students without dependents .

some independent students without dependents may qualify for the simplified needs test and therefore not be subject to the full formula .

detailed definitions for each term in italics are provided in appendix a of this report .

the calculation of the efc for an independent student with dependents considers the financial resources of the student and , if applicable , the student's spouse .

for the purposes of calculating total income and total assets of a married student , the couple is considered a single unit .

income or assets of an independent student's dependents are not considered by the efc formula .

this section describes the full formula for independent students with dependents .

as noted in the " determining eligibility for the simplified needs test " section , an independent student who qualifies for the simplified needs test is only subject to the income components of the efc formula ( not the assets components ) .

an independent student with dependents who qualifies for the simplified needs test and the automatic zero is not subject to the formula and receives a zero efc .

detailed definitions for the terms in italics are provided in appendix a of this report .

in some cases where a family is subject to unusual financial circumstances , the efc formulas may not accurately reflect a family's current ability to contribute to educational expenses .

the hea gives individual schools' financial aid administrators ( faas ) limited authority "on the basis of adequate documentation , to make adjustments on a case - by - case basis to the cost of attendance or the values of the data items required to calculate the expected student or parent contribution ( or both ) to allow for treatment of an individual eligible applicant with special circumstances. .

such adjustments are commonly known as professional judgment ( pj ) .

the hea provides a non - exhaustive list of circumstances that might qualify for pj .

these include unusually high medical , dental , or nursing home expenses as well as unusually high dependent care costs .

an applicant may also be eligible for pj if the data provided on the fafsa do not accurately reflect the family's current financial circumstances .

for example , a student may request pj if the family recently experienced a job loss of a primary earner or other substantial changes to the family's income or assets .

when exercising pj , the faa may not directly change the student's efc .

the administrator may only change suitable input data that may reduce the efc .

for example , if a family experienced the job loss of a primary earner , the faa may reduce the applicant's income level to more accurately reflect the family's anticipated income in the coming year .

in very limited cases , faas may be able to classify a student as independent when the student does not meet any of the statutory criteria for independent students ( "dependency override" ) .

guidance from ed notes that a student may not be classified as independent on the basis of total self - sufficiency or because the student's parents refuse to provide information or contribute financially to the student's education .

circumstances that may trigger a dependency override include abandonment by parents , an abusive family environment that threatens the student's safety or health , or the student being unable to locate his or her parents .

in all cases of pj , the faa is required to document evidence of the circumstances .

this documentation may be necessary if the school is audited and has to produce evidence for the adjustment of data used to calculate the efc .

appendix a .

detailed definitions and ay2018-2019 levels a number of terms and formula factors are defined similarly across efc formulas .

this appendix provides detailed definitions of each of these terms and factors .

the definitions in this report are a combination of statute and subsequent agency guidance .

in cases where a factor is quantitative and revised annually , this report provides the most recent level from ay2018-2019 .

total income total income consists of three factors: ( 1 ) adjusted gross income ( agi ) and ( 2 ) untaxed income , both of which contribute to the total income ; and ( 3 ) excludable income , which reduces it .

total income = adjusted gross income + untaxed income – excludable income agi comes from the applicant's prior - year tax return .

agi is the sum of income that is considered for the purposes of federal taxation .

if the applicant did not have to file a tax return in the prior year , the applicant declares any earnings from the prior year and these earnings substitute for the agi .

untaxed income the efc formulas consider some forms of income that are excluded from federal taxation .

untaxed income that is considered by the efc formulas includes the following: child support received for any of a parent's children , but not including foster care or adoption payments ; payments to tax - deferred pension and retirement savings plans ; ira deductions and payments to self - employed sep , simple , keogh , and other qualified plans ; tax - exempt interest income ; untaxed portions of ira distributions , excluding rollovers ; untaxed portions of pensions , excluding rollovers ; housing , food , and other living allowances paid to members of the military , clergy , and others ( including cash payments and cash value of benefits ) , not including the value of on - base military housing or the value of a basic military allowance for housing ; veterans noneducation benefits , such as disability , death pension , or dependency and indemnity compensation and / or va educational work - study allowances ; money received , or paid on the student's behalf , not reported elsewhere on the fafsa , including money received from a parent whose financial information is not reported on the fafsa and that is not part of a legal child support agreement , but excluding money paid on a dependent student's behalf by parents whose information is included on the fafsa ; and other untaxed income not otherwise reported , such as workers' compensation , disability , etc. , but not including extended foster care benefits , student aid , earned income credit , additional child tax credit , welfare payments , untaxed social security benefits , supplemental security income , workforce innovation and opportunity act educational benefits , on - base military housing or a military housing allowance , combat pay , benefits from flexible spending arrangements ( eg , cafeteria plans ) , foreign income exclusion , or credit for federal tax on special fuels .

excludable income excludable income is income not considered for the purposes of federal student aid .

excludable income is subtracted from the sum of agi and untaxed income .

excludable income includes the following: education tax credits claimed under section 25a of the internal revenue code ; child support paid by the student or parent because of a divorce or separation or as a result of a legal requirement ; taxable earnings from a need - based employment program , such as federal work study and need - based employment portions of fellowships to assistantships ; taxable student grant and scholarship aid reported to the irs in adjusted gross income , including americorps benefits as well as grant and scholarship portions of fellowships and assistantships ; taxable combat pay , including special combat pay ; and earnings from work under a cooperative education program offered by an institution of higher education .

allowances against income allowances against income ( also known as "protections" ) offset total income as calculated in the prior step .

allowances have the effect of exempting some ( or potentially all ) of the applicant's income from contributing to the efc .

the allowances are designed to exempt non - discretionary income ( such as taxes and very basic living expenses ) from the efc calculation .

the allowances mean that applicants are not expected to contribute to educational expenses from their "first dollar" of income .

there are five allowances against income .

the sum of these five allowances is the total allowance against income , which is used to calculate available income ( described in the next section ) .

certain components of the allowances against income vary by dependency status .

some allowances are "fixed" and are the same for all applicants with certain characteristics while other allowances vary by an applicant's financial characteristics and income level .

allowance against income #1: income protection allowance the income protection allowance ( ipa ) is designed to exclude income for very basic living expenses from contributing to the applicant's efc .

the ipa is determined by the applicant's dependency status and family size , and the number of students in the family enrolled in college .

ipa levels for applicants of each dependency status are established in statute and updated each year .

typically , a schedule of annual ipa increases is established during a reauthorization and ed is directed to calculate increases in award years beyond those established in statute .

the most recent statutorily specified ipa levels were in ay2012-2013 .

since then , ipa levels have been subject to annual inflationary increases .

ed - calculated increases are based on projected levels of inflation and are published annually in the federal register .

allowance against income #2: allowance for federal income taxes this allowance reflects actual federal income taxes for the reference year .

this information is available from tax returns .

if the applicant or relevant family member has not yet filed a tax return at the time of filling out the fafsa , the applicant may estimate income taxes and later correct the fafsa .

allowance against income #3: allowance for federal payroll taxes this allowance is designed to reflect actual federal payroll taxes ( social security taxes plus medicare taxes ) , and is calculated on the basis of earnings from work .

the allowance equals 7.65% of each earner's earnings up to a maximum ( $118,500 in the ay2018-2019 formula ) and 1.45% of earnings above that maximum .

the maximum applies on a per - earner basis , so if multiple earners are considered on an application ( for example , two parents and a student ) , each earner's payroll tax allowance is calculated separately .

allowance against income #4: allowance for state and other taxes this allowance aims to reflect estimated non - federal taxes , and is calculated on the basis of total income and state of residence .

there is variation among states .

allowances for each state are established in statute but are updated each year after ed reviews the department of the treasury's statistics of income file and the determination of the percentage of income that each state's taxes represent .

updated allowance percentages are published each year in the federal register .

the allowance percentage for residents of each state varies based on dependency status .

allowance against income #5: employment expense allowance the employment expense allowance ( eea ) provides an additional allowance to two - adult households in which both adults have earnings from work and to one - adult households with dependents and earnings from work .

the eea is available to parents of dependent students , married independent students without dependents , and independent students with dependents .

it is not available to dependent students themselves or unmarried independent students without dependents .

the maximum eea is 35% of the earnings of the lower - earning adult or $4,000 , whichever is less .

available income available income is the difference between total income and the sum of the five allowances against income .

in some cases where total allowances against income are greater than total income , available income can be zero or negative .

total assets the consideration of assets aims to reflect financial resources that are not reflected in income .

assets are only considered when applicants do not qualify for the simplified needs test ( snt ) .

applicants who do qualify for the snt do not have to provide asset information for federal student aid purposes .

statute and some federal documents use both "assets" and "net worth" interchangeably for various stages of asset calculations .

in the interest of uniformity , this report uses "assets. .

the hea defines assets as [c]ash on hand , including the amount in checking and savings accounts , time deposits , money market funds , trusts , stocks , bonds , other securities , mutual funds , tax shelters , qualified education benefits ... and the net value of real estate , income producing property , and business and farm assets .

exemptions and special treatments of assets there are substantial exemptions that exclude some assets from being considered in the calculation of total assets .

these exemptions include the following: home equity .

the family's "principal place of residence" or "a family farm on which the family resides" is excluded in the calculation of total assets .

retirement accounts .

these accounts are not mentioned in the definition in law .

agency guidance explicitly excludes them .

family - owned businesses .

statute excludes from a family's assets "a small business with not more than 100 full - time equivalent employees ... that is owned and controlled by the family. .

possessions .

the values of cars , jewelry , and other tangible items are not considered assets by the efc formulas .

the value of a non - exempt businesses or farm is adjusted so that it is considered an asset at less than 100% of its value .

the value is adjusted at a progressive rate .

in ay2018-2019 , the adjusted value of a non - exempt business or farm worth up to $130,000 is 40% of its value .

the percentage increases at higher values and 100% of the value of a business in excess of $655,000 is considered an asset of the family .

education savings accounts balances of education savings accounts ( such as those commonly known as 529 accounts ) are counted as an asset in calculating the efc .

in the case of dependent students , education savings accounts that are owned by the dependent student are considered assets of the student's parents .

because assets of parents are treated more favorably by the efc formula than assets of dependent students , this results in a lower efc than if the account were considered as an asset of the student .

disbursements from education savings accounts that are owned by a student or a parent of a dependent student are not reported on the fafsa .

disbursements from education savings accounts that are not owned by a student or a parent of a dependent student and therefore not reported on the fafsa ( such as an account owned by a grandparent ) are considered untaxed income .

asset protection allowance as is the case with income , an allowance against assets means that only non - exempt assets in excess of the allowance contribute to the efc .

unlike the multiple allowances against income , the hea has a single allowance against assets called the "education savings and asset protection allowance. .

this allowance is also referred to as the "asset protection allowance. .

this report will follow the terminology used in ed documents and refer to it as the asset protection allowance ( apa ) .

the apa varies by the age and marital status of the student's older parent ( in the case of parents of a dependent student ) or by the age and marital status of the student ( in the case of an independent student ) .

the apa increases with the age of the applicable parent or student .

dependent students are not eligible for an apa .

this means that dependent students' assets ( except for an education savings account , which is considered an asset of the parent ) are assessed from the "first dollar. .

apa levels were established in statute ( by the 1992 hea amendments ) and are updated by ed each year .

updated levels are published in the federal register alongside updated income allowances .

updates to the apa are not based on inflation .

instead , the hea specifies that the apa level for a given year is developed by determining the present value cost , rounded to the nearest $100 , of an annuity that would provide , for each age cohort of 40 and above , a supplemental income at age 65 ( adjusted for inflation ) equal to the difference between the moderate family income ( as most recently determined by the bureau of labor statistics ) , and the current average social security retirement benefits .

for each age cohort below 40 , the allowance shall be computed by decreasing the allowance for age 40 , as updated , by one - fifteenth for each year of age below age 40 and rounding the result to the nearest $100 .

in making such determinations - ( 1 ) inflation shall be presumed to be 6 percent per year ; ( 2 ) the rate of return of an annuity shall be presumed to be 8 percent ; and ( 3 ) the sales commission on an annuity shall be presumed to be 6 percent .

the single formula for the apa means that the apa is the same for persons of the same age across dependency statuses , though there are slight variations in application .

for example , married parents of a dependent student , the older of which is 40 years old , would have the same apa in a given year as a married 40-year - old student .

unlike the ipa , which increases each year based on estimated inflation , the more sophisticated calculation of the apa means that it can rise or fall from year to year .

the apa is calculated based on the difference between "moderate family income" and "current average social security benefits," and a change in the difference can increase or decrease the apa .

since the establishment of the apa in statute effective ay1993-1994 , average social security benefits have increased faster than family incomes , reducing the difference between the two and resulting in a corresponding reduction in the apa .

available assets available assets are the difference between an applicant's total assets and the asset protection allowance .

in cases where the allowance is greater than the applicant's total assets , the applicant's available assets and contribution from assets are zero .

asset conversion rate the asset conversion rate is the portion of available assets that either contribute to the final efc , or contribute to the calculation of adjusted available income that is subsequently assessed to calculate the efc .

statute refers to the resulting product of multiplying available assets by the asset conversion rate as "contribution from assets. .

the asset conversion rate varies by dependency status .

asset conversion is discussed in greater detail in the description of each formula .

adjusted available income ( aai ) aai is an intermediate calculation prior to final assessment that is only performed for parents of dependent students and independent students with dependents .

aai is the sum of available income and the product of available assets and the asset conversion rate .

the application of the aai is discussed in the description of the formulas for parents of dependent students and independent students with dependents .

assessment rate and calculation of the efc the assessment rate is the portion of available income , available assets , or aai that is determined to be available for educational expenses and contributes to the efc .

depending on dependency status , the assessment rate can be a flat percentage ( such as the 50% assessment of a dependent student's available income ) or a progressive percentage ( such as the increasing assessment rates for independent students with dependents in table 3 ) .

in practice , the assessment rate is the portion of an "additional dollar" that contributes to the efc .

for example , the assessment rate for available income for independent students without dependents is 50% .

this means that a $10 increase in available income will increase the efc of such a student by $5 .

appendix b .

legislative history financial need has been a key component of federal student aid since the enactment of the original higher education act ( hea ) in 1965 , though the specific processes for determining need have evolved .

generally , reauthorizations of the hea and other legislative action have gradually increased statutory direction in determining the ability of students and their families to contribute to educational costs while reducing the discretion of the administering agency ( originally the office of education , now the department of education [ed] ) .

enactment of the hea and action through 1986 need - based aid programs and corresponding provisions related to the determination of need were established in title iv of the hea of 1965 ( p.l .

89-329 ) .

modified versions of these programs remain in title iv of the hea , as amended .

as such , student aid programs are often collectively referred to as "title iv programs. .

title iv of the original hea authorized , among other programs , educational opportunity grants to institutions of higher education to support students with "exceptional financial need. .

establishing student need and disbursing awards was the responsibility of the grantee institution , though the law directed the commissioner of education to prescribe "basic criteria or schedules ( or both ) for the determination of the amount of any such educational opportunity grant , taking into account the objective of limiting grant aid under this part to students of exceptional financial need[.] .

the 1972 amendments to the hea ( p.l .

92-318 ) established the term "expected family contribution" and used the efc in the determination of need - based grants .

the 1972 amendments did not establish an efc formula , but instead offered a general framework and instructed the commissioner of education to publish an annual family contribution schedule ( fcs ) in the federal register .

the statutory framework for the efc and corresponding fcs in the 1972 amendments specified factors that the agency should consider when determining the efc ( such as effective income , amount of assets , and the number of dependents in the family ) , but it did not specify treatments of these factors ( such as assessment rates ) .

the 1972 amendments required the office of education to publish the proposed fcs by february 1 of each year .

subsequent to this publication , "interested parties" may "present their views and make recommendations with respect to such schedule. .

the law also gave both the house and the senate the authority to adopt a resolution of disapproval related to the schedule .

the commissioner was required to take any feedback into consideration prior to publishing a final fcs by july 1 .

the education amendments of 1980 ( p.l .

96-374 ) established a revised need analysis system in section 482 of the hea , as amended .

this system applied across most title iv programs , including the newly renamed pell grants .

the system established in the 1980 amendments offered more congressional direction than prior legislation , but still left substantial decisionmaking authority to the department of education .

a relatively short time after the enactment of the 1980 amendments , various legislation modified the need analysis provisions of the hea , establishing separate systems for pell grants and other campus - based programs with ed publishing contribution schedules in the federal register .

several other laws made short - term modifications to eligibility for pell grants and other forms of need - based aid between 1981 and the enactment of the higher education amendments of 1986 .

higher education amendments of 1986 the higher education amendments of 1986 ( p.l .

99-498 ) made substantial statutory changes to the need analysis system .

this law established one need analysis formula for pell grants ( "pell formula" ) and a different formula for most other title iv programs ( "part f formula" ) .

the 1986 amendments marked a change from congress providing guidelines to ed and the agency determining factor definitions and levels to congress specifying in statute what factors would be considered and what the treatment of those factors would be ( eg , prescribing allowance levels and assessment rates in statute ) .

both the pell formula and the part f formula established three dependency statuses with corresponding treatments of income and assets for each status: dependent student , independent student with dependents , and independent student without dependents .

the law established that a student would be considered independent if he or she met criteria related to age ( 24 or older on december 31 of the award year ) or other criteria .

under the 1986 amendments , a student could be classified as independent if the student was not claimed as a dependent for tax purposes by his or her parents in the prior year ( in the case of a married student or graduate student ) or the prior two years ( in the case of a single undergraduate student ) .

while terminology and definitions varied between the formulas , both the pell formula and the part f formula followed the same general process of determining the financial resources of the student ( and if applicable , the student's parents and / or spouse ) by calculating the applicant's total income ( and assets ) , subtracting specified allowances , and then assessing financial resources in excess of those allowances .

both formulas considered family size and the number of family members in college .

the formulas differed in some of their treatments of certain financial resources and the construction of some of their allowances .

for example , when calculating assets the pell formula only considered home equity in excess of $30,000 while the part f formula considered home equity in its entirety .

the two formulas also have different final assessment rates of each applicant's income and / or assets .

the 1986 amendments established a simplified needs test ( snt ) for qualified applicants .

applicants who were eligible for the snt were required to provide less financial information in the application process and no information related to assets .

to qualify for the snt under the 1986 amendments , the applicant's family must have an adjusted gross income of $15,000 or less and file tax form 1040a .

the snt criteria were applicable to all title iv programs .

1992 amendments to the higher education act the 1992 amendments to the higher education act ( p.l .

102-325 ) established the foundation for the current efc system .

they merged the need analysis systems , creating a single system that calculated a single efc that applied across need - based hea title iv programs .

prior to the 1992 amendments , separate formulas existed for pell grants and other types of aid and could yield different family contributions for their respective programs .

in merging the two formulas , the 1992 amendments also made changes to the factors that the formula considered .

creation of the fafsa and the combining of efc formulas the 1992 amendments created the free application for federal student aid ( fafsa ) .

the fafsa was intended to be a standardized data collection tool for all students .

prior to the fafsa , several entities were under contract with the federal government to collect and process data related to federal student aid .

these contracted entities , known as multiple data entry processors or mdes , each developed different forms .

the mdes shared information with states and institutions , but could charge a fee to the applying student or to the state or institution that received the data .

the 1992 amendments specified that ed would create a common application for federal student aid that would be distributed and processed at no charge to the student .

the law also specified that the mdes must provide student data to states and institutions at no cost .

to incentivize states and institutions to only use fafsa - collected data in their student aid decisions , the law allows the inclusion of questions on the fafsa that do not affect federal aid but may affect nonfederal aid .

provisions pertaining to fafsa distribution , processing , and the inclusion of additional questions on the fafsa were established by section 483 of p.l .

102-325 and remain in section 483 of the hea .

formula changes in the 1992 amendments in combining formulas from prior legislation , it was necessary to make a number of changes to each formula .

for example , the pell formula and part f formula from the 1986 amendments had different assessment rates , so changes were necessary to develop a standardized formula .

in addition to these "compromises" necessary to combine the formulas , the 1992 amendments also made some changes to the efc formula that did not have precedent in either prior formula .

for example: the 1992 amendments completely eliminated home equity from consideration when determining a family's assets .

the 1992 amendments eliminated the provision by which a student could establish independence on the basis of "total self - sufficiency" for two years .

reauthorizations and amendments since 1992 since the 1992 amendments , the hea was reauthorized by the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) and the higher education opportunity act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-315 ) , and each law made changes to the efc formula .

the efc formula was also amended by the college costs reduction act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-84 ) as well as by other appropriations and reconciliation laws .

these changes were largely incremental and did not have systemic effects on the scale of some of the prior reauthorizations .

the most far - reaching provisions of the post - 1992 changes to the need analysis formulas have primarily been numeric adjustments to the income protection allowances ( i.e. , the amount of income that is exempt from assessment in calculating the efc ) and / or changes to qualifications for alternative formula such as the "automatic zero" efc .

these changes usually ( but not always ) have resulted in lower efcs for at least some students .

non - numeric changes since 1992 have included establishing protocol for enrollment periods of less than nine months and expanding the range of circumstances in which financial aid administrators could use professional judgment to adjust formula factors to reflect students with special circumstances .

