since 2014 , the united states and a coalition it leads have partnered with a politically diverse set of kurdish groups to combat the islamic state organization ( is , also known as isis / isil or by the arabic acronym da'esh ) .

coalition - backed kurdish forces have reversed is advances in some parts of iraq and syria and have taken control of some previously is - controlled territory .

coalition air support for kurdish fighters is provided primarily from bases in iraq , turkey , and arab gulf states .

u.s. officials have praised kurdish fighters as some of the most effective ground force partners the coalition has in iraq and syria .

their effectiveness may partly stem from a measure of kurdish political and military cohesion — relative to other groups — that predates the ongoing conflicts in both countries .

yet , kurdish military success in both states has complicated u.s. efforts to partner with the iraqi and turkish governments , largely because of the boost such success apparently has given to the political ambitions and regional profiles of various kurdish groups .

efforts by the united states to address its state partners' concerns could fuel uncertainty among kurdish groups about the terms and durability of u.s. support .

in iraq , the u.s. military has worked with fighters who come under the official authority of the kurdistan regional government ( krg ) ( see figure 1 ) .

in syria , u.s. forces have partnered with fighters from or allied with the democratic union party ( pyd ) / people's protection units ( ypg ) ( see figure 2 ) .

as of december 2016 , u.s. partnering with these forces is focusing on and around the key is - controlled cities of mosul ( iraq ) and raqqah ( syria ) .

as administration officials and members of congress assess how to reconcile u.s. coordination with kurdish groups with overall u.s. objectives , their considerations include: the extent to which kurdish groups should be involved in military operations and post - conflict security in areas with predominantly sunni arab or other non - kurdish populations .

the likely effects of u.s. military support for kurdish groups in iraq and syria on state cohesion and political compromise among varying ethnic , sectarian , and ideological groups .

whether and how the coalition's strategic priorities might come into conflict with kurdish groups' possible goals to ( 1 ) maximize their control over territory and resources and ( 2 ) reduce or eliminate potential threats ( either from rival kurds or non - kurds ) .

questions of leverage between the united states and kurdish groups , given how they depend on one another for their success and how they each manage relations with other actors — such as the syrian and iraqi governments , turkey , russia , and iran .

the nature of relationships among kurdish groups , including the kurdistan workers party ( pkk ) , a u.s. - designated terrorist organization .

legal authorities enacted by congress and the president permit the administration to provide some arms and some anti - is - related funding for iraq and syria to kurdish groups under certain conditions , as discussed below .

in april 2016 , u.s. officials announced that they would provide more than $400 million to pay and otherwise sustain iraqi kurdish fighters with the consent of the iraqi government .

such support is being drawn from defense department - administered funds congress has appropriated in recent years for countering the islamic state organization in iraq .

the obama administration has requested additional funds to counter the islamic state organization for fy2017 , and congress may choose to authorize and appropriate anti - is funding in general terms and / or specifically for various iraqi forces — including kurdish groups .

while kurdish groups in iraq and syria work with the u.s. - led coalition against the islamic state , various humanitarian and human rights concerns have affected kurdish - populated communities and the surrounding areas where kurdish forces have been active .

with the assault by u.s. - backed iraqi forces in mosul , the largest remaining stronghold of the islamic state , concerns remain about the humanitarian impact of the operation , including evacuation plans and the protection and assistance of those who flee ( or stay ) and the possible influx of tens of thousands of internally displaced persons ( idps ) to areas under the control of the krg .

some members of congress have considered the following issues in assessing policy options related to u.s. support for kurdish groups fighting the islamic state organization in iraq and syria: risks that that u.s. equipment provided to kurdish groups could fall under the control of the islamic state or other actors actively working against u.s. regional goals .

means for better providing u.s. and international humanitarian assistance to support the needs of displaced persons in the kurdish - controlled areas of iraq and syria .

the extent to which the united states can influence the decisions of various kurdish groups and the extent to which kurdish decisions may reshape the strategic context in which the united states is pursuing its own goals .

the nature of the pyd / ypg's apparent links with the pkk , and related turkish concerns .

other actors' relationships with various kurdish groups , including the syrian and iraqi governments , russia , and iran .

questions reflected in legislative and executive policy discussions as of late 2016 include: what roles should kurdish ground forces in iraq and syria play in u.s. - supported operations , particularly those to take is strongholds such as mosul and raqqah , and in post - conflict administration ? .

to what extent should congress authorize ( or require ) the administration to provide arms or assistance directly to the krg , the ypg , or forces affiliated with them ? .

to what extent , if at all , should caps or conditions ( such as those related to central government approvals , end - use monitoring , human rights practices , or good governance ) be placed on arms shipments or assistance ? .

how might other u.s. partners and adversaries view such assistance and respond ? .

how might various types of u.s. military and political support for specific kurdish or kurdish - led groups affect ( 1 ) prospects for political cooperation or resolution among kurds and between different ethnic , sectarian , and ideological groups in iraq and syria , ( 2 ) regional security , and ( 3 ) long - term u.s. commitments ? .

what alternatives exist to continued cooperation with kurdish forces to achieve stated u.s. objectives in the conflict ? .

how should u.s. assistance to kurdish forces evolve as u.s. objectives for defeating the islamic state group are achieved ? .

as anti - is operations continue , u.s. officials appear inclined to embrace the capabilities of various kurdish ground forces in iraq and syria .

at the same time , u.s. officials seem to focus on addressing and resolving limitations or complications that may arise from u.s. - kurdish partnerships .

for example , officials may be seeking to leverage and augment the kurds' military successes by empowering non - kurdish forces that may be more able to command political legitimacy among local populations in predominantly sunni arab areas such as mosul and raqqah .

u.s. officials may also be looking to minimize disruptions in u.s. relations with other partners — such as the iraqi and turkish governments .

the future of the u.s. - kurdish partnership beyond current anti - is cooperation is unclear and could largely depend on how the current cooperation and its outcomes unfold .

might the present joint efforts translate into a longer - term partnership in a region riven by chronic instability , ethnosectarian tension , and weapons proliferation ? .

policymakers might conclude that greater u.s. - kurdish closeness could promote greater stability and political resolution due to some kurdish groups' active support for u.s. operations in recent decades ; general embrace of secular political leadership ; and relative prosperity amid the complexities and tribulations of their surroundings .

alternatively , policymakers might conclude that greater u.s. - kurdish closeness could work against stability in the region due to some kurdish groups' possible efforts to maximize their influence , wealth , power , and status ( potentially including attempts to gain independence or more autonomy ) at the expense of non - kurdish actors ; treatment of civilians in areas over which they have recently gained control ; and political disputes among themselves , both inside and across national borders .

ultimately , u.s. policy on this question may depend on a number of factors .

these include the degree to which the united states is willing to maintain or undertake long - term political or military commitments in the region , and kurdish groups' value as partners — relative to other state and non - state actors — in contributing to u.s. objectives in that context .

