this report focuses on selected u.s. airborne electronic attack programs .

such programs involve developing and procuring both the aircraft whose primary mission is electronic warfare ( ew ) and the ew systems that are mounted on u.s. aircraft .

the president's fy2020 budget request for the department of defense ( dod ) seeks funding for a number of airborne ew programs .

these programs pose a number of potential oversight issues for congress , and its decisions on these issues could affect future u.s. military capabilities and funding requirements .

congress has continually shown interest in ew , and airborne electronic attack in particular .

some members have formed the ew working group , and they routinely discuss improving ew capabilities .

the national defense authorization acts over the past several years have included provisions related to ew and electronic attack .

most recently the fy2019 john s. mccain national defense authorization act , discussed the air force's acquisition strategy for a new ew attack aircraft as well as a study to catalogue all ew capabilities .

given their interest in , and concerns about , u.s. ew capabilities in the era of renewed great power competition , some members of congress have met in recent years through the electronic warfare working group ( ewwg ) .

in the 115 th congress , representative bacon introduced the joint electromagnetic spectrum operations readiness act of 2018 ( h.r .

5522 ) .

this bill would have asked the dod to develop a joint campaign modeling capability to model electromagnetic spectrum effect on operations , assess capabilities and capacities of ew platforms associated with operational plans , and develop an interim and annual report on programs and personnel assigned to ew missions .

an identical bill in the senate was referred to the senate armed services committee .

one potential oversight issue for congress is whether dod is giving too little , too much , or the right amount of priority to airborne ew programs in its planning and budgeting relative to other u.s. military ew programs ( such as those for u.s. ground forces or navy surface ships ) and to other dod non - ew priorities , particularly in the context of renewed great power competition and improvements in air defense and ew capabilities by russia , china , and other potential adversaries .

congress may consider developments such as russia's deployment and sales to other countries of advanced air defense systems .

some observers have expressed concern about russia's ability to use its advanced air defense systems , such as its s - 400 surface - to - air ( sam ) missile system , to establish hard - to - penetrate anti - access / area - denial ( a2 / ad ) zones around defended areas in europe and middle east , and for countries that purchase russian - made air defense systems , such as china , to do something similar in other regions .

other observers state that the capabilities of russia's a2 / ad air defense systems have been overrated .

the defense intelligence agency states that russian air defense are among the best in the world , and they continue to develop highly - capable systems which they export to countries like china interested in acquiring long range defensive systems .

dod states that china's air force has one of the largest air defense forces , with a series of advanced long - range surface - to - air missiles .

these consist of the russian s - 300pmu , the domestically produced csa - 9 , and the recently fielded russian s - 400 system .

an april 2018 press report stated ( emphasis added ) : one of the "wicked problems" [u.s.] commandos are facing now is in syria , which [u.s. army general tony] thomas called the "most aggressive electronic warfare environment on the planet from our adversaries .

they are testing us every day , knocking our communications down , disabling our ec - 130s , etc. .

another factor congress may consider is how , in a situation of finite dod funding , devoting more funding to airborne ew programs would affect funding for other ew priorities , or dod non - ew priorities , and what the resulting net change would be in overall u.s. military capabilities .

another potential oversight issue for congress is whether dod's proposed mix of airborne ew capabilities and investments is appropriate given the current and projected capabilities of potential adversaries such as russia and china .

specifically , what is dod's vision by combining specialized tactical ew aircraft such as the ea - 18g , standoff ew aircraft such as the ec - 130h and ec - 37b , strike fighters with embedded ew capabilities such as the f - 35 , and air - launched decoys and jammers with growing numbers of stealthy fifth - generation f - 35s ? .

what evolutions are occurring in u.s. military operational concepts ? .

is it appropriate , for example , that the air force and marine corps no longer operate their own specialized tactical ew aircraft , while the navy continues to operate and invest in the ea - 18g and its next generation jammer ew pods ? .

more generally , to what degree do the airborne ew capabilities of the air force , navy , and marine corps overlap , and is that overlap appropriate ? .

a third potential issue for congress is how dod uses advances in technology .

electronic attack platforms have evolved from the manned platforms with relatively large crew sizes , such as the ea - 6b prowler and the ec - 130h compass call , to the ea - 8g growler with a crew of two and the mald - j , which does not have crew and is a standoff weapon .

evolving a2 / ad environments potentially make traditional stand - in jamming too dangerous for manned aircraft .

therefore , congress may consider policy for dod regarding developing platforms that are capable of operating in a2 / ad environments .

what unmanned ew programs does dod currently fund ? .

does dod plan to develop additional stand - in jamming systems ? .

another oversight issue for congress concerns the air force's planned quantity and rate for procuring ec - 37bs and replacing ec - 130hs .

the air force plans to replace 14 ec - 130h aircraft with 10 ec - 37bs .

the air force currently maintains 10 ec - 130h compass calls for operations , with one aircraft devoted to testing and three additional aircraft in back - up inventory .

how does the air force plan to use a smaller fleet of aircraft ? .

would 10 ec - 37b aircraft be able to meet operational demands ? .

some members of congress have expressed an interest in procuring ec - 37bs more quickly than the air force plans , so as to accelerate the replacement of ec - 130hs with ec - 37bs .

the committee and conference report language bearing on this issue for the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 and the fy2019 dod appropriations act appear below .

john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 ( h.r .

5515 / s. 2987 / p.l .

115-232 ) the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

115-676 of may 15 , 2018 ) on h.r .

5515 , the fy2019 national defense authorization act , stated that [t]he committee supports the air force's efforts to recapitalize the aging ec – 130h compass call fleet with the more capable ec – 37 type aircraft .

the committee notes that the air force must first comply with the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( public law 114 – 328 ) and the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 ( public law 115 – 91 ) before it can carry on with the transition plan .

the air force requested $108.1 million for fiscal year 2019 for one ec – 37 .

the committee is concerned that the air force plan to procure one aircraft per year over 10 years in order to recapitalize this fleet is not the most efficient way to move the capability to the field quickly , and may put the compass call mission at unacceptable risk of mission failure .

therefore , the committee directs the secretary of the air force to provide a briefing to the house committee on armed services by february 1 , 2019 , on the compass call transition plan .

this plan should include: ( 1 ) courses of action to accelerate the recapitalization of the ec – 130h fleet and baseline 4 development and deployment for incoming ec – 37 aircraft ; ( 2 ) attendant timelines for each course of action ; ( 3 ) cost estimates for each course of action ; ( 4 ) recommended course of action and a plan to manage both fleets while supporting combatant commander requirements ; and ( 5 ) an assessment of the potential for future cooperative development and procurement of ec – 37b compass call aircraft by the royal air force of the united kingdom and the royal australian air force in a way the leverages the best practices of the rc – 135 cooperative program arrangement with the royal air force of the united kingdom .

 ( pages 23-24 ) the senate armed services committee , in its report ( s.rept .

115-262 of june 5 , 2018 ) on s. 2987 , the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 , stated the following: the committee supports the air force's efforts to recapitalize the aging ec – 130h compass call fleet with the ec – 37 type aircraft .

the committee notes that before it can carry on with the transition plan , the department of defense must first comply with the related provisions in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( public law 114 – 328 ) and the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 ( public law 115 – 91 ) .

while the committee notes that department has submitted the certification required by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2018 ( public law 115 – 91 ) , delays in satisfying the requirement has led to a work stoppage on the program lasting at least six weeks .

the committee is concerned about the potential for further work stoppages should the secretary of the air force fail to make a timely determination that the ec – 37b has a high likelihood of meeting combatant requirements , as required by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( public law 114 – 328 ) .

the committee encourages the secretary of the air force to make a timely determination for this requirement to avoid further program delays and cost overruns .

therefore , the committee directs the secretary of the air force , not more than 60 days after the determination required by the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 ( public law 114 – 328 ) is made , to provide a briefing to the congressional defense committees on the compass call transition plan .

this plan should include: ( 1 ) courses of action to accelerate the recapitalization of the ec – 130h fleet and baseline 4 development and deployment for incoming ec – 37 aircraft ; ( a ) attendant timelines for each course of action ; ( b ) cost estimates for each course of action ; and ( 2 ) recommended course of action and a plan to manage both fleets while supporting combatant commander requirements .

 ( pages 40-41 ) fy2019 dod appropriations act ( division a of h.r .

6157 / p.l .

115-245 ) the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

115-769 of june 20 , 2018 ) on the fy2019 dod appropriations act ( h.r .

6157 ) , stated the following: the [committee's] recommendation [of fy2019 procurement funding for the program] includes an increase of $194,000,000 above the budget request to procure and modify one additional ec – 37b compass call aircraft , with the expectation that such funds will allow the air force to accelerate the fielding of the fourth such aircraft to meet combatant commander needs and mitigate performance concerns regarding the legacy ec – 130h fleet .

the committee recommends that the secretary of the air force consider increasing the procurement of ec – 37b aircraft to two per year if such a pace of recapitalization can be achieved without unduly disrupting the operational availability of compass call capability for the combatant commanders .

 ( page 188 ) in final action on the fy2019 dod appropriations act ( division a of h.r .

6157 / p.l .

115-245 of september 28 , 2018 ) , congress increased the requested amount for procurement of new ec - 37bs by $108 million for "program increase - accelerate fourth ec - 37b aircraft. .

