workers' compensation provides cash and medical benefits to workers who are injured or become ill in the course of their employment and benefits to the survivors of workers killed on the job .

benefits are provided without regard to fault and are the exclusive remedy for workplace injuries , illnesses , and deaths .

nearly all workers and employers in the united states are covered by workers' compensation and each state , with the exception of texas , has a mandatory workers' compensation system .

in 2015 , more than 135 million workers , accounting for more than $7.1 trillion in wages , were covered by a state or federal workers' compensation system .

when a covered worker is injured , becomes sick , or dies as a result of his or her employment , that worker is entitled to full medical coverage for the injury or illness , cash benefits to replace a portion of wages lost due to inability to work , and benefits for surviving family members in case of death .

employers are responsible for providing workers' compensation benefits to their workers and generally purchase insurance to cover these costs .

the federal government has only a limited role in the provision of workers' compensation because most workers are covered by state laws .

although every state has a workers' compensation system and in all but one state workers' compensation or an equivalent is mandatory , there is no federal mandate that states must have workers' compensation , no federal standards for state programs , and no federal oversight of state systems .

workers' compensation is often referred to as a grand bargain between workers and employers .

under workers' compensation , workers receive defined benefits for covered injuries , illnesses , and deaths without regard to fault or liability .

in exchange for this coverage , employees are prohibited from suing their employers for workplace injuries , illnesses , and deaths .

workers' compensation is the exclusive remedy available to employees .

employers are protected from lawsuits but must pay defined benefits in all cases , regardless of fault , liability , or defense .

employers are able to purchase insurance to mitigate their financial risks and increase cost predictability or , in a majority of systems , can self - insure .

the workers' compensation system in the united states is made up of individual state programs and four federal programs of limited jurisdiction .

caution should be exercised when making generalizations about these systems .

however , while each workers' compensation system is different and operates under its own set of laws , regulations , and legal precedents , there are some common elements to these systems .

the direct costs associated with workers' compensation benefits are generally the responsibility of the employers and not the workers or the general revenue stream of the government .

workers never directly pay for their own benefits , which are provided without any coinsurance costs or deductibles that must be met by the workers .

employers may have deductibles that must be met before their insurer will pay benefits .

the federal government has no formal oversight of state workers' compensation programs .

there is no federal mandate that states have workers' compensation laws and no federal standards for workers' compensation systems .

compulsory workers' compensation that covers all employers and workers was one of the key goals of the national commission .

today , while workers' compensation systems continue to exclude certain groups of workers , such as casual and household workers in certain states , coverage is generally compulsory for employers in all states except texas .

noncompulsory workers' compensation should not be confused with self - insurance for workers' compensation .

self - insurance is part of all but two states' workers' compensation systems ( north dakota and wyoming ) and although employers approved to self - insure do not have to purchase workers' compensation insurance , they are required to comply with all other provisions of the workers' compensation law and must pay benefits to covered workers .

for more than a century workers and employers in the united states have been protected and served by the workers' compensation system .

the grand bargain of guaranteed no - fault benefits that replaced the tort system has , with only limited federal intervention and no federal mandate , largely stood the test of time and today covers nearly all workers in every state .

workers' compensation policy has not been without its challenges , however .

the competing interests of employers looking to control costs and workers looking to maximize benefits and coverage have long been at odds .

recently , some in congress have expressed concern that the lack of federal oversight of workers' compensation has led to changes in state policies that have negatively affected workers .

compulsory coverage is one of the key tenets of the workers' compensation system and traditionally each state , with the exception of texas , has required employers to participate in the workers' compensation system by purchasing insurance or self - insuring .

in 2013 , however , oklahoma began to permit employers to opt out of workers' compensation by providing approved alternative benefit plans to their employers .

advocates have argued allowing employers to opt - out of workers' compensation will bring needed flexibility to the workers' compensation system , allow workers to have a say in their own benefits , and reduce employer and taxpayer costs .

concerns have been raised , however , that the plans offered by employers opting out of workers' compensation do not sufficiently protect workers and may compromise their ability to appeal benefit denials .

although the oklahoma legislation was ruled unconstitutional by the state's supreme court and efforts to adopt the oklahoma changes have so far been unsuccessful in other states , compulsory coverage will likely remain a key issue as workers' compensation moves through its second century .

