prior to 1867 , qatar was ruled by the family of the leaders of neighboring bahrain , the al khalifa .

that year , an uprising in the territory led the united kingdom , then the main western power in the persian gulf region , to install a leading qatari family , the al thani , to rule over what is now qatar .

the al thani family claims descent from the central arabian tribe of banu tamim , the tribe to which shaykh muhammad ibn abd al wahhab , the founder of wahhabism , belonged .

thus , qatar officially subscribes to wahhabism , a conservative islamic tradition that it shares with saudi arabia .

in 1916 , in the aftermath of world war i and the demise of the ottoman empire , qatar and britain signed an agreement under which qatar formally became a british protectorate .

in 1971 , after britain announced it would no longer exercise responsibility for persian gulf security , qatar and bahrain considered joining with the seven emirates ( principalities ) that were then called the "trucial states" to form the united arab emirates .

however , qatar and bahrain decided to become independent rather than join that union .

the uae was separately formed in late 1971 .

qatar adopted its first written constitution in april 1970 and became fully independent on september 1 , 1971 .

the united states opened an embassy in doha in 1973 .

the last u.s .

ambassador to qatar , dana shell smith , resigned from that post in june 2017 , reportedly over disagreements with the trump administration .

mary catherine phee has been nominated as a replacement .

qatar's governing structure approximates that of the other gcc states .

the country is led by a hereditary amir ( literally "prince," but interpreted as "ruler" ) , shaykh tamim bin hamad al thani .

he became ruler in june 2013 when his father , amir hamad bin khalifa al thani , relinquished power voluntarily .

the amir governs through a prime minister , who is a member of the al thani family , and a cabinet , several of whom are members of the al thani family or of prominent allied families .

amir tamim serves concurrently as minister of defense , although most of the defense policy functions are performed by the minister of state for defense , a position with less authority than that of full minister .

in november 2014 , amir tamim appointed a younger brother , shaykh abdullah bin hamad , to be deputy amir and the heir apparent .

the prime minister , shaykh abdullah bin nasir bin khalifa al thani , also serves as interior minister .

there is dissent within the al thani family — mostly from those of lineages linked to ousted former qatari rulers — but no significant challenge to tamim's rule is evident .

there were no significant protests in qatar during the "arab spring" uprising of 2011 or since .

political parties are banned , and unlike in kuwait and bahrain , there are no well - defined "political societies" that act as the equivalent of parties .

political disagreements in qatar are aired mainly in private as part of a process of consensus building in which the leadership tries to balance the interests of the various families and other constituencies .

then - amir hamad put a revised constitution to a public referendum on april 29 , 2003 , achieving a 98% vote in favor .

nevertheless , it left in place significant limitations: for example , it affirms that qatar is a hereditary emirate .

some western experts also criticize qatar's constitution for specifying islamic law as the main source of legislation .

the constitution stipulates that elections will be held for 30 of the 45 seats of the country's advisory council ( majlis ash - shura ) , a national legislative body , but elections have been repeatedly delayed .

the elected council is also to have broader powers , including the ability to remove ministers ( two - thirds majority vote ) , to approve a national budget , and to draft and vote on proposed legislation that can become law ( two - thirds majority vote and concurrence by the amir ) .

in 2008 , it was agreed that naturalized qataris who have been citizens for at least 10 years will be eligible to vote , and those whose fathers were born in qatar will be eligible to run .

qatar is the only gcc state other than saudi arabia not to have held elections for any seats in a legislative body .

the country holds elections for a 29-seat central municipal council .

elections for the fourth council ( each serving a four - year term ) were held on may 13 , 2015 .

the central municipal council advises the minister of municipality and urban affairs on local public services .

voter registration and turnout — 21,735 voters registered out of an estimate 150,000 eligible voters , and 15,171 of those voted — were lower than expected , suggesting that citizens viewed the council as lacking influence .

the state department stated that "observers considered [the municipal council elections] free and fair. .

qatar uses its financial resources to implement a foreign policy that engages a wide range of regional actors , including those that are at odds with each other .

qatari officials periodically meet with israeli officials while at the same hosting leaders of the palestinian militant group , hamas .

qatar maintains consistent ties to iran while at the same time hosting u.s. forces that contain iran's military power .

qatar hosts an office of the afghan taliban movement that facilitates u.s. - taliban talks .

its policies have enabled qatar to mediate some regional conflicts and to obtain the freedom of captives held by regional armed groups .

yet , qatar often backs regional actors at odds with those backed by de facto gcc leader saudi arabia and other gcc states , causing saudi arabia and its close allies in the gcc to accuse qatar of undermining the other gcc countries .

as have some of the other gcc states , qatar has shown an increasing willingness to use its own military forces to try to shape the outcome of regional conflicts .

u.s. - qatar defense and security relations are long - standing and extensive — a characterization emphasized by senior u.s. officials in the course of the two u.s. - qatar "strategic dialogue" sessions — in washington , dc , in january 2018 , and in doha in january 2019 .

senior u.s. officials have praised qatar as "a longtime friend and military partner for peace and stability in the middle east and a supporter of nato's mission in afghanistan. .

the u.s - qatar defense relationship emerged during the 1980-1988 iran - iraq war .

the six gulf monarchies formed the gcc in late 1981 and collectively backed iraq against the threat posed by iran in that war , despite their political and ideological differences with iraq's saddam hussein .

in the latter stages of that war , iran attacked international shipping in the gulf and some gulf state oil loading facilities , but none in qatar .

after iraq invaded gcc member kuwait in august 1990 , the gcc participated in the u.s. - led military coalition that expelled iraq from kuwait in february 1991 .

in january 1991 , qatari armored forces helped coalition troops defeat an iraqi attack on the saudi town of khafji .

the qatari participation in that war ended u.s. - qatar strains over qatar's illicit procurement in the late 1980s of u.s. - made "stinger" shoulder - held antiaircraft missiles .

u.s. - qatar defense relations subsequently deepened and the two countries signed a formal defense cooperation agreement ( dca ) .

u.s. central command ( centcom ) commander general joseph votel testified on february 27 , 2018 , that u.s. operations have not been affected by the intra - gcc rift .

qatar , one of the wealthiest states in the world on a per capita gross domestic product ( gdp ) basis , receives virtually no u.s. military assistance .

at times , small amounts of u.s. aid have been provided to help qatar develop capabilities to prevent smuggling and the movement of terrorists or proliferation - related gear into qatar or around its waterways .

even before the june 2017 intra - gcc rift , qatar had been wrestling with the economic effects of the fall in world energy prices since mid - 2014 — a development that has caused gcc economic growth to slow , their budgets to fall into deficit , and the balance of their ample sovereign wealth funds to decline .

oil and gas reserves have made qatar the country with the world's highest per capita income .

qatar is a member of the organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) , along with other gcc states saudi arabia , kuwait , and uae and other countries .

however , on december 3 , 2018 , qatar announced it would withdraw from opec in early 2019 in order to focus on its more high - priority natural gas exports .

some observers attributed the decision , at least in part , to the ongoing intra - gcc rift , insofar as rival saudi arabia is considered the dominant actor within opec .

the economic impact on qatar of the june 2017 intra - gcc rift is difficult to discern .

about 40% of qatar's food was imported from saudi arabia precrisis , and there were reports of runs on stocks of food when the blockade began .

however , the government's ample financial resources enabled it to quickly arrange substitute sources of goods primarily from turkey , iran , and india .

the effects on qatar's growing international air carrier , qatar airways , have been significant because of the prohibition on its overflying the blockading states .

in november 2017 , iran and turkey signed a deal with qatar to facilitate the mutual transiting of goods .

qatar's main sovereign wealth fund , run by the qatar investment authority ( qia ) , as well as funds held by the central bank , total about $350 billion , according to qatar's central bank governor in july 2017 , giving the country a substantial cushion to weather its financial demands .

qia's investments consist of real estate and other relatively illiquid holdings , such as interest in london's canary wharf project .

in may 2016 , qatar offered $9 billion in bonds as a means of raising funds without drawing down its investment holdings .

in april 2018 , the country raised $12 billion in another , larger , bond issue .

qatar also has cut some subsidies to address its budgetary shortfalls .

in early october 2017 , it was reported that qia is considering divesting a large portion of its overseas assets and investing the funds locally — a move that is at least partly attributable to the economic pressures of the intra - gcc rift .

the intra - gcc rift has not harmed qatar's ability to earn substantial funds from energy exports .

oil and gas still account for 92% of qatar's export earnings , and 56% of government revenues .

proven oil reserves of about 25 billion barrels are far less than those of saudi arabia and kuwait , but enough to enable qatar to continue its current levels of oil production ( about 700,000 barrels per day ) for over 50 years .

its proven reserves of natural gas exceed 25 trillion cubic meters , about 13% of the world's total and third largest in the world .

along with kuwait and uae , in november 2016 qatar agreed to a modest oil production cut ( about 30,000 barrels per day ) as part of an opec - wide production cut intended to raise world crude oil prices .

qatar is the world's largest supplier of liquefied natural gas ( lng ) , which is exported from the large ras laffan processing site north of doha .

that facility has been built up with u.s. - made equipment , much of which was exported with the help of about $1 billion in export - import bank loan guarantees .

qatar is a member and hosts the headquarters of the gas exporting countries forum ( gecf ) , which is a nascent natural gas cartel and includes iran and russia , among other countries .

state - run qatar petroleum is a major investor in the emerging u.s. lng export market , with a 70% stake ( exxon - mobil and conoco - phillips are minority stakeholders ) in an lng terminal in texas that is seeking u.s. government approval to expand the facility to the point where it can export over 15 million tons of lng per year .

in june 2018 , qatar petroleum bought a 30% state in an exxon - mobil - run development of an onshore shale natural gas basin in argentina ( vaca muerta ) .

qatar is the source of the gas supplies for the dolphin gas project established by the uae in 1999 and which became operational in 2007 .

the project involves production and processing of natural gas from qatar's offshore north field , which is connected to iran's south pars field ( see figure 2 ) , and transportation of the processed gas by subsea pipeline to the uae and oman .

its gas industry gives qatar some counter leverage against the saudi - led group , but qatar has said it will not reduce its gas supplies under existing agreements with other gcc states .

both the uae and qatar have filed complaints at the wto over their boycotting each other's goods ; the united states reportedly has backed the uae's arguments that the wto does not have the authority to adjudicate issues of national security .

because prices of hydrocarbon exports have fallen dramatically since mid - 2014 , in 2016 qatar ran its first budget deficit ( about $13 billion ) .

as have other gcc rulers , qatari leaders assert publicly that the country needs to diversify its economy , that generous benefits and subsidies need to be reduced , and that government must operate more efficiently .

at the same time , the leadership apparently seeks to minimize the effect of any cutbacks on qatari citizens .

still , if oil prices remain far below their 2014 levels and the intra - gcc rift continues much further , it is likely that many qatari citizens will be required to seek employment in the private sector , which they generally have shunned in favor of less demanding jobs in the government .

the national development strategy from 2011 to 2016 focused on qatar's housing , water , roads , airports , and shipping infrastructure in part to promote economic diversification , as well as to prepare to host the 2022 fifa world cup soccer tournament , investing as much as $200 billion .

in doha , the result has been a construction boom , which by some reports has outpaced the capacity of the government to manage , and perhaps fund .

a metro transportation system is under construction in doha .

in contrast to the two least wealthy gcc states ( bahrain and oman ) , which have free trade agreements with the united states , qatar and the united states have not negotiated an fta .

however , in april 2004 , the united states and qatar signed a trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) .

qatar has used the benefits of the more limited agreement to undertake large investments in the united states , including the city center project in washington , dc .

also , several u.s. universities and other institutions , such as cornell university , carnegie mellon university , georgetown university , brookings institution , and rand corporation , have established branches and offices at the qatar foundation's education city outside doha .

in 2005 , qatar donated $100 million to the victims of hurricane katrina .

the joint statement of the january 2018 u.s. - qatar strategic dialogue "recognized" qia's commitment of $45 billion in future investments in u.s. companies and real estate .

according to the u.s. census bureau's "foreign trade statistics" compilation , the united states exported $4.9 billion in goods to qatar in 2016 ( about $600 million higher than 2015 ) , and imported $1.16 billion worth of qatari goods in 2016 , slightly less than in 2015 .

u.s. exports to qatar for 2017 ran about 40% less than the 2016 level , but u.s. imports from qatar were about the same as in 2016 .

u.s. exports to qatar rebounded to $4.4 billion in 2018 and imports were about $1.57 billion .

u.s. exports to qatar consist mainly of aircraft , machinery , and information technology .

u.s. imports from qatar consist mainly of petroleum products , but u.s. imports of qatar's crude oil or natural gas have declined to negligible levels in recent years , reflecting the significant increase in u.s. domestic production of those commodities .

qatar's growing airline , qatar airways , is a major buyer of u.s. commercial aircraft .

in october 2016 , the airline agreed to purchase from boeing up to another 100 passenger jets with an estimated value of $18 billion — likely about $10 billion if standard industry discounts are applied .

however , some u.s. airlines challenged qatar airways' benefits under a u.s. - qatar "open skies" agreement .

the u.s. carriers asserted that the airline's privileges under that agreement should be revoked because the airline's aircraft purchases are subsidized by qatar's government , giving it an unfair competitive advantage .

the obama administration did not reopen that agreement in response to the complaints , nor did the trump administration .

however , the united states and qatar reached a set of "understandings" on civil aviation on january 29 , 2018 , committing qatar airways to financial transparency and containing some limitations on the airline's ability to pick up passengers in europe for flights to the united states .

some assert that qatar airway's 2018 purchase of air italy might represent a violation of those limitations .

as one of the wealthiest countries per capita in the world , qatar gets negligible amounts of u.s. assistance .

in fy2016 , the united states spent about $100,000 on programs in qatar , about two - thirds of which was for counternarcotics programming .

in fy2015 , the united states spent $35,000 on programs in qatar , of which two - thirds was for counternarcotics .

