semiconductors , tiny electronic devices based on silicon or germanium , provide data processing capabilities in millions of products , from coffee pots to space vehicles .

the u.s. government played a significant role in the development of semiconductor technology , and domestic research and production have long been matters of intense congressional interest .

u.s. - headquartered semiconductor firms accounted for about half of worldwide semiconductor sales in 2015 .

however , u.s. - headquartered producers face stiff competition from firms headquartered in south korea , japan , and taiwan ; moreover , the chinese government has identified global leadership in semiconductors as a national priority .

further , the united states accounts for a diminishing share of global semiconductor production capacity , as manufacturers establish plants in locations where generous subsidies are available or customers in user industries , such as electronic products manufacturing , are nearby .

in july 2015 , members of congress concerned about the industry's competitiveness formed a semiconductor caucus to support increased federal funding for semiconductor research activities , among other objectives .

a semiconductor chip ( also known simply as a "semiconductor" or "chip" ) is a tiny electronic device ( generally smaller than a postage stamp ) comprised of billions of components that store , move , and process data .

these functions are made possible by the unique properties of semiconducting materials , such as silicon and germanium , which allow for the precise control of the flow of electrical current .

semiconductors are the enabling technology of the information age .

semiconductors allow computers to run software applications , such as email , internet browsers , and word processing and spreadsheet programs and to store documents , photographs , videos , music , and other data .

they also provide the "brains," memory , and data communication capabilities of countless other products , from cell phones and gaming systems to aircraft and industrial machinery to military equipment and weapons .

even many products with roots in mechanical systems are now heavily dependent on chip - based electronics: one car manufacturer asserts that some of its models incorporate as many as 6,000 semiconductors .

and one expert on software in cars estimates that premium - class automobiles can contain close to 100 million lines of software code ( instructions ) that the chips use to control the vehicle .

the semiconductor industry is generally characterized by large fluctuations in product supply and demand , depending heavily on the strength of the global economy .

u.s. - headquartered firms have the largest share of the global market , measured by sales , at close to 50% .

half of the 20 largest semiconductor firms by revenue in 2015 are headquartered in the united states: intel , qualcomm , micron , texas instruments , broadcom , apple , sandisk , nvidia , advanced micro devices , and on semiconductor .

other leading firms are based in south korea , japan , taiwan , and europe .

there are no china - based semiconductor firms on the top 20 list .

only a handful of companies have the sales volume to operate as integrated device manufacturers ( idms ) operating their own fabrication facilities ( known as fabs ) .

other chip firms are "fabless," meaning that they design and market semiconductors but contract production to "foundries" that manufacture semiconductors to order .

taiwan semiconductor manufacturing company ( tsmc ) , a taiwanese - headquartered company , operates the world's largest foundry .

fabless semiconductor firms generally enjoy higher and less volatile profit margins than semiconductor manufacturers with integrated operations .

potential risks associated with the use of a contract foundry include availability of capacity , timeliness of production , and quality control .

nationally , there were about 820 firms involved in semiconductor and related device manufacturing in 2013 .

the u.s. semiconductor industry's contribution to the u.s. economy measured by value added was $27.2 billion in 2014 , accounting for approximately one percent of u.s. manufacturing value added .

declining chip prices remain a challenge for semiconductor manufacturers as producers can continually manufacture more powerful chips that contain more functionality at lower prices and the price of semiconductors has fallen consistently over time .

for example , according to the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) producer price index , a measure of price changes by industry , semiconductor prices , adjusted for quality and performance , decreased by 46% between 2005 and 2015 .

consequently , to maintain or grow their revenue , chip producers must find new markets for their products .

the federal government has played a major role in supporting the u.s. semiconductor industry since the late 1940s .

that role , however , has changed considerably over time .

in the early years , federal support for the nascent industry included research funding ; support for the development of increasingly powerful computers ; and , serving as an early adopter of semiconductor - enabled technologies , creating a market through defense and space - related acquisitions .

from the late 1980s through the mid - 1990s , the federal role centered on reversing a perceived loss of u.s. competitiveness in semiconductors through the initiation and funding of an industry research consortium .

more recently , the federal role has focused on support for research to extend the life of current semiconductor technologies and to develop the scientific and technological underpinnings for revolutionary successor technologies .

for decades , many have argued that maintaining a domestic manufacturing capability for the most advanced semiconductor products is necessary for national security .

proponents of this view claim dependence by the u.s. military on foreign suppliers of semiconductors , especially those that are hostile or may become hostile to u.s. interests , is not acceptable due to the military's reliance on semiconductors as a vital and ubiquitous component in u.s. weapons and defense systems .

however , the high costs of maintaining a domestic semiconductor production capability for critical military inputs may result in more expensive weapons systems .

in 2003 , then - deputy secretary of defense paul wolfowitz wrote in an unclassified memo the "country needs a defense industrial base that includes leading edge , trusted commercial suppliers for critical integrated circuits used in sensitive defense weapons , intelligence , and communications systems. .

as a follow - up to the memo , the department of defense ( dod ) implemented a trusted supplier program ( originally named the trusted foundry program ) in 2004 , whereby the government pays a fee to u.s. companies to guarantee the access and reliability of components that are important to national defense .

under the program , ibm's fabrication facilities supplied advanced semiconductors to dod as the sole source contractor .

in 2014 , however , ibm announced that the united arab emirates - owned globalfoundries would acquire its unprofitable microelectronics fabrication facilities in vermont and new york .

the committee on foreign investment in the united states ( cfius ) reviewed the transaction and in july 2015 said that it would not prohibit the acquisition .

globalfoundries also obtained the appropriate accreditations to be a dod trusted supplier .

according to recent news reports , in june 2016 , dod reached a seven - year agreement with globalfoundries to supply microchips until 2023 .

in october 2015 , the house armed services subcommittee on oversight and investigations held a hearing that considered the long - term viability of the dod trusted supplier program in light of the shrinking number of domestic microelectronics manufacturers and other ways the semiconductor industry has changed .

future policy options under consideration include identifying additional u.s. - based trusted foundries with leading - edge manufacturing capability ; exploring alternative manufacturing approaches , which may incorporate non - u.s. made semiconductor parts ; or , establishing a government - owned fabrication facility .

beyond manufacturing , the trusted supplier program also includes firms that provide other services in the semiconductor supply chain , including design , assembly , and testing .

despite national security concerns , dod is heavily reliant on the commercial supply chain , which includes many non - u.s. suppliers , for most of its electronic hardware and the trusted supplier program is used for only a small fraction of the chips in defense systems .

in summer 2015 , dod's office of manufacturing and industrial base policy began a study on the microelectronics industrial base , which when finished is expected to include recommendations on strategies to increase dod's access to trusted microelectronics manufacturers .

