following incidents of terrorism or mass violence in the united states , jurisdictions and individuals may be eligible to receive various types of victim assistance both directly from the department of justice ( doj ) and indirectly from doj through their respective state victim assistance agencies or other programs .

while circumstances in some terrorism or mass violence incidents may make a jurisdiction or organization eligible for assistance from other federal departments , this report focuses solely on assistance available from doj's office for victims of crime ( ovc ) .

as authorized by the victims of crime act ( voca ) , the ovc supports several federal programs that may assist victims of terrorism or mass violence .

the ovc awards funds through formula and discretionary grants to states , local units of government , individuals , and other entities with the primary purpose of assisting victims .

these programs are funded by the crime victims fund ( cvf ) — an account within the u.s. treasury that is not funded through traditional appropriations but largely through the collection of federal criminal fines .

the director of the ovc is authorized to set aside $50 million of cvf money in the antiterrorism emergency reserve , which funds ovc - administered programs that support victims of terrorism or mass violence .

this report examines cvf - funded assistance for victims of terrorism or mass violence .

it includes discussion of programs that broadly cover crime victim assistance and programs that are specifically designed to address terrorism or mass violence .

it also includes a discussion of how these programs have assisted victims of various incidents of terrorism or mass violence over the last several years .

several doj programs may be used to assist jurisdictions in responding to the needs of victims following incidents of terrorism or mass violence .

grant programs include the victim assistance and victim compensation formula grant programs and the antiterrorism and emergency assistance program ( aeap ) .

other programs and operations directly assist victims , including the victim assistance program at the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , victim witness assistance at the offices of the u.s .

attorneys , the international terrorism victim expense reimbursement program ( itverp ) and the victim reunification travel program at the ovc , and various supplemental grants to and agreements with agencies and organizations that provide assistance to victims of terrorism or mass violence .

victim assistance formula grant program funds may be used by states to immediately respond with victim services in the event of a large - scale incident such as the shooting that occurred in charleston , sc , in june 2015 .

states use these funds to support crime victim assistance programs that provide direct services to crime victims .

eligible services , activities , and costs include the following: those that respond to the immediate emotional and physical needs ( excluding medical care ) of crime victims such as crisis intervention , mental health assistance , assistance with participation in criminal justice proceedings , forensic examinations , costs necessary and essential for providing direct services such as pro - rated costs of rent and transportation costs for victims to receive services , special services such as assisting victims in recovering property retained as evidence , personnel costs directly related to providing direct services , and restorative justice , which includes opportunities for crime victims to meet with perpetrators .

other allowable costs , such as training and advanced technologies , are listed in the final program guidelines for the victim assistance grant program .

each year in support of victim assistance programs , states and territories receive a base amount plus the remaining funds available after all other cvf - funded programs have received funding — this remaining amount is distributed based on population .

in fy2016 , $2.22 billion in victim assistance grant funds was distributed to the states , territories , and the district of columbia .

in fy2015 and fy2016 , victim assistance grants were substantially increased as the annual obligation cap on the cvf was tripled for fy2015 ( $2.361 billion ) and increased further in fy2016 ( $3.042 billion ) .

victim assistance grant award project periods span several years .

for example , the project period for fy2016 victim assistance grants is october 1 , 2015 , through september 30 , 2019 .

victim compensation formula grant funds may be used to help victims offset the costs of expenses related to incidents of terrorism or mass violence , including out - of - pocket expenses such as medical and mental health counseling expenses , lost wages , funeral and burial costs , and other costs ( except property loss ) authorized in a state's compensation statute .

victims are reimbursed for crime - related expenses that are not covered by other resources , such as private insurance .

maximum reimbursement amounts vary widely from state to state .

for example , california set its maximum reimbursement at $63,000 on a single application while virginia set its maximum award at $25,000 .

the ovc awards each eligible state victim compensation program an annual grant equal to 60% of what the state spent in state - funded benefits in the previous two years .

like victim assistance grants , victim compensation award project periods span several years .

in fy2016 , $125.4 million in victim compensation grant funds was distributed to the states , territories , and the district of columbia .

the antiterrorism emergency reserve was established in p.l .

104-132 to meet the immediate and long - term needs of victims of terrorism or mass violence .

the director of the ovc was authorized to set aside $50 million of cvf money in the antiterrorism emergency reserve to respond to the needs of victims of the september 11 terrorist attacks , and subsequently to replenish any amounts expended so that not more than $50 million is reserved in any fiscal year for any future victims of terrorism or mass violence .

of note , these funds do not fall under the annual obligation cap of the cvf , but rather funds retained in the cvf may be used to replenish the antiterrorism emergency reserve .

this reserve fund supports the antiterrorism and emergency assistance program ( aeap ) , the international terrorism victim expense reimbursement program ( itverp ) , the crime victim emergency assistance fund , the victim reunification program , and other activities in support of victims of mass violence or terrorism .

in addition , the antiterrorism emergency reserve supports other activities such as supplemental grants to other entities to provide emergency relief ( eg , crisis response efforts , assistance , compensation , training and technical assistance , and ongoing assistance , including during any investigation or prosecution ) to victims of terrorist acts or mass violence occurring within the united states .

the ovc may respond to incidents of terrorism or mass violence with grants from the aeap .

following these incidents , the ovc verifies that an act of terrorism or mass violence has resulted in a significant number of victims being injured or killed .

it then contacts the relevant state's voca administrative office and advises the administrator that aeap resources may be available .

in cases of terrorism or mass violence outside the united states , the ovc will determine which organizations or agencies within the united states may apply for funding .

eligible applicants include u.s .

attorneys' offices ; federal , state , and local governments ( including state victim assistance and compensation programs ) ; and nongovernmental victim service organizations .

aeap funds may be used for the following types of assistance: crisis response , consequence management , criminal justice support , crime victim compensation , and training and technical assistance .

see table a - 1 for award amounts distributed under the aeap from fy2014 through july 2016 .

in addition to the aeap , the antiterrorism emergency reserve funds several other programs and operations that support victims of terrorism or mass violence .

these programs and operations include the following: the international terrorism victim expense reimbursement program ( itverp ) — through itverp , the ovc reimburses victims of international terrorism and their families for expenses related to medical and mental health care , a funeral and burial , repatriation of the victim's remains , property loss , and other expenses including emergency travel .

crime victim emergency assistance fund at the fbi — with support from this fund , the fbi's office for victim assistance provides support and emergency assistance to victims of terrorism or mass violence .

victim reunification program — through this program , the ovc assists parents whose children are illegally taken across u.s. borders by a spouse or biological parent .

support includes services such as payment of transportation expenses required to attend a court proceeding with the child , translation of documents related to court hearings and the reunification process , and counseling support to prepare the parents for reunification and minimize the trauma for the child .

interagency agreements — the ovc contracts with and reimburses other agencies , including federal agencies , to provide assistance and compensation to victims of terrorism acts or mass violence occurring within the united states .

special masters claims — the ovc funds reimbursement for federal court special masters in certain terrorism - related civil lawsuits .

funds from the antiterrorism emergency reserve have supported most of these listed activities over the last several years .

see the appendix for further details on use of these funds .

this appendix includes award data for the past three fiscal years to illustrate how the antiterrorism emergency reserve has been used to assist victims of terrorism or mass violence .

table a - 1 includes awards made under the antiterrorism and emergency assistance program ( aeap ) from fy2014 through july 2016 .

table a - 2 includes all other activities funded by the antiterrorism emergency reserve from fy2014 through july 2016 .

