in february 2016 , the united states signed the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) with 11 countries: canada , mexico , chile , peru , japan , australia , new zealand , singapore , malaysia , vietnam , and brunei .

the tpp , now subject to approval and implementation by congress , is termed by its participants as a comprehensive and high - standard agreement , designed to eliminate and reduce trade barriers and establish and enhance trade rules and disciplines among the parties .

if implemented , it would be the largest plurilateral fta by value of trade , encompassing roughly 40% of world gdp , and could serve further to integrate the united states in the dynamic asia - pacific region .

as a "living agreement," it has the potential to negotiate new rules and expand its membership .

it could also mark a shift to the negotiation of "mega - regional" trade liberalization agreements in lieu of bilateral ftas and broader multilateral trade liberalization in the world trade organization ( wto ) .

in considering tpp and other trade agreements , discussions often focus on potential economic effects , and especially on potential gains or losses in employment .

in addition , some observers have tied u.s. trade deficits to existing u.s. free trade agreements ( ftas ) by arguing that the agreements have worsened the trade deficit and , thereby , have negatively affected u.s. employment and wages .

according to many economists , trade in general provides economy - wide net positive benefits for consumers as a whole and for producers , especially for firms in export - oriented industries .

they also note , conversely , that economic adjustment costs stemming from lower trade barriers may be highly concentrated , affecting some workers , firms , and communities disproportionately .

the relationship between trade and jobs , however , is complicated and subject to a number of different and , at times , opposing forces .

in addition , impediments in local labor markets may raise adjustments costs for some workers , firms , and communities in ways that may not be fully reflected in traditional trade models .

this report examines recent studies on the potential economic impact of the tpp .

it also provides a limited discussion of the role of trade agreements in the economy and examines selected studies on the impact of tpp .

for a broader treatment of some of these issues see crs report r44546 , the economic effects of trade: overview and policy challenges , by james k. jackson .

in general , economists and others use various economic models and approaches to estimate the magnitude of changes in u.s. economic activity and employment that could arise from a trade agreement .

both proponents and opponents of trade agreements often cite the results of these studies to support their respective positions .

these models , however , differ in the estimates they produce , reflecting different assumptions and differences in the structure of the models themselves .

while all the various models and approaches have strengths and weaknesses , although not always in equal proportions , they vary in the degree to which they reflect economic reality , and they are highly sensitive to the assumptions they use .

the tpp , considered by participants to be a high - standard and comprehensive agreement , is designed to eliminate and reduce trade barriers and establish and enhance trade rules and disciplines of the trading system among the parties to the agreement .

the agreement covers goods , services , investment , and a number of other issues including trade facilitation , digital trade , intellectual property rights , and standards , or technical barriers to trade .

due to the limitations of data and other theoretical and practical issues involved with services , investment , and non - tariff barriers , most estimates of the economic and employment effects of trade and trade agreements focus narrowly on the goods sector , where data on trade and tariff rates are available , to estimate how demand for these goods may change as a result of changes in tariffs .

accordingly , such estimates do not represent the total impact of the agreement on the economy .

trade models used to analyze ftas are part of a class of economic models referred to as computable general equilibrium models ( cge ) that incorporate data on trade and a range of domestic economic variables , including an industry input - output ( i - o ) table , employment , and labor data , on as many as 100 countries .

the most commonly used cge economic model and database is the global trade atlas project ( gtap ) , located at purdue university , that is used to estimate changes in trade ( exports and imports ) from changes in tariff rates and tariff rate quotas .

cge trade models are widely used and have proven to be helpful in estimating the effects of trade liberalization in such sectors as agriculture and manufacturing where the barriers to trade are more easily identifiable and quantifiable .

the united states international trade commission ( usitc ) , economists peter a. petri and michael g. plummer , and the world bank all use the gtap model for their simulations .

in contrast , economists jeronim capaldo and alex izurieta use a different model to develop their estimates of the impact of tpp .

due to the unique nature of the model and the approach used by capaldo and izurieta , this model and its estimates are given a relatively lengthy treatment in this report .

cge models are long - run microeconomic models that have been used widely and tested thoroughly .

the models provide estimates of the distribution of potential gains and losses expressed as proportional effects ( percentage increases or decreases in trade ) for various sectors , relative to certain baseline economic projections .

modelers argue that the microeconomic approach is justified because trade policies operate through microeconomic channels by tracing changes in trade policy to national productivity levels , wages , and incomes .

although the limitations of the models are well - known ( see earlier sections ) , the models arguably represent a rigorous , data - centric approach to estimating the economic effects of trade agreements .

trade models also use data that represent well - established trade relationships between countries , which means they are limited in their ability to estimate the impact of a new trade agreement on goods or services that previously had not been traded due to barriers or on trade between countries that previously had a limited trade relationship .

given the size and complexity of the cge models , they must necessarily operate with a number of assumptions .

one such assumption is that the economies in question are operating at full employment .

while some experts question the assumption of full employment , it does not seem unreasonable considering the long - term time frame generally required for most trade agreements to be fully implemented .

during this time , the economy would be expected to return to its long - term growth path at or near full employment .

over the estimating period , a persistently low level of unemployment is unlikely to have a significant impact on the results of the models , given the multitude of other assumptions involved in generating the estimates .

in addition , during the implementation period , it seems questionable to assume that the rate of unemployment would persist at levels that would be high enough to have a significant impact on the estimates .

in most cases , either the economy would be expected to return to full employment solely through market forces , or the government would be expected to intervene by adopting keynesian - style stimulative macroeconomic policies ( changes in tax rates or government spending ) to move the economy toward full employment .

as a result of the large number of countries that often are included in trade models and the vast amounts of trade data used , the models necessarily must sacrifice some level of precision in their estimating abilities .

the models are intended to provide insight into the mechanisms by which changes in tariffs or other parameters may affect changes in trade flows among a set of countries .

as a consequence , trade models aggregate vast amounts of data into a manageable size , for instance by reducing more than 17,000 individual commodities into about 50 categories and over 150 countries into 29 different country and geographic regions .

as a result , tariffs in the models represent weighted averages of tariffs for the commodities that are aggregated into these basic groups .

this procedure tends to mask the importance of those products within the aggregate that have high tariffs rates , which often are the target of new trade agreements .

trade models generally do not incorporate assumptions about the speed with which tariff changes affect the relevant economies , leaving it to the modelers to make assumptions about how quickly changes in tariff rates will be passed along in goods prices and about the timing of any adjustments .

these models also make no assumptions about the basic input - output structure of the economy and do not attempt to adjust this structure to account for economic or technical changes that lead an industry to substitute one factor for another .

this assumption is important , because standard economic theory indicates that changes in goods prices , whether from changes in tariff rates or from some other source , give rise to changes in the demand for labor and capital and , therefore , that price changes ultimately will alter the basic input - output structure of the economy .

since most large trade models originally were developed with the intent of analyzing the economic effects of such broad multi - country trade agreements as the uruguay round , this lack of precision was not considered to be an important drawback .

however , this lack of precision may be an issue when the models are used to estimate the effects of bilateral and plurilateral free trade agreements where the overall amount of trade , and therefore the impact of the agreement , generally would be expected to be less than that of a wto - style multilateral agreement .

trade models such as the cge differ from large macroeconomic models that are used to forecast changes in the rate of growth of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , wages , taxes , or jobs .

as a result , trade models do not yield precise estimates of the number of jobs that will be affected by any particular trade agreement .

in response , some groups have used various methods and proxy estimators to assess the potential impact of trade agreements on jobs , which have produced a wide range of estimates .

as examples of these approaches , some groups have used such indicators as trade deficits , or estimates of the number of jobs in the economy that are supported by exports , to develop estimates of the impact of trade and trade agreements on jobs in the economy .

these models may face important limitations of data and theoretical and practical issues that make it difficult to derive precise estimates of the impact of a particular trade agreement on the economy .

this section provides an overview of various studies , their assumptions and a description of the models used to estimate the economic impact of the proposed tpp on u.s. trade , employment , and gdp relative to a baseline projection .

the studies were selected because they are widely cited and are affecting the public policy debate about tpp .

congress may consider legislation to implement the proposed tpp in the near future .

part of the debate surrounding the agreement likely will focus on the potential impact of the agreement on the u.s. economy , particularly the effect on employment .

although the u.s. rate of unemployment has fallen by more than half since the high rates reached in 2009 , many observers remain concerned over the role of international trade and the tpp on the relatively slow growth in wages and the distribution of income .

under such conditions , it is not uncommon for communities or workers to raise concerns over the potential impact of a new trade agreement .

an analysis of the available estimates of the potential effects of tpp on u.s. employment , trade , and economic welfare raises a number of questions concerning the usefulness of those estimates .

economic modeling naturally incorporates various assumptions and entails differing methodologies that can have a profound effect on the estimates that are generated , even when the estimates are derived from the same economic model .

standard models are well known and incorporate standard assumptions and approaches that generally are well explained .

many experts agree that the mark of a good economic model is one that uses assumptions and methodologies that seem reasonable and are not geared toward generating any particular result .

even estimates by these studies can vary substantially .

in contrast , some models may use non - standard approaches and assumptions that may be difficult to justify and seem to have been chosen in order to generate pre - determined results .

consequently , estimates of the impact of the tpp on the u.s. economy can vary from positive to negative , reflecting the importance of the assumptions that are used to derive the results .

given the current state of economic modeling and data availability , the models that are deemed to offer the most accurate representation of the effects of changes in trade policy likely can provide only rough estimates of the magnitude of the potential changes in employment in certain sectors , but cannot offer estimates of the precise size of the shifts in employment .

as this report indicates , the most important assumption involved in generating estimates of the impact of tpp on employment appears to be the expected level of labor utilization in the u.s. economy over the phase - in period .

model simulations based on an assumption of full employment likely track closer to the current situation than would data following the 2008-2009 financial crisis when rates of labor unemployment were above historical levels .

it seems reasonable to assume , however , that the u.s. economy will perform at or close to its long - term trend approaching full employment during the period following the adoption of tpp .

another major qualification for the estimates may be that they do not account for changes in exchange rates , which may have a wide - ranging effect on the prices of internationally traded goods and may overwhelm changes in prices of goods that arise from changes in tariff rates .

estimates of employment effects of new ftas can be subjective and misleading because they represent a partial accounting of the total economic effects of new ftas .

u.s. ftas typically include comprehensive provisions for goods , services , and investment .

with few exceptions , estimates of possible employment effects of the tpp focus primarily on employment effects in the goods sectors and neglect the potential effects in the services and investment areas .

the study by petri , et al .

attempts to bridge this gap by developing a methodology for making such an assessment .

it is not possible to draw any conclusions about the extent to which these estimates reflect the actual costs and benefits of liberalizing trade in services and foreign investment flows without additional information .

in addition , the estimates neglect a broad range of impacts for the economy as a whole that potentially can provide consumers with large economic benefits and that can yield broad productivity and efficiency gains for the economy and may enhance employment .

as a result , estimates of the employment effects of the tpp may serve poorly as an indicator of the total impact of a new fta on the economy as a whole .

as policymakers consider tpp , they likely will continue to weigh the results of a range of estimates of the employment effects of the agreement to gauge the impact on the economy .

in this process , policymakers likely would be aided by estimates that clearly state the assumptions that are used and that inform policymakers about the broad implications of such agreements for the economy as a whole .

in addition , policymakers likely would benefit from more reliable data on the potential magnitude of the effects that such agreements might be expected to have on specific sectors , allowing them to craft programs to assist those most directly affected by the agreements .

as a result , policymakers may benefit from a number of initiatives to improve information and data on the impact of international trade on the economy .

these might include increased information and data on services in the economy , including the shifting of in - house services from the manufacturing sector to the services sector and the formal and informal barriers to u.s. services posed by major trading partners ; better data on worker dislocations , including the reasons for business closings ; and better understanding of the development of global supply chains and the role they are playing in the u.s. economy .

