nicaragua began to establish a new democracy in the early 1990s after eight years of civil war in which the united states supported the anti - sandinista contra movement in the country .

institutions such as a demo cratically elected legislature , a partially independent judiciary ( judges are elected by the national assembly ) , and an independent electoral council remained weak , however .

since the late 1990s , these institutions have become increasingly politicized .

in 1998 , the leftist sandinista national liberation front ( fsln , or sandinistas ) and the conservative constitutionalist liberal party ( plc ) made a pact intended to limit participation by other political parties .

current president and fsln leader daniel ortega was a member of the junta that took power in 1979 after overthrowing dictator anastasio somoza and was elected president in 1984 .

as part of a regional peace plan , ortega agreed to democratic elections in 1990 , which he lost to violeta chamorro .

after losing three successive bids to regain the presidency in 1990 , 1996 , and 2001 elections , ortega was elected in 2006 .

since then the government has grown increasingly authoritarian in nature .

he was reelected in 2011 and 2016 .

as opposition leader in the national assembly from 1990 to 2006 and during his two subsequent terms as president , ortega slowly consolidated sandinista — and his own — control over the country's institutions .

the united states and other observers cite municipal and regional elections over this period , and the 2011 presidential elections , as having been flawed and used to strengthen ortega's control of national institutions .

nonetheless , ortega and the fsln have raised the standard of living for much of nicaragua's poor population , thereby increasing the sandinistas' popularity and public support .

although numerous observers questioned the legitimacy of the 2011 national elections and the official tally giving ortega almost 63% of the vote , many also conceded that ortega most likely would have won even without carrying out fraud .

by 2012 , the fsln had achieved "near complete dominance over most of the country's institutions," according to freedom house .

in summer 2016 , the government removed some of the last checks on ortega's power by removing members of the opposition from the legislature , easing ortega's way to winning a third consecutive presidential term that november .

ortega's popularity may be diminishing , however .

although the official electoral authority reported voter turnout was almost 70% , opponents estimated a much lower turnout of only 30% .

ortega was inaugurated to his third consecutive , and fourth overall , five - year term as president on january 10 , 2017 .

in early september 2016 , nicaragua granted asylum to former el salvadoran president mauricio funes , who is being investigated for alleged corruption .

funes , of the leftist farabundo marti national liberation front ( fmln ) , said he is fleeing political persecution from rightist elements and is afraid for his safety .

nicaragua's establishment of a framework for economic development since the signing of the 1990 central american peace accords , which ended years of armed civil war in nicaragua , has followed a more consistent path than has its democratic development .

the world bank says nicaragua stands out for maintaining growth levels above the average for latin america and the caribbean .

nicaragua's economic growth reached a high of 6.2% in 2011 ; the world bank estimates a drop in growth of 3.9% for 2015 and predicts growth of 4.2% for 2016 .

president ortega's stated goal has been to implement socialism in nicaragua , which he defines as a mixed economy .

nonetheless , he has maintained many elements of a market - based economy , including participation in the u.s. - central america - dominican republic free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) .

nicaragua's economy faces two significant challenges .

high electricity costs appear to hinder the business community's ability to compete and stifle foreign investment in new businesses .

the future of the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement could also have a negative impact on nicaragua's textile production , a major export commodity for nicaragua .

the united states has sought to strengthen democratic institutions and practices in nicaragua since nicaragua initiated a transition to democracy in 1990 .

the united states has repeatedly expressed concerns as those institutions became politicized and , according to the state department , democratic space has narrowed .

it has sometimes reduced assistance to sanction the nicaraguan government .

in 2013 , for example , the united states moved almost $4 million in counternarcotics assistance away from direct support to the government because of inadequate nicaraguan government transparency .

the funds were shifted to drug eradication and nongovernmental drug demand reduction programs instead .

both houses of congress are currently considering bills that would oppose loans at international financial institutions for the nicaraguan government unless it is taking effective steps to hold free , fair , and transparent elections ( h.r .

5708 , s. 3284 ) .

according to the u.s. department of state , despite some of the concerns about the direction the ortega government has taken nicaragua , increasing numbers of private american citizens , including retirees , reside in nicaragua .

in addition , about 250,000 u.s. citizens visited nicaragua in 2014 .

tensions between the two countries have risen recently .

nicaragua expelled three u.s. officials — two u.s. customs and border control agents and a u.s. army war college professor researching the canal — from the country on june 14 , 2016 .

the state department said that such action was "unwarranted" and could have a negative impact on bilateral relations , particularly trade. .

the ortega government stated that two officials ( it did not mention the third official ) were acting without the knowledge of nicaraguan authorities .

the state department issued a travel alert on june 29 , 2016 , informing u.s. citizens to increased nicaraguan government scrutiny of foreigners' activities , new requirements for volunteer groups , and the potential for demonstrations during the fall election season .

the administration's fy2016 foreign aid request for nicaragua totaled $18.2 million and focused on strengthening independent media and civil society organizations and working with at - risk youth along the caribbean coast to reverse increasing violence and insecurity .

congress appropriated $10 million for nicaragua .

the fy2017 request of $14.8 million for nicaragua had the same goals .

the request included $14.5 million in development assistance ( da ) and $300,000 in international military education and training ( imet ) .

the da funding would support civil society , education , and citizen - security programs .

the united states and nicaragua cooperate on security and counternarcotics issues .

according to the administration's congressional budget justification , imet assistance would "promote the professional development of the nicaraguan military and strengthen the military - to - military relationship with the united states. .

through the central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) , the united states has provided equipment , training , and technical assistance to support law - enforcement operations .

the united states has worked with the nicaraguan police and navy to improve their narcotics interdiction capabilities and supported nongovernmental drug demand reduction programs .

from 1994 to 2015 , u.s. administrations had to certify to congress that nicaragua was resolving property claims by u.s. citizens whose property was expropriated in the 1980s , or issue a property waiver , before congress would approve aid on an annual basis .

in august 2015 , the united states announced that nicaragua had resolved the last of the relevant claims , and that requirement was dropped .

on september 21 , 2016 , the house of representatives passed the nicaraguan investment conditionality act of 2016 ( nica ; h.r .

5708 ) to oppose loans at international financial institutions for the government of nicaragua unless the government was taking effective steps to hold free , fair , and transparent elections .

the senate did not pass the bill before the end of the 114 th congress .

for decades , various u.s. administrations and congresses have expressed concerns about respect for human rights in nicaragua .

according to the state department's 2015 human rights report on nicaragua , the principal human rights abuses committed by the nicaraguan government were restrictions on citizens' rights to vote , obstacles to freedom of speech and press , and increased government harassment and intimidation of nongovernmental and civil society organizations .

other notable abuses included biased policies to promote single - party dominance ; arbitrary arrests by police ; life - threatening prison conditions ; widespread corruption ; violence against women and lesbian , gay , bisexual , transgender , and intersex people ; trafficking in persons ; and violations of trade union rights .

discrimination against ethnic minorities and indigenous people and communities , people with disabilities , and people with hiv / aids has also been reported .

according to the state department's human rights report , there were several allegations that the nicaraguan government or its agents committed arbitrary or unlawful killings and "human rights organizations and independent media alleged some killings ... were politically motivated. .

government agents committed "many" of those killings during confrontations with illegal armed groups in the northern part of the country , the report said .

according to the state department , the nicaraguan government generally did not act on complaints of corruption or human rights abuses — including unlawful killings — allegedly committed by security forces .

in addition , the nicaraguan government limits public information on abuse investigations .

under such conditions , some observers are concerned that it may be difficult for the united states to ensure that officers participating in u.s. - sponsored imet programs are not human rights abusers .

the state department's report said that human rights organizations reported several cases of arbitrary arrests by the nicaraguan police and army related to protests in several cities .

the state department also reported that the ortega government intimidated and harassed journalists , increased restriction of access to public information , and harassed and intimidated nongovernmental and civil society organizations in 2015 .

nicaragua made some progress in combatting corruption during earlier democratically elected governments .

in 2003 , for example , then - president enrique bolaños's administration convicted former president arnoldo alemán of embezzling about $100 million in public funds while in office .

according to the state department's 2015 human rights report on nicaragua , nicaraguan officials frequently engage in corrupt practices with impunity .

as mentioned above , recent u.s. administrations , both democratic and republican , have emphasized respect for human rights as a key component of u.s. foreign policy , including regarding nicaragua .

during confirmation hearings for secretary of state nominee rex tillerson , members on both sides of the aisle and human rights advocates expressed concerns that tillerson was not committed to human rights .

the senate foreign relations committee voted to send his nomination to the full senate , where a vote was expected the week of january 30 , 2017 .

the united states and nicaragua are participants in the u.s. - central america - dominican republic free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) .

since the accord went into effect in 2005 , u.s. exports to nicaragua have increased by 101% and nicaraguan exports to the united states have grown by 170% .

according to the office of the u.s. trade representative , nicaragua is the united states' 62 nd largest goods trading partner , with $4.4 billion in total ( two - way ) goods trade during 2015 .

although president trump pledged to renegotiate the north american free trade agreement with canada and mexico and withdrew from the trans - pacific partnership process , which includes some south american countries , he has yet to mention any intentions regarding cafta - dr. central american leaders seemed to believe that their trade agreement would remain intact , but nicaraguan and other officials said they are watching the new administration for indications otherwise .

the top u.s. exports to nicaragua in 2015 were machinery , articles donated for relief , electrical machinery , mineral fuels , and knitted or crocheted fabrics .

nicaragua was the united states' 72 nd largest goods export market in 2015 , with u.s. goods exports up 25% ( $248 million ) from 2014 .

u.s. exports of agricultural products to nicaragua include soybean meal and oil , corn , dairy products , and prepared food .

nicaragua was the 57 th largest supplier of goods imports to the united states in 2015 .

the top nicaraguan exports to the united states in 2015 were knit apparel , electrical machinery , woven apparel , precious metal and stone ( gold ) , and coffee .

recent changes in u.s. laws regarding cigars could have a negative impact on future tobacco exports from nicaragua .

the american chamber of commerce estimates that more than 125 companies operating in nicaragua have some relation to a u.s. company , either as wholly or partly owned subsidiaries , franchisees , or exclusive distributors of u.s. products .

the companies have more than 300,000 employees in nicaragua .

some members of congress have expressed concern about nicaragua's relationship with russia , especially recent military purchases .

russian president vladimir putin visited nicaragua in 2014 , saying that he intended to continue strengthening economic ties with nicaragua .

president ortega pushed through the legislature authorization for a ground station in nicaragua for a russian satellite network .

the nicaraguan army has expressed interest in buying a fleet of russian - made fighter jets for defense and to prevent aerial drug trafficking .

costa rican and honduran analysts have expressed concerns that such an arms purchase would be destabilizing to the region .

nicaragua ordered 50 tanks from russia to be delivered in 2016-2017 , reportedly costing $80 million , which also raised concern among its neighbors .

nicaraguan and russian military officials reportedly said that delivery of the battle tanks was part of ongoing "military cooperation" between the two countries .

the nicaraguan government has kept many aspects of the canal deal , including the technical and financial studies , secret .

this secrecy has contributed to speculation that the chinese government is involved in the project .

china and nicaragua do not have diplomatic relations ; nicaragua maintains relations with taiwan .

the chinese government denies involvement in the canal , but some experts claim that it has influence over hknd , the private chinese company granted the canal concession .

although various reports emerged in 2009 that iran was expanding its role in nicaragua , causing concern in washington , those reports were later shown to be untrue or exaggerated .

in late august 2016 , iran's foreign minister , mohammad javad zarif , included a visit to nicaragua on his latin american tour .

the iranian government said the trip was part of its efforts to expand economic relations with the region now that international sanctions against iran have been lifted .

zarif said that areas of cooperation between the two countries could include work on the nicaraguan canal , agriculture , energy production , and banking , among others .

