g eographical indications ( gis ) are place names used to identify products that come from these places , and to protect the quality and reputation of a distinctive product originating in a certain region .

the term is most often applied to wines , spirits , and agricultural products .

examples of registered or established gis include parmigiano reggiano cheese and prosciutto di parma ham from the parma region of italy , toscano olive oil from tuscany , roquefort cheese , champagne from the region of the same name in france , irish whiskey , darjeeling tea , florida oranges , idaho potatoes , vidalia onions , washington state apples , and napa valley wines .

some food producers benefit from the use of gis by giving certain foods recognition for their distinctiveness , differentiating certain foods from other foods in the marketplace .

in this manner , gis can be commercially valuable .

gis may also be eligible for relief from acts of infringement or unfair competition .

gis may also protect consumers from deceptive or misleading labels .

gis are an example of intellectual property rights ( ipr ) , along with other types of intellectual property such as patents , copyrights , trademarks , and trade secrets .

the use of gis , particularly for some wines and dairy products , has become a contentious international trade issue .

some consider gis to be protected intellectual property , while others consider them to be generic or semi - generic terms .

many u.s. food manufacturers view the use of common or traditional names as generic terms and view the european union's ( eu's ) protection of its registered gis as a way to monopolize the use of certain wine and food terms and as a form of trade protectionism .

specifically , several industry groups have expressed concern that the eu is using gis to impose restrictions on the use of common names for some foods — such as parmesan , feta , and provolone cheeses and certain wines — and limit u.s. food companies from marketing these foods using these common names .

laws and regulations governing gis differ between the united states and eu , which further complicates this issue .

gis are among the agricultural issues that have been raised in the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) , a potential reciprocal free trade agreement ( fta ) that the united states and the eu are negotiating .

formal negotiations commenced in july 2013 .

through the negotiation , the united states and eu seek to enhance market access and trade disciplines by addressing remaining transatlantic barriers to trade and investment in goods , services , and agriculture by negotiating a "comprehensive and high - standard" t - tip .

the goals of the negotiation are to reduce and eliminate tariffs between the united states and eu ; further open services and government procurement markets ; enhance cooperation , convergence , and transparency in regulations and standards - setting processes ; and strengthen and develop new rules in areas such as intellectual property rights ( ipr ) , investment , digital trade , trade facilitation , labor and the environment , localization barriers , and state - owned enterprises .

for more background information on the negotiation , see crs report r43387 , transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) negotiations .

treatment of gis as part of any fta may likely be addressed as part of either an ipr chapter or an agriculture chapter .

the united states tends to address gis in the ipr chapter of its ftas .

the eu's march 2016 draft chapter on agriculture includes its proposal regarding gis .

the united nations distinguishes two main approaches for protecting gis at the national level: 1 .

the p ublic l aw a pproach applies to cases whereby public authorities enact legislation dedicated to the specific protection of gis ( a sui generis system such as a special regime of protection ) and generally consists of an official recognition of gis by granting the status of a public seal of quality — often through a common official logo — where governments can protect the use of the gi ex officio based on its official designation .

2 .

the p rivate l aw a pproach is the use of laws against unfair competition and usurpation .

it also involves trademark laws ( such as using collective or certification marks ) , where the protection is primarily based on private actions .

these approaches differ with respect to the conditions for protection or the scope of protection , but they share some common features in that both establish rights for collective use by those who comply with defined standards .

gi protections often differ by country and have been developed in accordance with different legal , historical , and economic traditions .

in the united states , gis are generally treated as a subset of trademarks , whereas the eu protects gis through a series of established "quality schemes. .

gis are also protected by various multilateral trade agreements .

gis are protected by the world trade organization ( wto ) agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) , which sets binding minimum standards for ip protection that are enforceable by the wto's dispute settlement procedure .

under trips , wto members have a mandatory responsibility to recognize and protect gis as intellectual property .

the united states and each of the eu countries are signatories of trips and subject to its rights and obligations .

accordingly , under trips , the united states has committed to providing a minimum standard of protection for gis ( i.e. , protecting gi products to avoid misleading the public and prevent unfair competition ) and an "enhanced level of protection" to wines and spirits that carry a geographical indication , subject to certain exceptions .

 ( see text box . ) .

trips defines gis as "indications which identify a good as originating in the territory of a member , or a region or locality in that territory , where a given quality , reputation or other characterist ic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographical origin" ( article 22 ( 1 ) ) .

accordingly , a product's quality , reputation , or other characteristics can be determined by where it comes from , and gis are place names ( or in some countries words associated with a place ) used to identify products that come from these places and have these characteristics .

previously , the united states challenged the eu's gi laws under wto dispute settlement in 1999 , alleging discrimination against u.s. gis and failure to protect u.s. trademarks .

a wto panel ruled that aspects of the eu's gi laws were inconsistent with trips , resulting in changes to the eu program .

trips builds on treaties administered by the world intellectual property organization ( wipo ) .

wipo is a specialized agency in the u.n. system with the mission to "lead the development of a balanced and effective international intellectual property ( ip ) system. .

wipo has 188 member states , including the united states and each of the eu countries .

wipo defines gis as "a sign used on products that have a specific geographical origin and possess qualities or a reputation that are due to that origin. .

to function as a gi , "a sign must identify a product as originating in a given place," "the qualities , characteristics or reputation of the product should be essentially due to the place of origin," and there must be "a clear link between the product and its original place of production. .

wipo also oversees the "international register of appellations of origin" established in the lisbon agreement for the protection of appellations of origin and their international registration ( "lisbon agreement" ) .

the lisbon agreement is among the major ip conferences and ensures for its members the protection against any "usurpation or imitation , even when used in translation or accompanied by words such as 'kind' , 'type' or the like. .

the agreement was adopted in 1958 ( later revised in 1967 ) and entered into force in 1966 .

the united states is not a party to the agreement .

several eu countries are members , including bulgaria , czech republic , france , greece , hungary , italy , portugal , romania , slovakia , and spain .

the agreement's multilateral register ( "lisbon register" ) covers food products and beverages and related products , as well as non - food products ( including cuban cigars ) .

the register covers appellations of origin ( ao ) only , which comprise a category of gis .

aos refer to "geographical denomination of a country , region or locality which serves to designate a product originating therein , the quality or characteristics of which are due exclusively or essentially to the geographical environment , including natural and human factors. .

both aos and gis require a qualitative link between the product and its place of origin , but ao designations generally result "exclusively or essentially to the geographical environment," while for gis a single criterion attributable to geographic origin may be sufficient to qualify .

as of may 2016 the registry contained more than 1,000 products .

more recent developments have raised u.s. concerns about the possible expansion of gi restrictions promoted by the eu .

specifically , the so - called geneva act under the lisbon agreement would allow for the international registration of gis and could allow the eu ( as well as other countries in africa and the americas ) to place further limits on the use of gis and product names linked to geographic regions .

the united states opposes expansion of the agreement given ongoing opposition to the gi registration of cheese names that the united states argues to be generic or common names .

congressional trade and judiciary committee leaders expressed disappointment that all wipo members were not allowed "meaningful participation" in the negotiation process and that the geneva act was adopted despite the "objection of multiple wipo members. .

some private stakeholders also expressed concerns about the process .

u.s. interests may now be focused on ensuring that any expansion of the lisbon agreement does not allow the agreement's members to place further limits on the ability of trademark owners and others to use , in foreign markets , names linked to geographic regions that the united states argues are generic .

the geneva act will enter into force three months after five eligible parties have ratified or acceded to it .

to date , no party has done so .

in the eu , a series of regulations governing gis was initiated in the early 1990s covering agricultural and food products , wine , and spirits .

legislation adopted in 1992 covered agricultural products ( not including wines and spirits ) , but it was replaced by changes enacted in 2006 following a wto panel ruling that found some aspects of the eu's scheme inconsistent with wto rules .

the new rules came into force in january 2013 .

the eu laws and regulations cover three eu - wide quality labeling schemes: 1 .

protected designation of origin ( pdo ) covers agricultural products and foodstuffs whose quality or characteristic is essentially or exclusively due to a particular geographic environment and is produced , processed , and prepared in a given geographical area using recognized know - how .

2 .

protected geographical indication ( p g i ) covers agricultural products and foodstuffs whose quality , reputation , or other characteristic is closely linked to the geographical area and where at least one of the stages of production , processing , or preparation takes place in the area .

3 .

traditional specialties guaranteed ( tsg ) covers foodstuffs highlighting a traditional character , either in the composition or means of production ( eg , resulting from a traditional production or processing method or composed of raw materials or ingredients used in traditional recipes ) .

unlike pdo and pgi marks , the geographical origin of a tsg registered product is irrelevant .

product registration markers for these three quality schemes , along with the relevant regulations , are shown in the text box below .

the eu regulations establish provisions regarding products from a defined geographical area given linkages between the characteristics of products and their geographical origin .

the eu defines a gi as "a distinctive sign used to identify a product as originating in the territory of a particular country , region or locality where its quality , reputation or other characteristic is linked to its geographical origin. .

according to the eu , gis matter "economically and culturally" and "can create value for local communities through products that are deeply rooted in tradition , culture and geography" and "support rural development and promote new job opportunities in production , processing and other related services. .

because of their commercial value , the protection of gis is a major priority for the eu .

a 2012 study estimates that gi product sales were valued at €54.3 billion ( roughly $72.0 billion given 2010 exchange rates ) .

more than one - half of this estimated value is for wines .

leading eu member states , by value of gi sales , include france , italy , germany , the united kingdom , spain , greece , and portugal .

eu trade policy actively supports stronger protection of gis internationally , including as part of its multilateral and bilateral negotiations , given concerns about gi "violations throughout the world" from misuse and imitation .

regarding protection of gis , the eu is seeking certain "trips - plus" provisions that would establish a list of eu names to be protected "directly and indefinitely" in countries outside the eu , allow coexistence with prior trademarks ( if they are "registered in good faith" ) , phase out other uses of eu names , ensure a right to use ( as opposed to trademark license system ) , guarantee administrative protections , and create a cooperation mechanism and dialogue .

as of may 2016 , more than 4,500 product names are registered and protected in the eu for foods , wine , and spirits originating in both eu member states and other countries ( table 1 ) .

nearly two - thirds are wine registrations .

overall , about one - fourth of all registrations are for non - eu ( "third country" ) registrations , and these are also overwhelmingly wine registrations .

in the united states , gis are treated as brands and trademarks and administered by the u.s. patent and trademark office ( pto ) .

in addition , labeling requirements for wine , malt beverages , beer , and distilled spirits are under the jurisdiction of the alcohol and tobacco tax and trade bureau ( ttb ) .

as discussed later , u.s. trade policy is actively engaged in addressing concerns in the united states regarding the eu's gi protections to ensure that they "do not undercut u.s. industries' market access" and to defend the use of certain "common food names. .

in general , the united states is seeking protection for current u.s. owners of trademarks that overlap with eu - protected gis , the ability to use u.s. trademarked names in third countries , and the ability to use u.s. trademarked names in the eu .

many in the u.s. agricultural sectors are looking to the proposed trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement for indications on how certain proposals in t - tip could be negotiated , particularly on issues such as regulatory coherence and gi names .

for example , regarding gis , the tpp agreement obligates member countries that recognize gi names to make this process available and transparent to all interested parties within the agreement while also providing a process allowing countries to cancel gi protection .

member countries that recognize gis are also to adopt a procedure by which interested parties may object to the provision of a gi .

among the reasons the agreement lists for why a country may oppose a gi may include concerns that such protections may cause confusion with a trademark that is recognized within the country .

other provisions apply regarding wine and spirits .

as the united states and eu continue to negotiate t - tip , they are likely considering how gis have been addressed in the tpp agreement as well as in other negotiated agreements .

stakeholders in the united states are also tracking gi issues in other ongoing negotiations between the eu and other third countries , including canada and japan .

they also worry about the potential implications for global agricultural trade under these preferential agreements between the eu and its trading partners , as well as establishing precedent on certain issues .

however , given concerns voiced primarily by the u.s. dairy industry and the seeming reluctance of either party to compromise on gis , some have speculated whether this issue would need to be addressed at a higher political level than the negotiators within t - tip .

