the united states and new zealand work together in bilateral , regional , and global contexts to address common interests in the areas of defense , foreign affairs , and trade .

bilateral and multilateral military - to - military exercises involving the two countries have increased in number since the signing of the wellington declaration of 2010 and the washington declaration of 2012 .

the two nations were both part of the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) trade negotiations until president trump withdrew the united states from the tpp in january 2017 .

the 2016 new zealand defence white paper describes new zealand's engagement with the united states as having "reached a depth and breadth not seen in 30 years. .

past differences over nuclear policy have now largely been put to rest by the wellington ( see appendix b ) and washington declarations .

the shift to normal relations between the two nations was marked by a u.s. naval ship visit to new zealand in november 2016 .

this was the first such visit since 1983 .

labour party leader 37-year - old jacinda ardern became the youngest female prime minister in new zealand following the september 23 , 2017 , election .

she became labour party leader only two months prior to the election .

ardern's labour - led coalition government follows nine years of center - right rule by the new zealand national party .

ardern is new zealand's third female prime minister .

 ( see " 2017 election " section below for further information. ) .

the election of september 23 , 2017 , left no political party with an outright majority of seats in parliament .

while the national party had the most seats , it was labour that formed a government in coalition with the populist new zealand first party with the support of the green party .

the center - left bloc holds 63 of 120 seats in parliament .

the national party leader and former prime minister bill english became opposition leader following ardern's swearing in as prime minister .

ardern's labour - led government is expected to move to tighten immigration , curb foreign property ownership , raise the minimum wage , build affordable housing , address child poverty , lock in a goal of zero carbon emissions , and set up an independent climate commission .

new zealand first is led by winston peters , who became both deputy prime minister and foreign minister in ardern's government .

peters was previously ( 1996-1998 ) deputy prime minister in prime minister jim bolger's and then prime minister jenny shipley's national government , and foreign minister ( 2005-2008 ) in former prime minister helen clark's labour government .

peters has been described as a protectionist and a conservative economic nationalist .

he is reported to favor curbs on immigration , renegotiation of certain trade deals , adjusting the role of the central bank , and strengthening ties with australia .

for many years after the mid - 1980s , differences over nuclear policy rather than shared values or common interests defined relations between the united states and new zealand .

during the mid - 1980s , the united states suspended its alliance commitments to new zealand due to differences over nuclear policy .

new zealand legislation made the country nuclear - free , which had the effect of barring visits from nuclear - powered or nuclear - armed ships .

the united states had , and still has , a policy of neither confirming nor denying the presence of nuclear weapons on u.s. navy ships .

these differences over nuclear policy significantly constrained the relationship for many years .

the relationship has now largely moved beyond past differences over nuclear policy .

this was marked by a u.s. naval ship visit to new zealand in november 2016 .

the uss sampson , which went to new zealand to participate in the new zealand navy's 75 th anniversary celebrations , diverted to kaikoura , new zealand , to assist in evacuating civilians following a 7.8 magnitude earthquake which blocked roads , isolating the town of kaikoura .

with past differences no longer defining the relationship , the united states and new zealand have in recent years expanded collaboration on areas of common concern .

a center for strategic and international studies ( csis ) report published in 2011 stated that the united states and new zealand share many common interests and strategic objectives .

the countries have a strong focus on a stable and secure asia - pacific region and on a robust international architecture that supports and open trade and investment system , a rules based international legal framework , and sound principles of good governance .

the two nations share a commitment to promoting security and development in the south pacific .

they coordinate their support to pacific island states in patrolling their exclusive economic zones ( eezs ) to try to prevent poaching of fisheries resources .

new zealand and the united states also participate in joint humanitarian and disaster relief exercises with pacific island states .

the united states and new zealand are also long - standing partners in antarctic scientific research .

the u.s. navy support base at christchurch , new zealand , is used to support u.s. antarctic operations .

this is one area of bilateral cooperation that was apparently not affected by past differences .

several organizations and groups , some involving members of congress , help promote bilateral ties between the united states and new zealand , including the united states - new zealand council in washington , dc , and its counterpart , the new zealand - united states council in wellington ; and the bipartisan friends of new zealand congressional caucus and its new zealand parliamentary counterpart .

the u.s. - n.z .

council was established in 1986 to promote cooperation between the two countries .

it works with government agencies and business groups to this end .

the first new zealand - united states partnership forum was held in april 2006 .

the forum brings together government , business , military , and community leaders in an effort to advance bilateral relations .

speaking at the june 2015 partnership forum , then - assistant secretary of state for east asian and pacific affairs daniel russel pointed to the "bonds of trust that extends throughout our diplomatic , intelligence and military relationships" before highlighting that two - way goods trade had increased from $5 billion in 2009 to $8 billion in 2014 .

new zealand's defense policy historically supported great britain .

in recent years , new zealand's independent defense policy has focused on contributing to international peace operations , new zealand's maritime environment ( including its exclusive economic zone [eez] and the southern ocean ) , the south pacific , antarctica , and cybersecurity .

new zealand armed forces made a significant contribution in support of the allied cause in world war i and world war ii .

approximately 100,000 new zealand troops , out of a total new zealand population of 1.1 million in 1914 , went to fight in battles such as gallipoli , passchendaele , and the somme as part of the new zealand expeditionary force .

this represented about half of the eligible male population .

several thousand more served with british and australian forces in world war i .

by comparison , the american expeditionary force in europe numbered over 1 million troops in 1918 when the total population of the united states was 103.2 million .

approximately 140,000 new zealand troops served in world war ii out of a total new zealand population of 1.6 million in 1940 .

they fought in places like crete , el alamein , and the pacific .

new zealand troops also fought alongside american and allied troops in korea and vietnam .

new zealand's 2016 defense white paper has "a renewed focus on new zealand's own backyard" and places relatively more emphasis on protecting southern ocean resources , the south pacific , and antarctica than previous defence white papers .

it also states that the new zealand defence force must be flexible and able to conduct concurrent operations , from humanitarian and disaster response , operating in the southern ocean and supporting antarctic operations , to participating in international coalition deployments... .

these challenges [for the defence force] include maintaining an awareness of and an ability to respond to activities in new zealand's exclusive economic zone , supporting new zealand's presence in antarctica and the southern ocean , as well as increasing cyber threats to defence force networks .

the white paper further signals "a commitment to a portfolio of planned defence capability investments valued at close to $20 billion over the next 15 years. .

one observation on the white paper points out that many specifics have been left to the defence capability plan .

another observer notes that new zealand defense spending is low when compared to security partners australia and the united states .

the world bank estimated new zealand defense spending to be 1.1% of gdp as compared with 1.8% for australia and 3.5% for the united states in 2014 .

a public consultation document was created in 2015 in preparation for production of the 2016 white paper .

the public consultation document described new zealand's strategic environment as evolving .

it noted that "new zealand's interests beyond our region are growing while the rules and values we rely on are increasingly under threat. .

it also noted the rising "number of actors operating within new zealand's exclusive economic zone , southern ocean and the pacific islands. .

the document identified "a marked improvement in our relationship with the united states," "china's rising global influence," an "escalation of military spending across southeast asia," and "increasing challenges to the rules - based international system. .

new zealand's pacific identity , derived from its geography and growing population of new zealanders with polynesian or other pacific island backgrounds , as well as its historical relationship with the south pacific , informs its relationship with the region .

new zealand has the world's fourth - largest exclusive economic zone .

new zealand works closely with pacific island states on a bilateral and multilateral basis through the pacific islands forum , which is based in fiji .

the forum has in recent years focused on regional security , sustainable fisheries resources , and climate change .

illegal , unregulated , and unreported ( iuu ) fishing is estimated by one source to be worth $616.11 million each year or 20% of the catch in the pacific .

other sources report that iuu fishing accounts for 34% of the total catch in the western central pacific .

new zealand works with states in the region to help them monitor their fisheries resources .

new zealand has played a key role in promoting peace and stability in the south pacific in places such as the solomon islands , timor - leste , and bougainville in papua new guinea .

new zealand also provides development and disaster assistance to the region .

the defence white paper of 2016 highlights new zealand's interests in the south pacific .

given its strong connections with south pacific countries , new zealand has an enduring interest in regional stability .

the south pacific has remained relatively stable since 2010 , and is unlikely to face an external military threat in the foreseeable future .

however , the region continues to face a range of economic , governance , and environmental challenges .

these challenges indicate that it is likely that the defence force will have to deploy to the region over the next ten years , for a response beyond humanitarian assistance and disaster relief .

in september 2015 , new zealand pledged to increase foreign assistance to the south pacific by $100 million to reach a total of $1 billion in expenditures over the next three years .

former prime minister key has reaffirmed new zealand's support for the pacific island's forum and sustainable south pacific economic development , including for sustainable fisheries in the south pacific .

new zealand , along with australia , the united states , and japan , has traditionally been one of the largest aid donors in the south pacific .

in recent years , china too has become a significant aid donor in the region .

while much of china's assistance is bilateral , it also provides assistance to the pacific islands forum .

approximately 80% of chinese assistance to the region is reportedly in the form of concessional loans .

china has become fiji's largest bilateral aid donor and "... it may overtake the united states as the second largest donor [behind australia] in the region within a few years. .

new zealand conducts its external affairs through international fora , such as the united nations and the commonwealth ( the commonwealth was established in 1949 to maintain an association between countries that were once part of the british empire ) , as well as through bilateral ties and other multilateral arrangements .

new zealand has traditionally had particularly close ties with the united kingdom and australia and is a member of the five power defence arrangements ( fpda ) of 1971 ( discussed below ) .

in recent years , new zealand has sought to expand its traditionally close relationships by reaching out to develop closer ties with other countries , particularly through expanded trade , with china and other asian states .

many new zealanders take pride in their natural environment .

according to statistics new zealand , 72.7% of new zealanders "were very satisfied or satisfied with the state of the lakes , rivers , harbours , oceans and coastlines," while 84.2% "were satisfied with the state of the native bush , forests , nature reserves , and open green spaces. .

international perceptions of new zealand's clean environment have helped draw international tourists and promote new zealand's agricultural exports .

in the year ending july 2015 , over 3 million tourists visited new zealand — a nation of 4.5 million people — and spent nz$8.7 billion , which marked an increase in spending of 28% over the previous year .

in september 2015 , new zealand created the kermadec ocean sanctuary .

the sanctuary covers a maritime area approximately twice the size of new zealand's land mass that accounts for 15% of new zealand's exclusive economic zone .

new zealand supports sustainable pacific fisheries .

in 2015 , new zealand protested the resumption of whaling by japan in the southern ocean .

the government of new zealand joined the united states , australia , and the netherlands to state "our governments remain resolutely opposed to commercial whaling , in particular in the southern ocean whale sanctuary established by the international whaling commission. .

on the issue of climate change , new zealand supports the goal of "limiting global temperature rise to no more than 2 degrees centigrade," and has sought to support international efforts on the environment and climate change .

in an effort to reduce emissions from livestock , cropping , and rice production , new zealand formed the global research alliance on agricultural greenhouse gasses in 2009 .

environmental issues will likely receive renewed focus in the ardern labour government given the labour party's past focus on environmental issues .

former labour party prime minister helen clark ( 1999-2008 ) set a goal for new zealand to be a leader on climate change and to become carbon neutral .

while new zealand gross emissions have increased 24.1% from 1990 to 2015 , gross emissions in new zealand were 0.1% lower in 2015 than in 2014 .

the agriculture ( 47.9% ) and energy ( 40.5% ) sectors were the two largest contributors to new zealand's gross emissions in 2015 .

the new zealand green party's support for the government , and its desire to push forward a progressive environmental agenda , will be a further impetus to including a renewed focus on the environment .

the labour party's environmental policy focuses on water and climate change .

as part of its water policy , labour has pledged to do the following: restore new zealand rivers and lakes ; assist farmers to fence off waterways and conduct riparian planting through a ready for work program ; and provide resources to regional councils to clean up waterways through a water royalty .

labour has criticized the national party's promise to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 5% below 1990 levels by 2020 because they lacked a specific plan to achieve that target .

new zealand submitted a nationally determined contribution ( ndc ) to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 30% below 2005 levels by 2030 .

labour has articulated a number of measures that it will seek to implement: set a target of net zero greenhouse gas emission by 2050 ; establish an independent climate commission ; initiate a youth climate change challenge ; show government leadership to actively pursue low - carbon options and technologies ; restore the emissions trading scheme ; ensure that farmers are operating at best practice ; support worker transition and the creation of jobs in sectors that are carbon sinks such as forestry ; and establish a transitions national science challenge to facilitate the transition to a low - carbon economy .

the new zealand green party has also emphasized the importance of clean water and green energy .

one such initiative would place a levy on nitrate pollution from agriculture including dairy farming .

the greens also have an 11-point climate protection plan , which has some similarities to the labour environment agenda: pass a zero carbon act to reach net zero emissions by 2050 ; establish an independent climate commission ; replace the emission trading scheme with a new kiwi climate fund ; plant 1.2 billion trees ; establish a green infrastructure fund ; create a transformational farming partnership fund ; no new coal , fracking , or deep sea oil and gas drilling ; divest public investment from fossil fuels ; commit to 100% renewable electricity generation by 2030 ; invest in clean electric transport ; and create humanitarian visas for pacific islanders displaced by climate change .

new zealand is a trade - dependent nation .

as such , its leaders have traditionally been strong advocates of free trade .

new zealand's largest export markets are china , australia , the european union , the united states , and japan .

china overtook australia as new zealand's largest trading partner in 2013 .

new zealand's principal exports are dairy products , meat , timber , fish , fruit , wool , and manufactured products .

new zealand's top export markets are china ( 19.3% ) , australia ( 17% ) , the united states ( 10.9% ) , and japan ( 6.2% ) .

new zealand has approximately 30 million sheep , 3.5 million beef cattle , 6.5 million dairy cattle , and 1 million farmed deer .

new zealand supports liberalized trade through the world trade organization process but is also seeking alternative comprehensive free trade relationships in both bilateral and regional fora .

in the lead - up to the september 2017 election , new zealand , along with japan , played a leading role by remaining committed to a deal with tpp - 11 countries to cut trade barriers in the asia pacific .

the labour party has said it will seek to renegotiate tpp to accommodate its proposed ban on foreign ownership of existing properties .

the green party has stated that it will oppose the core comprehensive and progressive agreement on trans pacific partnership ( cptpp ) .

appendix a .

new zealand political parties electoral performance the following tables provide a look at the electoral performance of political parties in new zealand since 2005 .

these data show the prominent role of the national and labour parties as well as the performance of smaller parties .

appendix b. wellington declaration wellington declaration on a new strategic partnership between new zealand and the united states media note office of the spokesman u.s. department of state washington , dc november 4 , 2010 minister of foreign affairs for new zealand murray mccully and secretary of state hillary rodham clinton of the united states met today to reaffirm the close ties between their two nations and to establish the framework of a new united states - new zealand strategic partnership to shape future practical cooperation and political dialogue .

new zealand and the united states are both pacific nations .

our governments and peoples share a deep and abiding interest in maintaining peace , prosperity , and stability in the region , expanding the benefits of freer and more open trade , and promoting and protecting freedom , democracy and human rights worldwide .

we recall the long history of shared united states and new zealand sacrifice in battle and we honor those , past and present , who have borne that sacrifice .

as we look to the challenges of the 21 st century , our shared democratic values and common interests will continue to guide our collective efforts .

the united states - new zealand strategic partnership is to have two fundamental elements: a new focus on practical cooperation in the pacific region ; and enhanced political and subject - matter expert dialogue — including regular foreign ministers' meetings and political - military discussions .

we resolve to further our two nations' joint cooperation in addressing broader regional and global challenges , such as climate change , nuclear proliferation , and extremism .

we resolve also to develop new joint initiatives that confront the challenges faced by the pacific .

particular areas of focus are to include renewable energy and disaster response management .

we recognize that climate change adaptation in the pacific is also a priority for both countries and is an issue to which the united states and new zealand are committed .

we intend also to work closely to enhance dialogue on regional security issues .

we endeavor to develop deeper and broader people - to - people ties between the united states and new zealand , encouraging innovation , and expanding our commercial and trade relations , building on the creativity and rich diversity of our societies .

to ensure the broadest participation of our citizens in strengthening the relationship between our two nations , we should focus efforts across our societies , including women , youth , minorities and future leaders .

we are dedicated to working together to address trade , security and development issues through apec , the east asia summit , the united nations , and other regional and multilateral institutions .

our goal is a partnership for the 21 st century that is flexible , dynamic , and reflects our fundamental beliefs and aspirations .

