a biologic or biological product is a preparation , such as a therapeutic drug or a vaccine , made from living organisms , either human , animal , yeast , or microorganisms .

biologics are composed of proteins ( and / or their constituent amino acids ) , carbohydrates ( such as sugars ) , nucleic acids ( such as dna ) , or combinations of these substances .

biologics may also be cells or tissues used in transplantation .

a biosimilar , sometimes referred to as a follow - on biologic , is a therapeutic drug that is similar but not structurally identical to the brand - name biologic made by a pharmaceutical or biotechnology company .

the brand - name product is sometimes referred to as the innovator or reference product .

in contrast to biologics , most commonly used drugs — over - the - counter drugs and most prescription drugs — are synthesized via a chemical process .

a generic drug is chemically identical to its reference brand - name drug .

the molecular structure of a commonly used chemical drug is much smaller than a biologic and therefore less complicated and more easily defined .

for example , table 1 shows that the chemical drug aspirin contains nine carbon atoms , eight hydrogen atoms , and four oxygen atoms while the biologic drug remicade contains over 6,000 carbon atoms , almost 10,000 hydrogen atoms , and about 2,000 oxygen atoms .

inflectra , which is biosimilar to remicade , was approved by the food and drug administration ( fda ) in april 2016 .

the fda regulates both biologics and chemical drugs .

the center for biologics evaluation and research ( cber ) within fda regulates what are often referred to as traditional biologics , such as vaccines , blood and blood products , allergenic extracts , and certain devices and test kits .

cber also regulates gene therapy products , cellular therapy products , human tissue used in transplantation , and the tissue used in xenotransplantation — the transplantation of nonhuman cells , tissues , or organs into a human .

the fda center for drug evaluation and research ( cder ) regulates prescription brand - name and generic drugs , over - the - counter drugs , and most therapeutic biologics ; this last responsibility was transferred from cber to cder in 2003 .

see appendix a for further details .

examples of types of therapeutic biologics regulated by cder are briefly described in the list below .

monoclonal antibodies — proteins that bind to a specific substance in the body or a specific cell .

a monoclonal antibody may carry a drug or toxin .

an example of a monoclonal antibody product is infliximab , used to treat crohn's disease , ulcerative colitis , rheumatoid arthritis , and psoriasis .

cytokines — proteins that control ( stimulate or slow down ) the immune system and are used to fight cancer , infections , and other diseases .

examples include interleukins , interferons , and colony - stimulating factors , such as filgrastim .

growth factors — substances , such as hormones , made by the body that regulate cell division and cell survival , such as the human growth hormone somatropin .

enzymes — proteins that speed up chemical reactions in the body .

enzymes take part in many cell functions , including cell signaling , growth , and division .

in cancer treatment , enzyme inhibitors may be used to block certain enzymes that cancer cells need to grow .

immunomodulators — substances , such as a vaccine , that stimulate or suppress the immune system and may help the body fight cancer , infection , or other diseases .

biologics and biosimilars frequently require special handling ( such as refrigeration ) and processing to avoid contamination by microbes or other unwanted substances .

also , they are usually administered to patients via injection or infused directly into the bloodstream .

for these reasons , biologics often are referred to as specialty drugs .

in the past , biologics were often dispensed by pharmacies with specialized facilities and personnel .

the term specialty drugs is now used to describe drugs that are expensive for any of several reasons , including the requirement for special handling .

the cost of specialty drugs , including biologics , may be extremely high .

for example , the annual cost of some biologic medications , such as soliris ( eculizumab ) and vimizim ( elosulfase alfa ) , exceeds $250,000 per patient .

the use of biologics and spending on these products has been increasing ; see for example appendix c .

spending on biologics in the united states totaled $105.5 billion in 2016 , a 13% increase over 2015 .

the amount spent on biologics subject to biosimilar competition in 2016 was $3.2 billion ( 3% of $105.5 billion ) , of which $2.9 billion was spent on "original" biologics and $0.3 billion was spent on biosimilars .

biologics spending has increased by 10% each year since 2011 .

according to a december 2016 report to congress by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , "[i]ncreases in spending in the medicare part b program have been driven by increases in biologics .

spending on biologics between 2006 and 2014 grew by 13.3 percent annually , whereas spending on small molecule drugs grew by 0.7 percent annually during the same period .

in 2014 , biologics accounted for 63 percent of prescription drug spending in part b. .

biologic drugs are often more expensive in the united states than in europe and canada ; see appendix b .

in europe , the introduction of biosimilars has reduced prices for biologics , in some cases by 33% compared with the original price of the reference product ; for one drug in portugal , the price reduction was 61% .

the next section of this report describes efforts by congress to lower the price of commonly used chemical drugs via passage of the 1984 hatch - waxman act and its use of a similar approach in 2010 to provide lower - cost alternatives for biologics .

congress passed the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-417 ) — often called the hatch - waxman act — to allow for the fda approval of generic chemical drugs .

by offering an alternative to brand - name drug products , the hatch - waxman act has been credited with lowering the cost of drugs to consumers , as well as allowing the u.s. generic drug industry to expand .

for chemical drugs , "generic medications decrease prices 60% to 90% on branded oral - solid medications," according to some experts .

the generic drug industry achieves cost savings by avoiding the expense of clinical trials , as well as the initial drug research and development costs incurred by the brand - name manufacturer .

before a generic drug is approved for marketing , the generic drug company must demonstrate to the fda that the drug product is identical to the original product .

this "sameness" allows the generic company to rely on , or "reference," the fda's previous finding of safety and effectiveness for the already approved drug .

a generic drug is considered to be interchangeable with its reference ( brand - name ) drug and with other generic products that use the same reference drug .

the sponsor of the generic drug must also meet manufacturing process standards and reporting requirements .

during the time that hatch - waxman was debated by congress and later implemented by the fda , the biotechnology industry was developing its first biologics for use as human therapeutic agents .

in 1982 , fda allowed on the market the first human drug developed by the biotechnology industry , human insulin ( humulin - r ) .

this was followed by human growth hormone ( protropin ) in 1985 , alpha interferon ( intron - a ) in 1986 , tissue plasminogen activator ( activase ) in 1987 , and erythropoietin ( epogen ) in 1989 .

most biological products are regulated — licensed for marketing by fda via a biologics license application ( bla ) — under the public health service act ( phsa ) .

biological products were originally regulated by the national institutes of health ( nih ) and its precursors .

in 1972 , this regulatory responsibility was transferred to fda ; see appendix a of this report for further details .

all chemical prescription drugs are regulated — approved for marketing by fda via a new drug application ( nda ) or abbreviated new drug application ( anda ) — under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) .

the hatch - waxman act provided a mechanism for the approval of generic drugs under the ffdca , but it did not provide a mechanism for follow - on biologics / biosimilars under the phsa .

as a result , after hatch - waxman , companies could submit follow - on biologics applications for fda review only for the very small number of so - called "natural source" biologics that had been approved under the ffdca .

companies were effectively blocked from submitting follow - on applications for the much larger group of therapeutic biologics that had been licensed under the phsa .

historically , certain biological products were regulated as drugs under the ffdca rather than as biologics under the phsa .

in 1941 , congress gave the fda authority over the marketing of insulin .

the hormone insulin is a small protein — a short chain of 51 amino acids — that regulates carbohydrate ( sugar ) metabolism .

in the 1940s , insulin was obtained in the same way as many biologics — extraction from animals — hence the term "natural source. .

despite this similarity with other biologics , insulin was regulated as a drug by fda rather than as a biologic by nih .

besides insulin , a small set of other natural source biological products were regulated as drugs under the ffdca rather than as biologics under the phsa: the hormone glucagon , human growth hormone , hormones to treat infertility , hormones used to manage menopause and osteoporosis , and certain medical enzymes ( hyaluronidase and urokinase ) .

even when patent protection for specialty biologic drug products was approaching expiration , the market competition that occurred with chemical drugs via generics could not happen with therapeutic biologics because fda lacked clear regulatory authority to approve biosimilars .

although some entities , such as the generic pharmaceutical association ( gpha , now called the association for accessible medicines ) , advocated that the fda establish a regulatory system for the approval of biosimilars under its existing statutory authority , the biotechnology industry organization ( bio ) filed a citizen petition with the fda requesting a number of actions that would have inhibited the approval of biosimilars .

in contrast , the pathway to marketing biosimilars in europe seemingly had fewer barriers .

in april 2006 , the european medicines agency ( ema ) authorized for marketing in europe the first biosimilar product , omnitrope , a human growth hormone .

this was followed by the authorization of five other biosimilar products in 2007 , two more in 2008 , and many more thereafter ( as shown in table 2 ) .

in the united states , fda approval of omnitrope was announced in june 2006 following an april 10 , 2006 , ruling by the u.s. district court for the district of columbia in favor of omnitrope's sponsor , sandoz .

the court ruled that the fda must move forward with consideration of the application , submitted by sandoz in 2003 , which presented omnitrope as "indistinguishable" from the fda - approved genotropin , marketed by pfizer .

sandoz "alleged that the fda had violated its statutory obligation to act on the omnitrope application within 180 days , a time frame that the fda characterized as merely a congressional aspiration. .

the 505 ( b ) ( 2 ) pathway , created by the hatch - waxman act , was used to approve omnitrope .

at the time of the omnitrope approval in 2006 , the fda indicated in a document on the agency's website that this action "does not establish a pathway" for approval of other follow - on biologic drugs .

"the agency has said that congress must change the law before it can approve copies of nearly all other biotech products , and lawmakers haven't moved on the issue. .

in march 2010 , congress established a new regulatory authority for fda by creating an abbreviated licensure pathway in section 351 ( k ) of the phsa for biological products that are demonstrated to be "highly similar" ( biosimilar ) to or "interchangeable" with an fda - licensed biological product .

this authority was accomplished via the biologics price competition and innovation act ( bpcia ) of 2009 , enacted as title vii of the affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) .

in addition , congress authorized fda to collect the associated user fees from industry .

fda describes the terms biosimilar and interchangeable in the following paragraphs .

under the bpci act , a sponsor may seek approval of a "biosimilar" product under new section 351 ( k ) of the phs act .

a biological product may be demonstrated to be "biosimilar" if data show that the product is "highly similar" to the reference product notwithstanding minor differences in clinically inactive components and there are no clinically meaningful differences between the biological product and the reference product in terms of safety , purity and potency .

in order to meet the higher standard of interchangeability , a sponsor must demonstrate that the biosimilar product can be expected to produce the same clinical result as the reference product in any given patient and , for a biological product that is administered more than once , that the risk of alternating or switching between use of the biosimilar product and the reference product is not greater than the risk of maintaining the patient on the reference product .

interchangeable products may be substituted for the reference product by a pharmacist without the intervention of the prescribing health care provider .

fda held a two - day public meeting on november 2 and 3 , 2010 , to obtain perspectives from industry and the general public prior to developing and releasing agency guidance on the new biosimilars pathway .

based on public input at this first meeting , fda released three draft guidance documents in february 2012 and held another public meeting on may 11 , 2012 , to obtain feedback on the draft guidance .

the fda released final guidance on the first three draft guidance documents on april 28 , 2015 .

the agency has also released additional guidance on a variety of other topics related to biosimilars .

a list of fda guidance documents on biosimilars is available on the agency's website .

under section 351 ( k ) of the phsa , a company interested in marketing a biosimilar product in the united states must first submit to fda an application that provides information demonstrating biosimilarity based on data from analytical studies ( structural and functional tests ) , animal studies ( toxicity tests ) , and a clinical study or studies ( tests in human patients ) .

the agency may decide , at its discretion , that a certain study or studies are unnecessary in a biosimilar application .

as is the case with other fda - approved products , any subsequent change to the approved manufacturing process — such as a change in the supplier of a raw material or the replacement of a piece of equipment — requires a demonstration to fda of the comparability of the product's quality attributes before and after the change to ensure that the safety and effectiveness of the product is maintained .

for example , the brand - name biologic remicade ( infliximab ) underwent 37 manufacturing changes between 1998 and october 2014 ; each change required a demonstration of comparability , most likely through chemical , physical , and biological assays .

for many years , the drug industry and fda have coped with the inherent variability in biological products from natural sources .

fda maintains that the batch - to - batch and lot - to - lot variability that occurs for brand - name biologics and biosimilars can be assessed and managed effectively .

in general , the federal government — such as the work conducted or supported by nih — tends to focus more on basic or preclinical research and the pharmaceutical industry concentrates more of its research funding on clinical trials rather than on discovery activity .

when trying to assign credit for specific therapeutic advancements , drawing a line between basic and applied research can be challenging .

for example , without a major underlying advance , like recombinant dna , the development of whole new classes of drugs would not have occurred .

concern over the high costs of pharmaceuticals in general and biologics in particular has led some to look more carefully at the federal role in the development of costly new therapeutics .

various studies have attempted to quantify the contribution of publicly funded research to the discovery of new drugs .

a study published in 2003 found that of the 284 new drugs approved by fda from 1990 through 1999 , 6.7% originated from sources other than private industry .

a 1993 study found that 7.6% of new drugs approved from 1981 through 1990 originated from nonindustry sources .

however , rather than focusing on all drug approvals — including many "me too" drugs — another way to answer this question is to look at the origin of truly innovative new drugs , what fda calls new molecular entities ( nmes ) .

nmes are drugs that have not been approved by fda previously and frequently provide important new therapies for patients .

a 2010 study found that of the nmes and new biologics that received fda approval between 1998 and 2007 , 24.1% originated from work that was publicly funded .

a study by stevens et al .

published in 2011 claims to be more comprehensive than these earlier investigations .

the stevens study found that of the 1,541 drugs approved by fda from 1990 through 2007 , 143 , or 9.3% , resulted from work conducted in publicly funded labs .

of the total 1,541 drug applications , fda granted priority review to 348 applications , and 66 of these ( 19% ) resulted from publicly funded research .

the authors state that "viewed from another perspective , 46.2% of the new - drug applications from psris [public - sector research institutions] received priority reviews , as compared with 20.0% of applications that were based purely on private - sector research , an increase by a factor of 2.3. .

an fda designation of priority review is for "the evaluation of applications for drugs that , if approved , would be significant improvements in the safety or effectiveness of the treatment , diagnosis , or prevention of serious conditions when compared to standard applications. .

according to the authors , their data "suggest that psris tend to discover drugs that are expected to have a disproportionately important clinical effect. .

the 2011 stevens study considered a psri "to have participated in the applied phase of research that led to discovery of a drug if it , solely or jointly , created intellectual property specific to the drug that was subsequently transferred to a company through a commercial license. .

it is important to understand that the methodology used by the stevens study "excluded the role of psris in the development of platform technologies that have contributed to the development of whole new classes of drugs. .

for example , the following platform technologies were all developed with public funds and were excluded from the study: recombinant dna technology ( cohen - boyer patents ) ; bacterial production methods for recombinant dna ( riggs - itakura patents ) ; production and chimerization methods for antibodies ( cabilly patents ) ; methods to produce glycosylated recombinant proteins in mammalian cells ( axel patents ) ; and methods of gene silencing with the use of small interfering rnas ( mello - fire patents ) .

although these platform technologies enabled the development of many of the products approved by fda during the period evaluated in the study , they were excluded "because the psri scientists who developed the platforms generally did not use them to develop specific drug candidates. .

however , without these platform technologies , many new drugs would not have been developed , resulting perhaps in a vastly different economic outlook for the pharmaceutical industry .

according to the stevens et al. , 2011 publication , the 36 biologic drugs listed in table 6 were "discovered at least in part by psris during the past 40 years. .

appendix a .

major laws on biologics regulation in general , biological products are regulated ( licensed for marketing ) under the public health service act — originally by the national institutes of health ( nih ) and its precursors and later , starting in 1972 , by the fda — and chemical drugs are regulated ( approved for marketing ) under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act — by the fda .

this section provides a brief history of these two acts and other relevant laws as they relate to biologics , as well as some of the important amendments that have occurred during the past 100 years .

relevant laws biologics control act of 1902 the regulation of biologics by the federal government began with the biologics control act of 1902 , "the first enduring scheme of national regulation for any pharmaceutical product. .

the act was groundbreaking , "the very first premarket approval statute in history. .

it set new precedents , "shifting from retrospective post - market to prospective pre - market government review. .

the biologics control act was passed in response to deaths ( many of children ) from tetanus contamination of smallpox vaccine and diphtheria antitoxin .

the act focused on the manufacturing process of such biological products ; it required that facilities manufacturing such biological products be inspected before a federal license was issued to market them .

pure food and drugs act and the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act the biologics control act predates the regulation of drugs under the pure food and drugs act , which was enacted in 1906 .

the 1906 act "did not include any form of premarket control over new drugs to ensure their safety ... [and] did not include any controls over manufacturing establishments , unlike the pre - existing biologics act and the later - enacted federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) . .

the pure food and drugs act was replaced by the ffdca in 1938 .

the ffdca required that drug manufacturers submit , prior to marketing , a new drug application ( nda ) demonstrating , among other things , that the product was safe .

the public health service act the biologics control act was revised and recodified ( 42 u.s.c .

262 ) when the public health service act ( phsa ) was passed in 1944 .

the 1944 act specified that a biological product that has been licensed for marketing under the phsa is also subject to regulation ( though not approval ) under the ffdca .

a biological product is defined under section 351 ( i ) of the phsa , as a virus , therapeutic serum , toxin , antitoxin , vaccine , blood , blood component or derivative , allergenic product , or analogous product ... applicable to the prevention , treatment or cure of a disease or condition of human beings .

section 351 ( j ) of the phsa states that the ffdca "applies to a biological product subject to regulation under this section , except that a product for which a license has been approved under subsection ( a ) shall not be required to have an approved application under section 505 of such act. .

most biological products regulated under the phsa also meet the definition of a drug under section 201 ( g ) of the ffdca: articles intended for use in the diagnosis , cure , mitigation , treatment , or prevention of disease in man or animals ; and articles ( other than food ) intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other animals .

the phsa was amended by the fda modernization act of 1997 ( fdama , p.l .

105-115 ) to require a single biological license application ( bla ) for a biological product , rather than the two licenses — establishment license application ( ela ) and product license application ( pla ) — that had been required between 1944 and 1997 .

the phsa provides authority to suspend a license immediately if there is a danger to public health .

the phsa was amended by the biologics price competition and innovation act ( bpcia ) of 2009 , enacted as title vii of the affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 ) .

the bpcia created a licensure pathway for biological products demonstrated to be "highly similar" ( biosimilar ) to or "interchangeable" with an fda - approved biological product , and it authorized the agency to collect associated fees .

the bpcia also created fda - administered periods of regulatory exclusivity for certain brand - name biologics and biosimilar products , as well as procedures for brand - name and biosimilar manufacturers to resolve patent disputes .

regulation of biologics by federal agencies following enactment of the 1902 biologics act , regulatory responsibility for biologics was first delegated to the hygienic laboratory , a precursor of nih .

in 1972 , regulatory authority for biologics was transferred from the nih division of biological standards to the bureau of biologics at the fda .

in 1982 , the fda's bureau of drugs and bureau of biologics merged to form the national center for drugs and biologics .

in 1988 , the center for drugs and biologics was split into the center for drug evaluation and research ( cder ) and the center for biologics evaluation and research ( cber ) .

cber continued to use nih facilities and buildings until it moved in october 2014 to the new fda headquarters in white oak , md .

because biotechnology products frequently cross the conventional boundaries between biologics , drugs , and devices , determining the jurisdictional status of these products has been difficult for both the fda and industry .

some products have had characteristics that met multiple statutory and scientific definitions .

in 1991 , fda published an intercenter agreement between cber and cder .

in general , the agreement stated that traditional biologics ( vaccines , blood , blood products , antitoxins , allergenic products ) , as well as most biotechnology products , would be regulated by cber .

the small set of biologics regulated as drugs under the ffdca ( mentioned above ) would continue to be regulated by cder , regardless of the method of manufacture .

in 2002 , however , the fda announced its intention to reorganize review responsibilities , consolidating review of new pharmaceutical products under cder , thereby letting cber to concentrate on vaccines , blood safety , gene therapy , and tissue transplantation .

on june 30 , 2003 , responsibility for most therapeutic biologics was transferred from cber to cder .

under this structure , biological products transferred to cder are regulated as licensed biologics under section 351 of the phsa .

examples of products transferred to cder include monoclonal antibodies , immunomodulators ( other than vaccines and allergenic products ) , growth factors , and cytokines .

remaining at cber are traditional biologics such as vaccines , allergenic products , antitoxins , antivenins , venoms , and blood and blood products , including recombinant versions of plasma derivatives ( clotting factors produced via biotechnology ) .

appendix b .

comparison of biologic drug prices appendix c. top - selling drugs appendix d. the purple boo .

