t his report is part of a suite of reports that discuss appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fy2017 .

it specifically discusses appropriations for the components of dhs included in the second title of the homeland security appropriations bill — customs and border protection ( cbp ) , immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , the transportation security administration ( tsa ) , the u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , and the u.s. secret service ( usss ) .

collectively , congress has labeled these components in recent years as "security , enforcement and investigations. .

the report provides an overview of the administration's fy2017 request for these components , and the appropriations proposed by the senate and house appropriations committees in response .

rather than limiting the scope of its review to the first titles of the bills , the report includes information on provisions throughout the bills and reports that directly affect these components .

the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to dhs appropriations , with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the reports do not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor do they systematically follow other legislation related to the authorization or amending of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of specialized budgetary concepts .

the appendix to crs report r44621 , department of homeland security appropriations: fy2017 , explains several of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act ( p.l .

112-25 ) .

a more complete discussion of those terms and the appropriations process in general can be found in crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , and the government accountability office's a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process .

note on data and citations except in summary discussions and when discussing total amounts for the bill as a whole , all amounts contained in the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations represent budget authority and are rounded to the nearest million .

however , for precision in percentages and totals , all calculations were performed using unrounded data .

data used in this report for fy2016 amounts are derived from two sources .

normally , this report would rely on p.l .

114-113 , the omnibus appropriations act , 2016 — division f of which is the homeland security appropriations act , 2016 — and the accompanying explanatory statement published in books ii and iii of the congressional record for december 17 , 2015 .

however , due to the implementation of the common appropriations structure for dhs ( see below ) , additional information is drawn from h.rept .

114-668 , which presents the fy2016 enacted funding in the new structure .

h.rept .

114-668 also serves as the primary source for the fy2016 enacted funding levels , the fy2017 administration - requested funding levels , and the house appropriations committee recommendation in the new structure .

s.rept .

114-264 serves as the primary source for the fy2016 enacted funding levels , the fy2017 administration - requested funding levels , and senate appropriations committee recommendation in the "legacy structure" — the overall structure of appropriations enacted for fy2016 .

there are several differences of interpretation between the two committee reports in accounting for both the fy2016 enacted and fy2017 requested levels .

these include differences in resources available for cbp through the small airport user fee , how reimbursements for preclearance operations are accounted for , the size of the request for immigration and customs enforcement salaries and expenses , and accounting for some tsa fees .

to facilitate comparisons with the enacted and requested numbers , unless otherwise specified , this report relies on the data in s.rept .

114-264 when the two reports are in conflict , as its interpretation of fy2016 enacted levels could be verified against the fy2016 explanatory statement .

the "common appropriations structure" section 563 of division f of p.l .

114-113 ( the fy2016 department of homeland security appropriations act ) provided authority for dhs to submit its fy2017 appropriations request under the new common appropriations structure ( cas ) , and implement it in fy2017 .

under the act , the new structure was to have four categories of appropriations: operations and support ; procurement , construction , and improvement ; research and development ; and federal assistance .

most of the fy2017 dhs appropriations request categorized its appropriations in this fashion .

the exception was the coast guard , which was in the process of migrating its financial information to a new system .

dhs has also proposed realigning its programs , project , and activities ( ppa ) structure — the next level of funding detail below the appropriation level — possibly trying to align ppas into a mission - based hierarchy .

the house appropriations committee made its funding recommendation using the cas ( although it chose to implement it slightly differently than the administration had envisioned in title i ) , but the senate appropriations committee did not , instead drafting its annual dhs appropriations bill and report using the same structure as was used in fy2016 .

it remains to be seen how differences between the house and senate structures will be worked out in the legislation which finalizes fy2017 appropriations levels for dhs .

some individual programmatic comparisons are possible between the two bills , and the coast guard's appropriations are comparable as its fy2017 funding was not proposed in the cas structure .

however , no authoritative crosswalk between the house appropriations committee proposal in the cas structure and senate appropriations committee proposal in the legacy structure is publicly available .

generally , the homeland security appropriations bill includes all annual appropriations provided for dhs , allocating resources to every departmental component .

discretionary appropriations provide roughly two - thirds to three - fourths of the annual funding for dhs operations , depending how one accounts for disaster relief spending and funding for overseas contingency operations .

the remainder of the budget is a mix of fee revenues , trust fund resources , and mandatory spending .

appropriations measures for dhs typically have been organized into five titles .

the first four are thematic groupings of components: departmental management and operations ; security , enforcement , and investigations ; protection , preparedness , response , and recovery ; and research and development , training , and services .

a fifth title contains general provisions , the impact of which may reach across the entire department , impact multiple components , or focus on a single activity .

the following pie chart presents a comparison of the share of annual appropriations requested for the components funded in each of the first four titles , highlighting the components discussed in this report .

cbp is responsible for security at and between ports of entry ( poe ) along the border .

it has a dual mission of preventing the entry of terrorists and instruments of terrorism , while also facilitating the flow of legitimate travel and trade into and out of the united states .

within cbp there is the office of field operations ( ofo ) , which operates at poes ; u.s. border patrol , which operates between poes ; and air and marine operations ( amo ) , which operates in border air space and waterways .

ofo agents , referred to as cbp officers ( cbpos ) , inspect people ( immigration enforcement ) and goods ( customs enforcement ) at poes to determine if they are authorized to enter the united states ; while u.s. border patrol ( usbp ) agents secure the border and interdict migrants and illicit actors and materials between poes .

cbp officers and usbp agents enforce more than 400 laws and regulations at the border to prevent illegal entries .

cbp's major accounts in the legacy appropriations structure include border security inspections and trade facilitation , which encompasses risk - based targeting and the inspection of travelers and goods at poes ; border security and control between ports of entry , which includes the border patrol ; air and marine interdiction ; automation modernization , which includes customs and immigration information technology systems ; border security fencing , infrastructure , and technology ( bsfit ) ; facilities management ; and a number of immigration and customs user fee accounts .

ice focuses on enforcement of immigration and customs laws within the united states .

ice has two main components: homeland security investigations ( hsi ) and enforcement and removal operations ( ero ) .

hsi is responsible for disrupting and dismantling criminal organizations ( many of which are transnational ) engaged in activities including terrorist financing and money laundering , intellectual property theft , human trafficking , cybercrime , child exploitation , and drug trafficking .

hsi enforces export laws and enforces trade agreement noncompliance and is responsible for investigating and enforcing violations of the immigration laws ( eg , alien smuggling , hiring unauthorized alien workers ) .

ero is responsible for locating , detaining if appropriate , and removing foreign nationals who have overstayed their visas , entered illegally , or become deportable .

tsa , created in 2001 by the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa , p.l .

107-71 ) , is charged with protecting air , land , marine , and rail transportation systems within the united states to ensure the freedom of movement for people and goods .

in 2002 , tsa was transferred from the department of transportation to dhs with the passage of the homeland security act ( p.l .

107-296 ) .

tsa's responsibilities include protecting the aviation system against terrorist threats , sabotage , and certain other criminal acts through the deployment of passenger and baggage screeners ; detection systems for explosives , weapons , and other threats ; and other security technologies .

tsa also has certain responsibilities for marine and land modes of transportation including assessing the risk of terrorist attacks to all nonaviation transportation assets , including seaports ; issuing regulations to improve security ; and enforcing these regulations to ensure the protection of these transportation systems .

tsa is further charged with serving as the primary liaison for transportation security to the law enforcement and intelligence communities .

the tsa budget is one of the most complex components of the dhs appropriations bill .

net direct discretionary appropriations represent only a portion of the budgetary resources it has available .

an airline security fee collection offsets a portion of aviation security costs , including $250 million dedicated to capital investments in screening technology .

other fees offset the costs of transportation threat assessment and credentialing .

table 2 presents a breakdown of tsa's total additional budgetary resources requested from all nonappropriated sources and those provided through direct appropriations , as accounted for in the dhs budget justifications .

the coast guard is the lead federal agency for the maritime component of homeland security .

as such , it is the lead agency responsible for the security of u.s. ports , coastal and inland waterways , and territorial waters .

the coast guard also performs missions that are not related to homeland security , such as maritime search and rescue , marine environmental protection , fisheries enforcement , and maintenance of aids to navigation .

the u.s. secret service ( usss ) has two concurrent missions — protection of certain people , places , and events , and criminal investigations .

the protection mission entails protecting current and former presidents , vice presidents , their spouses and minor children , as well as distinguished foreign visitors to the united states , and certain other individuals .

the usss also secures the white house , vice president's residence , and foreign missions in the district of columbia , and coordinates security for national special security events .

criminal investigation activities carried out by the usss encompass financial crimes , identity theft , counterfeiting , computer fraud , and computer - based attacks on the nation's financial , banking , and telecommunications infrastructure , among other areas .

the investigative work of the usss is enhanced by electronic crimes task forces and financial crimes task forces , which according to the usss , "combine resources from the law enforcement community , the private sector , and academia to combat threats to the nation's financial payment systems and critical infrastructures. .

rather than viewing protection and investigation as separate missions , the usss views these as an integrated mission set , writing in their budget documents: the secret service relies on long standing partnerships cultivated through its domestic and international field offices to successfully execute its protective responsibilities .

in addition to the permanent protective details assigned to the president , vice - president , their immediate families and former presidents , the backbone of the secret service is its network of 42 domestic field offices , 60 resident offices and resident agency offices , and 21 international resident investigative offices .

in addition to investigating financial crimes , cybercrime investigations , and protective intelligence cases , special agents assigned to these offices provide the surge capacity and advanced planning needed to carry out the secret service's protection mission .

for more information on the missions of the usss , see crs report rl34603 , the u.s. secret service: history and missions , by [author name scrubbed] .

for fy2017 , the administration requested just under $1.9 billion in discretionary budget authority for usss .

this is $42 million ( 2.2% ) less than was provided in fy2016 .

senate appropriations committee - reported s. 3001 included the overall requested level of discretionary budget authority for usss .

however , in addition to not adopting the common appropriations structure for usss , the senate appropriations committee recommended shifting $15 million from the usss protection operations to its investigative operations .

house appropriations committee - reported h.r .

5634 included over $1.9 billion in discretionary budget authority for usss .

this is $41 million ( 2.2% ) more than was requested by the administration , and $1 million ( 0.1% ) less than was provided in fy2016 .

the house committee - reported funding level is $41 million ( 2.2% ) more than was proposed in the senate committee - reported bill .

the secret service section of the dhs budget in brief for fy2017 highlighted three particular programs: the costs of the 2016 presidential campaign ( considered to extend through the 2017 inauguration ) ; upgrades for the usss radio systems ; and the operational mission support initiative ( oms ) , which is aimed at enhancing the protection of the president and vice president from established and emerging threats .

the senate report specifically notes support for the funding requests for campaign costs , and cites a recommendation for usss radio system upgrades within $1 million of the requested level .

however , it is unclear ( in part due to the differing structures of the request and appropriation ) exactly how much of the funding requested for oms is included in the senate's legislation .

the house report notes higher funding levels in many areas , and includes a variety of directions .

as the costs of the 2016 campaign are significantly less in fy2017 than in fy2016 , these funding levels would appear to be adequate to meet the request , the house report does not specifically note a level of funding for those costs , nor for the radio system upgrades or oms .

the senate appropriations committee report noted the accomplishments of the usss in the past year , but expresses concerns about the funding level requested for the agency's personnel .

according to the report , the request would underfund permanent change of station costs , and anticipates 1,250,000 hours of overtime in the coming fiscal year .

it notes a surge in newly trained personnel coming on board in fy2016 and fy2017 , and that difficulties remain in usss's ability to recruit and hire personnel for highly technical roles .

the house appropriations committee report indicates that the usss "continues to be unable to hire and maintain personnel at funded levels," and therefore reduces overall personnel funding by nearly $14 million in anticipation of slower hiring .

the house appropriations committee report recommended almost $40 million in additional funding "in an attempt to stem attrition," including over $16 million to fund permanent change of station moves , and over $13 million "to support the temporary reemployment of retired agents and officers. .

s. 3001 and h.r .

5634 , as reported , each included a general provision which temporarily increases the availability of overtime pay for u.s. secret service agents .

h.r .

5634 would do so for calendar year 2016 , while s. 3001 would do so for calendar years 2016 and 2020 .

both house and senate committee - reported bills provided new pay authority requested by the administration for subsistence expenses to be paid to secret service personnel who , unable to return home at the end of their work shift because of severe weather or other natural or manmade events , must remain on extended duty at their designated posts of duty .

the senate committee report directed the secret service to provide a briefing on the use and cost of the authority within 180 days after the act's enactment date .

