congress continues to focus attention upon both medical innovation and the growing cost of health care .

the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 , commonly known as the hatch - waxman act , addresses each of these concerns .

through amendments to both the patent law and the food and drug law , the hatch - waxman act established several practices intended to facilitate the marketing of generic pharmaceuticals while providing brand - name firms with incentives to i nnovate .

although congress has since modified the basic framework of the hatch - waxman act , both through direct amendments and the enactment of related legislation , potential legislative issues remain for congressional consideration .

this report provides an overview of the hatch - waxman act and identifies potential legislative issues .

it begins by explaining the fundamentals of the patent acquisition process at the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) and patent litigation in the federal courts .

the drug approval process at the food and drug administration ( fda ) is described next .

the report then describes the 1984 judicial ruling in roche products , inc. v. bolar pharmaceutical co . , a case that called attention to the relationship between pharmaceutical innovation and competition .

the report then describes the principal features of the hatch - waxman act .

these features include an expedited generic regulatory approval procedure ; a patent term extension to compensate for regulatory approval delays ; and a statutory exemption from patent infringement for firms seeking regulatory approval .

the hatch - waxman act also established specialized infringement litigation procedures with respect to certain pharmaceutical patents .

the statute further created periods of "regulatory exclusivity" that protect an approved drug from competing applications for marketing approval under specified conditions .

the report then reviews significant legislative amendments impacting the hatch - waxman act .

it closes with an identification of proposed amendments and other issues that may potentially be of legislative interest .

under the nation's patent laws , inventors may obtain patents on processes , machines , manufactures , and compositions of matter that are useful , novel , and nonobvious .

an invention is judged as useful if it is minimally operable toward some practical purpose .

to be considered novel within the patent law , an invention must differ from existing references that disclose the state of the art , such as publications and other patents .

the nonobviousness requirement is met if the invention is beyond the ordinary abilities of a skilled artisan knowledgeable in the appropriate field .

in order to be awarded a patent , an inventor must file a patent application with the uspto .

a patent application must include a specification that so completely describes the invention that skilled artisans are enabled to practice it without undue experimentation .

the patent application must also contain distinct , definite claims that set out the proprietary interest asserted by the inventor .

trained personnel at the uspto , known as "examiners," review all applications to ensure that the invention satisfies the pertinent requirements of the patent law .

if the uspto believes that the application meets the statutory standards , it will allow the application to issue as a granted patent .

at that time , the uspto will assemble and publish the corresponding patent instrument , which includes the complete specification , claims , and prior art references considered during prosecution .

each patent ordinarily enjoys a term of 20 years commencing from the date the patent application was filed .

granted patents give the patentee the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell , or importing into the united states the patented invention .

parties who engage in those acts without the permission of the patentee during the term of the patent can be held liable for infringement .

the patentee may file a civil suit in federal court in order to enjoin infringers and obtain monetary remedies .

although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that the patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds .

patents have the attributes of personal property and may be assigned or licensed to others .

since the 1962 kefauver - harris drug amendments , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act has prohibited the marketing of a "new drug" unless that drug meets certain safety and efficacy standards .

a showing that a new drug is sufficiently safe and effective to allow it to be marketed ordinarily requires manufacturers to conduct clinical investigations of drugs .

such investigations generally occur over several stages , commencing with preclinical evaluation .

the testing process begins in the company's laboratory , where scientists perform preliminary tests to determine whether the drug has any effect on a disease or its symptoms .

for those compounds that merit further consideration following preclinical evaluation , the next step is the filing of an investigational new drug application ( ind ) , at the fda .

the fda evaluates the pre - clinical data and the proposed clinical trial design to determine whether to allow the ind and testing in humans .

clinical trials are ordinarily carried out in three phases that gather further evidence of the drug's safety and effectiveness .

once a new drug's clinical testing is complete , the sponsor prepares a new drug application ( nda ) and submits it to the fda for evaluation .

an nda includes the clinical trial results along with a description of the drug's manufacturing process and facilities .

the agency considers three broad questions when reviewing an nda: whether the drug is safe and effective in its proposed use ( s ) , and whether the benefits of the drug outweigh the risks .

whether the drug's proposed labeling ( package insert ) is appropriate , and what it should contain .

whether the methods used in manufacturing the drug and the controls used to maintain the drug's quality are adequate to preserve the drug's identity , strength , quality , and purity .

as the agency has explained , an nda "is supposed to tell the drug's whole story , including what happened during the clinical tests , what the ingredients of the drug are , the results of the animal studies , how the drug behaves in the body , and how it is manufactured , processed and packaged. .

fda approval of an nda allows the drug to be marketed to the public .

since enacting the hatch - waxman act , congress has maintained a consistent interest in the role intellectual property rights play in the development of new pharmaceuticals and biologics .

congress frequently reconsiders whether the appropriate balance has been struck between providing financial incentives to innovators and encouraging the development of competition to limit economic cost to the public .

this section addresses select legislation in the 114 th congress .

similar themes are likely to be considered by future congresses as well .

the 2016 announcement that a brand - name firm would produce a generic version of its epipen® auto - injector renewed discussion of so - called "authorized generics. .

an "authorized generic" is a pharmaceutical that is marketed by or on behalf of a brand - named drug company , but is sold under a generic name .

the brand - name firm may distribute the drug under its own auspices or via a license to a generic drug company .

the price of this "authorized copy" is ordinarily lower than that of the brand - name drug .

some sources refer to authorized generics as "branded," "flanking," or "pseudo" generics .

authorized generics may be pro - consumer in that they potentially increase competition and lower prices , particularly in the short - term .

they have nonetheless proven controversial .

authorized generics ordinarily enter the market at about the time the brand - name drug company's patents are set to expire .

some observers argue that such products may decrease the value of the potential 180-day market exclusivity for the first approved generic .

this in turn may discourage independent generic firms both from challenging drug patents and from selling their own generic products .

the hatch - waxman act requires generic drug companies to prove that their proposed products are bioequivalent to the brand - name drug .

bioequivalence testing therefore requires that the generic firm use the brand - name product as a basis for comparison .

some generic firms have expressed concerns , however , that certain brand - name firms have refused to sell them samples of their drugs for use in developing competing products .

the creating and restoring equal access to equivalent samples ( creates ) act of 2016 , s. 3056 , addresses access to reference product samples when a brand - name product is subject to limited distribution channels — either voluntarily or via fda - imposed "risk evaluation and mitigation strategies ( rems ) " procedures .

the bill would allow a generic or biosimilar firm to commence litigation in federal court in order to obtain a sample of a drug or biologic that is subject to a restricted distribution scheme so that it may obtain fda approval of its competing product .

at least six bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress that would allow individuals to import lower - cost prescription drugs from foreign jurisdictions .

the bills differ on the jurisdictions from which imports are permissible .

h.r .

2228 and s. 122 , each titled the safe and affordable drugs from canada act of 2015 ; along with h.r .

3513 and s. 2023 , each titled the prescription drug affordability act of 2015 ; would allow u.s. - approved drugs to be imported from approved canadian pharmacies .

h.r .

2623 , the personal drug importation fairness act , would allow u.s. - approved drugs to be imported from australia , canada , israel , japan , new zealand , switzerland , south africa , a member state of the european union , or a country in the european economic area , as well as any other country determined by the commissioner of food and drugs to have safety and efficacy standards at least as protective as the united states .

finally , s. 1790 , the safe and affordable prescription drugs act of 2015 , would allow u.s. - approved drugs to be imported from approved pharmacies located anywhere in the world .

congress continues to express interest in regulatory exclusivities .

in the 114 th congress , the curb opioid misuse by advancing technology ( combat ) act of 2016 , h.r .

5127 , would extend the three - year new clinical study exclusivity by 12 months if the new study was related to clinical abuse potential and the product's labeling characterized the drug's abuse - deterrent potential .

the combat act would similarly extend the 180-day generic exclusivity by 60 days in such circumstances .

on the other hand , the period of biologics exclusivity would be reduced from 12 to 7 years by the price relief , innovation , and competition for essential drugs ( priced ) act , introduced as both h.r .

5573 and s. 3094 .

over the past 35 years , fda - administered regulatory exclusivities have been growing in numbers , scope , complexity , and duration .

the long history of congressional lawmaking has given rise to three types of patents: utility patents in 1790 , design patents in 1842 , and plant patents in 1930 .

in contrast , since 1982 congress has established 15 sorts of regulatory exclusivity .

encouraging innovation through regulatory exclusivities , rather than through the patent system , arguably possesses certain advantages .

the large number of industries affected by patents may make patent reform politically difficult .

fine tuning drug regulation rules may be more feasible .

in addition , u.s. membership in the world trade organization requires that "patents shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as to the ... field of technology...." this requirement of technological neutrality appears to prevent discrimination both against and in favor of drug patents .

on the other hand , increasing reliance upon regulatory exclusivities may require greater legislative oversight and hold less regard for the public domain .

cases litigated under the auspices of the hatch - waxman act have often ended with a settlement between the parties .

in some of these cases , a generic firm agrees to neither challenge the brand - name company's patents nor sell a generic version of the patented drug for a period of time .

in exchange , the brand - name drug company agrees to compensate the generic firm , often with substantial monetary payments over a number of years .

because the payment flows counterintuitively , from the patent owner to the accused infringer , this compensation has been termed a "reverse" payment .

for over two decades , a number of courts of appeal have been called upon to analyze the antitrust implications of patent settlements between brand - name and generic firms within the shadow of the hatch - waxman act .

facing somewhat different case specifics , the courts developed varying approaches to the issue .

these distinctions were laid to rest by the 2013 supreme court opinion in federal trade commission v. actavis , inc .

the watershed actavis decision ushered in a new era for antitrust review of reverse payment settlements .

there , the court held that the legality of reverse payment settlements should be evaluated under the "rule of reason" approach .

however , the court declined to hold that such settlements should be presumptively illegal under a "quick look" analysis .

the actavis opinion resolves a long - standing circuit split regarding the approach that should be taken toward settlement of pharmaceutical patent cases under the antitrust laws .

the lower courts have now been left with the potentially complex task of applying the rule of reason to reverse payment settlements going forward .

in the 114 th congress , a number of bills deal with reverse payment settlements .

the fair and immediate release of generics act , s. 131 , would make a number of changes to the hatch - waxman act in order to discourage reverse payments settlements .

in particular , s. 131 would grant any generic firm the right to share the 180-day regulatory exclusivity if it wins a patent challenge in the district court or is not sued for patent infringement by the brand company .

the legislation would also oblige generic firms to abide by any deferred entry date agreed to in their settlements with brand - name firms , even if relevant patents were struck down previously .

finally , brand - name firms would be required to make a decision to enforce their patents within 45 days of being notified of a patent challenge by a generic firm under the hatch - waxman act .

another bill , s. 2019 , the preserve access to affordable generics act , would declare that certain reverse payment settlements constitute acts of unfair competition .

in particular , that bill would amend the federal trade commission act to provide that an agreement "shall be presumed to have anticompetitive effects and be unlawful if — ( i ) an anda filer receives anything of value ; and ( ii ) the anda filer agrees to limit or forego research , development , manufacturing , marketing , or sales of the anda product for any period of time. .

certain exceptions apply — for example , the payment of reasonable litigation expenses not exceeding $7.5 million would not be unlawful .

that "quick look" presumption would not apply if the parties to the agreement demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the procompetitive benefits of the agreement outweigh the anticompetitive effects of the agreement .

s. 2019 includes a list of factors to be weighed by the courts in such circumstances .

a third bill , s. 2023 , the prescription drug affordability act of 2015 , would act similarly to s. 2019 .

it would also create a presumption that reverse payment settlements violate the federal trade commission act , subject to certain exceptions .

however , unlike s. 2019 , the parties to the agreement would not be able to overcome this presumption by showing that its procompetitive benefits outweigh the anticompetitive harms .

