section 1341 of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) establishes a transitional reinsurance program that is designed to provide payment to non - grandfathered , non - group market health plans ( also known as individual market health plans ) that enrolled high - risk enrollees for 2014 through 2016 .

under the program , the secretary of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) collected reinsurance contributions from health insurers and from third - party administrators on behalf of group health plans .

the secretary then used those contributions to make reinsurance payments to health insurers who enrolled high - cost enrollees ( statutes required the hhs secretary to determine how high - risk enrollees are identified , and the secretary in turn defined high - risk enrollees as high - cost enrollees ) in their non - group market plans both inside and outside of the exchanges ( also known as marketplaces , where individuals can shop for and purchase private health insurance coverage ) .

this report provides an overview of the aca's transitional reinsurance program .

the transitional reinsurance program's aim is to protect against the potential incentive to increase premiums by offsetting the expenditures associated with high - risk individuals .

the first section of the report provides background information on reinsurance and the aca risk mitigation programs .

the second section describes the components of the transitional reinsurance program , as well as implementation of the program .

the third section discusses questions , including those raised by a 2016 government accountability office ( gao ) report , regarding the scope of hhs's authority to administer the transitional reinsurance program .

finally , the report includes a table in the appendix that summarizes key aspects of the transitional reinsurance program .

although states are directed to establish their own transitional reinsurance programs , currently no state is doing so .

the hhs secretary is implementing the transitional reinsurance program for all states , citing the authority under section 1321 ( c ) ( 1 ) of the aca .

under this authority , the secretary may "take such actions as are necessary" to ensure that the requirements of the transitional reinsurance program are met .

in those states where the federal government is implementing the transitional reinsurance program , hhs ( through cms ) acts as the reinsurance entity for purposes of section 1341 of the aca , collecting contributions from covered insurers and third - party administrators ( i.e. , contributing entities ) , as well as making payments from those contributions to eligible insurers under the program .

cms currently allocates all collections in a given year to reinsurance payments for insurers until the statutory collection targets for those purposes have been met .

once the statutory collection targets for a year are satisfied , any further collections in that year would be allocated to program administration expenses and to the u.s. treasury .

prior to adopting this allocation formula , cms had issued a final rule with a different allocation method , which has since been amended .

in its 2015 payment notice issued on march 11 , 2014 , the first collection was allocated solely toward reinsurance payments and program administration expenses , whereas the second collection was allocated only to the u.s. treasury .

subsequently , in a march 21 , 2014 , proposed rule , cms sought comment on its "legal authority to implement a prioritization of reinsurance contributions to reinsurance payments over payments to the u.s .

treasury. .

one commenter described section 1341 of the aca as "impos[ing] few requirements on the expenditure of reinsurance contributions , stating that the statute does not specify that payments must be made to insurers and to the u.s. treasury simultaneously , or that the u.s. treasury must receive its full funding before reinsurance pool payments are made. .

cms noted its agreement with this argument , stating that section 1341 "provides [the agency] with the discretion ... to determine the priority , method , and timing for the allocation of reinsurance contributions collected. .

consistent with this conclusion , a final rule issued on may 27 , 2014 , revised the allocation formula .

under the current system , no funds collected from insurers are deposited in the treasury until sufficient amounts have been received to fund the reinsurance program .

the permissibility of cms's final rule has been called into question by some observers .

on september 29 , 2016 , gao issued a legal opinion stating that the current method of allocating contributions from insurers is not authorized by section 1341 .

in its opinion , gao focused on the language of section 1341 , noting that when congress has enacted statutory language that speaks directly to an issue , such statutory language , viewed in the context of the overall statutory scheme , must control .

in particular , section 1341 states that each insurer's contribution into the transitional reinsurance program "shall be designed so that each issuer's contribution amount for any calendar year ... reflects its proportionate share of an additional $2,000,000,000 for 2014 , an additional $2,000,000,000 for 2015 , and an additional $1,000,000,000 for 2016. .

gao noted that this provision uses the mandatory term "shall" when directing hhs to collect amounts from insurers for the u.s. treasury .

the use of this term led gao to the conclusion that the plain language of section 1341 "requires[s] hhs to collect amounts for the treasury and do so without qualification. .

in reaching this conclusion , gao rejected cms's argument that the use of the term "reflects" indicated that cms retained a degree of flexibility in determining how to assess an insurer's u.s. treasury contribution .

in gao's view , the plain language and structure of the statutory provision counseled against a permissive reading of the statute's allocation requirements .

further , gao concluded that the statute "explicitly prohibits" such amounts collected for the u.s. treasury from being used for reinsurance payments to insurers .

where overall collections were insufficient to meet the statutory targets , gao stated that the proper course of action was to apportion the receipts between reinsurance payments and the u.s. treasury on a pro rata basis instead of prioritizing one over the other .

in support of this pro rata allocation of collections , gao cited federal court decisions that held that , in cases where programs of federal spending were underfunded , the agency should "preserve the allocation formula" provided in the statute rather than exercise "total discretion in the allocation of the funds. .

following the issuance of gao's opinion , cms indicated that it disagreed with gao's conclusions and would continue to prioritize collections toward reinsurance payments .

past opinions by the office of legal counsel ( olc ) in the department of justice have taken the position that gao legal opinions are not binding upon the executive branch , "[a]lthough the opinions and legal interpretations of the gao and the comptroller general often provide helpful guidance on appropriations matters and related issues.... " other commentators have argued that the supreme court's recent decision in king v. burwell counsels interpreting the aca "[i]f at all possible ... in a way that is consistent" with "improving health insurance markets , not to destroy them. .

in king , a majority of the court rejected a literal application of the statutory provision governing health insurance premium subsidies in part because such a reading would have resulted in significantly higher premiums and lower enrollment .

arguably , cms's prioritization of reinsurance contributions for reinsurance payments over u.s. treasury contributions provides greater assistance to insurers by ensuring that more funding is available to make reinsurance payments to those insurers that enroll high - cost individuals .

if the market consequences of not allowing such prioritization of reinsurance contributions would be similarly as significant , it could be argued that king suggests it might be permissible to depart from "the most natural reading of the statute. .

on the other hand , if allocating contributions to the u.s. treasury would not result in the same degree of harm to the insurance market , it might be argued that the court's opinion in king would not have any applicability to the interpretation of section 1341 of the aca .

moreover , the king court's interpretation of the aca provision was not simply based upon the potential policy consequences of a literal reading of the provision ; rather , the court's interpretation of the aca provision was guided in part by the "broader structure" of aca .

relying upon "the fundamental canon of statutory construction that the words of a statute must be read in their context and with a view to their place in the overall statutory scheme," the king court determined that support existed to interpret the aca provision in a manner different than a plain reading of the text might initially suggest .

it is not clear that a reviewing court would necessarily believe that the king ruling supports construing section 1341 in a manner contrary to the reading suggested by its plain text , unless evidence could be found elsewhere in the aca that favored a different interpretation .

to date , it does not appear that any suits have been filed challenging cms's prioritization of reinsurance contributions for reinsurance payments over u.s. treasury contributions .

