housing assistance for families and individuals following a presidentially declared disaster event dates back to 1951 when special legislation ( h.j .

res .

303 ) in response to flooding in the midwest included a provision for "providing temporary housing or other emergency shelter for families who , as a result of such major disaster , require temporary housing or other emergency shelters. .

this authority , which derived from p.l .

81-875 , the federal disaster act of 1950 , was only sporadically employed over the next two decades .

but in the intervening years , congress created various forms of aid to assist those who had lost their homes and their livelihood to disasters .

during the late 1960s the disaster loan program of the small business administration ( sba ) was created as well as the disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) program .

in 1974 , the disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l .

93-288 ) was enacted that established the ihp program ( known initially as individual and family grants — ifg ) in the general form that it is recognized today .

the ihp has two broad categories that assist families and individuals who have been impacted by disaster damage ; housing assistance and other needs assistance .

the total of all assistance to one household cannot exceed $33,000 .

each household is considered a single applicant regardless of the number of household members .

in all instances , this help is intended to supplement , but not substitute for existing insurance coverage .

assistance to individuals and households is not automatic under a presidential declaration .

it must be specifically requested by the governor in his or her letter of request .

the governor's request would also include estimates of need based on a preliminary damage assessment ( pda ) .

the pda includes estimates of the number of homes affected , the degree of damage , the estimated amounts of insurance coverage , and other demographic information such as household income and percentages of elderly residents .

fema has provided an operations manual for damage assessment by the state that details the factors that need to be validated in a request for individual assistance ( ia ) : cause of damage jurisdictions impacted and concentration of damage types of homes homeownership rate of impacted homes percentage of affected households with insurance coverage appropriate to the peril number of homes impacted and degree of damage inaccessible communities special flood hazard areas , sanctioned communities , coastal barrier resource system zones and other protected areas primary or secondary residence other relevant pda data , such as income levels , poverty , trauma , and special needs .

during the period 2004 through 2013 there were 561 major disaster declarations .

of that total , 211 declarations were made for both public assistance ( pa ) and ia while 25 declarations were made for ia only .

the remaining 325 declarations were for pa only .

just over 40% of all presidential major disaster declarations during this period resulted in a designation for ia .

the declarations contain the designations of the areas covered ( eg , counties ) by the declaration and the types of assistance ( pa and / or ia ) available .

for example , the pie chart at the top of figure 1 reflects that division of the types of assistance provided under the declarations and the example below it is a major disaster declaration for south carolina during the fall of 2015 ( dr - 4241-sc ) that illustrates how the types of assistance are mentioned within a declaration , including the designation of counties .

the designations indicate the types of assistance being provided for individual counties within a state or tribal areas .

both the initial county designations , and any subsequent additions , are published in the federal register .

as noted earlier , the primary types of assistance provided under ihp are repairs , rental assistance and other needs assistance ( ona ) .

with the exception of hurricane katrina ( which is an outlier ) , for most disasters , the majority of assistance is provided through grants for home repairs to make a home habitable .

that is followed by rental assistance costs and ona payments .

the use of manufactured housing is not common and is a last resort when the other housing options are not available .

the figure 4 pie chart on the right ( not including katrina ) illustrates that the plurality of assistance goes to owner - occupied housing .

within that category the great majority of funds ( 74% ) are expended for home repairs , rental assistance , and other needs assistance ( ona ) .

however , the graphic including katrina shows a significantly smaller amount spent on repairs and a larger amount devoted to rental assistance for both renters and homeowners , reflecting the degree of damage from that event and the diaspora of survivors in rental properties across the nation .

hurricane katrina damaged or destroyed a significant amount of housing stock along the gulf coast , including rental properties .

this presented limited alternatives for temporary housing for disaster survivors .

many disaster survivors left the area to reach available housing because open rental units were often outside the impacted area .

this led to significant amounts of rental assistance payments .

in the case of hurricane sandy , and in fact for most disasters , the favored option for homeowners is to repair their homes and remain in them .

in evaluating the history of this topic it can be argued that disaster housing has been driven by the assumption , by both fema and its state partners , of a temporary , short - term mission .

this assumption was based upon the shared experiences of most non - catastrophic disaster events .

these "garden variety disasters" required minimal help to house those made homeless by the disaster event .

additionally , scant attention arguably has been paid to longer - term housing missions resulting in a program some have described as having limited resources , which may suffer from an approach that could arguably be considered insufficiently comprehensive .

however , in recent years there have been a number of steps taken by congress , such as authorizing case management services and increasing fema's ability to create housing resources in the disaster area , as well as initiatives by fema that include improved manufactured housing and wrap - around services to support such housing .

these incremental pieces have contributed to a more comprehensive temporary housing program with flexible options to offer disaster survivors .

also , following large , catastrophic events , the combination of ihp with hud's cdbg - dr program and sba disaster loans can present a range of types of assistance that can be fashioned to meet the needs of individual disaster survivors .

however , as noted earlier , the existence of all such help in each declared disaster is not guaranteed .

but the remaining challenges can be addressed through increased communication by fema and its state partners .

the most significant test is to manage expectations regarding the assistance that is available following a disaster .

that challenge is coupled with the potential need to create a culture of preparedness that would underline to homeowners that ihp assistance is limited and does not supplant the greater benefits of insurance coverage .

it is not a simple message , since the goal is to offer assurance to the public that , while supplemental help is available , it must be understood that insurance and personal mitigation measures should also be considered prior to a disaster event .

the ihp program is there for those without the resources to pursue insurance coverage or other preparedness tools .

but for those families and individuals able to take a role in their own recovery , an appreciation for the importance of insurance and mitigation would reduce the need of the ihp program , and result in safer and more resilient communities when disaster strikes .

