t he second amendment states that "[a] well - regulated militia , being necessary to the security of a free state , the right of the people to keep and bear arms , shall not be infringed. .

before the supreme court's 2008 opinion in district of columbia v. heller , the right generally had been understood by federal courts to be intertwined with military or militia use .

that understanding was formed with little supreme court guidance: before heller , the supreme court had barely opined on the scope of the second amendment , making its last substantive remarks on the right in its 1939 ruling in united states v. miller .

in miller , the supreme court evaluated a criminal law banning possession of a certain type of firearm , asking whether it bore a "reasonable relationship to the preservation or efficiency of a well regulated militia" such that it garnered second amendment protection .

this passage spawned a longstanding debate over whether the second amendment provides an individual right to keep and bear arms versus a collective right belonging to the states to maintain militias , with the vast majority of the courts embracing the collective right theory .

indeed , before the heller litigation began only one circuit court — the fifth circuit in united states v. emerson — had concluded that the second amendment protects an individual's right to keep and bear arms .

the supreme court's landmark 5-4 decision in heller upturned the earlier majority view with its holding that the second amendment guarantees an individual right to possess firearms for historically lawful purposes , such as self - defense in the home .

but in heller the court did not define the full scope of that right , leaving lower courts to fill in the gaps .

indeed , the court has said little on the matter , most notably by holding that the second amendment right is incorporated through the fourteenth amendment to apply to the states in mcdonald v. city of chicago .

beyond mcdonald , the court has largely declined to grant certiorari to the numerous second amendment cases percolating in the lower federal courts with one exception: in caetano v. massachusetts , the supreme court — in a single , two page ruling — granted a petition for certiorari and issued an unsigned , per curiam opinion vacating the decision of the massachusetts supreme court that had upheld a state law prohibiting the possession of stun guns .

but the court's opinion did little to clarify second amendment jurisprudence , principally noting that the state court opinion directly conflicted with heller without discussing the matter in further detail .

during the october 2019 term , however , the supreme court will review a second amendment challenge to a new york city firearm licensing provision in new york state rifle & pistol association , inc. v. city of new york , giving the court another opportunity to elaborate on the scope of the individual right to keep and bear arms .

accordingly , this report evaluates how the lower federal courts have interpreted heller and the second amendment through challenges to various federal , state , and local firearm laws .

in particular , this report focuses on federal appellate decisions , including what categories of persons , firearms , and places may be subject to government firearm regulation , and how federal , state , and local governments may regulate those categories .

these appellate decisions include challenges to provisions of the gun control act — the primary federal law regulating the transfer and possession of firearms in interstate commerce — as well as state and local laws that provide further restrictions on the possession and sale of firearms , including assault weapon bans , concealed carry restrictions , and firearm licensing schemes , among others .

this report is not intended to provide a comprehensive analysis of every second amendment issue brought in federal court since heller , but highlights notable challenges to firearm laws that may be of interest to congress .

before heller , the district of columbia had a web of regulations governing the ownership and use of firearms that , taken together , amounted to a near - total ban on handguns in the district .

one law generally barred the registration of most handguns .

another law required persons with registered firearms to keep them "unloaded and either disassembled or secured by a trigger lock , gun safe , locked box , or other secure device. .

and a third law prohibited persons within the district of columbia from carrying ( openly or concealed , in the home or elsewhere ) an unlicensed firearm .

in 2003 , six d.c. residents challenged those three measures as unconstitutional under the second amendment , arguing that the constitution provides an individual right to bear arms .

in particular , the residents contended that the second amendment provides individuals a right to possess "functional firearms" that are "readily accessible to be used .

 .

 .

for self - defense in the home. .

because heller involved a challenged to a d.c. law , and because the district is generally not viewed as a state for purposes of constitutional law , a question beyond the scope of heller was whether the second amendment applies to the states .

initially , the bill of rights was thought solely to restrict the power of the federal government .

only after the fourteenth amendment's adoption did the supreme court contemplate whether the bill of rights applies to the states .

section one of the fourteenth amendment declares that "[n]o state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of the unites states ; nor shall any state deprive any person of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law. .

during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries , several theories were advanced , with varying results , concerning whether the fourteenth amendment requires states to comply with the bill of rights .

the theory that eventually achieved the greatest success was selective incorporation through the fourteenth amendment's due process clause .

under the doctrine of selective incorporation , courts address whether the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment fully incorporates a particular provision ( and not an amendment as a whole ) in the bill of rights and thus applies to the states .

to do so , courts evaluate whether the particular provision is "fundamental to our scheme of ordered liberty" as well as "deeply rooted in this nation's history and tradition. .

most provisions of the bill of rights have been incorporated under this theory .

and most recently in mcdonald v. city of chicago , the supreme court addressed whether the second amendment applies to the states .

after heller and mcdonald , lawsuits were brought nationwide challenging on second amendment grounds various federal , state , and local firearms regulations .

heller did not define the full scope of the right protected by the second amendment , but the main take away may be summed up as follows: the second amendment protects the right of law - abiding citizens to possess weapons for lawful purposes , notably , self - defense in the home .

with this minimal guidance from the supreme court , the circuit courts largely have been applying a two - step inquiry , drawn from the discussion in heller , to determine whether a particular law is constitutional .

first , courts ask whether the challenged law burdens conduct protected by the second amendment .

if it does not , the inquiry ends , as the law does not implicate the second amendment .

but if the challenged law does burden conduct protected by the second amendment , courts next ask whether , under some type of means - end scrutiny ( described in more detail below ) , the law is constitutional under that standard of review .

the seventh circuit stands out among the circuit courts of appeal for , at times , taking a somewhat different approach in the two - step analysis .

in recent cases the court has declined , at step two , to dig "deeply into the 'levels of scrutiny' quagmire. .

instead , the court evaluates "the strength of the government's justification for restricting or regulating the exercise of second amendment rights. .

when the firearm restriction implicates core second amendment rights , the seventh circuit has suggested that the government must make a "rigorous showing" that may resemble something close to strict scrutiny .

for less severe burdens , the court requires the government to make a "strong showing" that a firearm regulation bears a "substantial relation" to an important governmental objective — a standard that resembles the intermediate scrutiny standard of review .

it is also worth noting that , although the d.c .

circuit has applied the two - step approach when evaluating firearm legislation , the newest member of the supreme court bench — justice kavanaugh — advocated for a different approach while serving as a judge on the d.c .

circuit , arguing that: "in my view," he stated , " heller and mcdonald leave little doubt that courts are to assess gun bans and regulations based on text , history , and tradition , not by a balancing test such as strict or intermediate scrutiny. .

heller largely left unresolved much of the "who , what , where , when , and why" of second amendment protections .

the supreme court did make clear , however , that the second amendment ( 1 ) applies to law - abiding citizens who seek to use firearms for lawful purposes , particularly for self - defense in the home ; and ( 2 ) does not protect dangerous and unusual weapons .

since heller and mcdonald , the lower courts have been attempting to apply heller in various second amendment challenges to federal , state , and local firearm laws .

this section of the report highlights cases that have examined what classes of persons , weapons , and places are protected by the second amendment , as well as the manner in which such categories may be permissibly regulated .

concerning federal regulations , most challenges stem from provisions of the gun control act of 1968 , as amended , which places limitations on the commercial sale and possession of firearms in interstate commerce .

the challenged state laws and regulations vary ; this report highlights challenges to state assault weapon bans , concealed carry restrictions , firearm licensing schemes , and the commercial sale of arms , among others .

although the circuit courts of appeals have taken various approaches in evaluating second amendment challenges , the results tend to share similar outcomes .

accordingly , without further guidance — for now — from the supreme court , congress may find the circuit court rulings instructive should the legislature seek to enact measures that would add or modify the categories of persons or weapons subject to firearm regulations .

however , any new ( and past ) firearms measures will need to comport with whatever guidance , if any , the supreme court offers when it issues a ruling in new york state rifle & pistol association , inc. v. city of new york .

almost all federal courts reviewing second amendment challenges post - heller have adopted a two - step approach to evaluating second amendment challenges .

first , courts ask whether the regulated person , firearm , or place comes within the scope of the second amendment's protections .

if not , the law does not run afoul of the second amendment .

if , on the other hand , the challenged law does implicate the second amendment , courts must next decide the appropriate level of scrutiny — rational basis , intermediate , or strict scrutiny — to employ in determining whether the law passes constitutional muster .

in deciding which level to choose , courts generally ask whether the challenged law burdens core second amendment conduct , like the ability to use a firearm for self - defense in the home .

if a law substantially burdens core second amendment activity , courts typically will apply strict scrutiny .

otherwise , courts will apply intermediate scrutiny .

in addition , sometimes circuit courts have taken a different approach by asking whether the challenged regulation is "presumptively lawful" as envisioned by heller .

further , some courts have deemed rational - basis review as "off the table" based on the majority's comments in heller .

all told , most firearm laws have been reviewed under intermediate scrutiny , where the courts require a reasonable fit between the challenged law and a substantial or important governmental interest asserted as the basis for the law .

based on these various approaches , it appears that the government can justify a firearm regulation in a number of ways .

first , at step one , the government can show that the regulation is a longstanding , presumptively lawful regulation .

the government typically can do this by tying the regulation to those restrictions identified in heller as presumptively lawful .

in some cases , a challenged restriction might not be among those listed in heller as presumptively lawful .

however , given the heller court's admonishment that the list was not intended to be exhaustive , later courts have concluded that a challenged law is presumptively lawful by analogizing it to restrictions identified in heller as presumptively permissible .

in other cases , the government can show that a firearm regulation is presumptively lawful by proving that a restricted person is not a lawful , responsible citizen and thus outside the scope of the second amendment .

additionally , the government can make a historical showing that the firearm regulation is longstanding and thus lawful .

second , if the inquiry proceeds to the second step , the government must show that the regulation is substantially related to an important governmental interest .

the cases show that the success of a law under this inquiry will depend on the evidence that the government puts forth .

the courts will not take mere assertions by the government but require meaningful evidence , like legislative findings , empirical evidence , and academic studies .

based on the courts' admonishments , future legislation to regulate firearms may face a greater chance of survival in the courts if that legislation evidences a clear fit between the government's interest and the regulation .

looking ahead , the seats of two of the justices critical to the outcomes in heller and mcdonald , justices scalia and kennedy , have been filled by justices gorsuch and kavanaugh respectively .

during justice gorsuch's tenure on the tenth circuit , he never had the opportunity to explore the scope of heller and the second amendment .

but since joining the court , he joined justice thomas in dissenting from the denial of certiorari in peruta v. county of san diego ( involving california's good - cause requirement for a concealed carry license ) , in which justice thomas opined that the second amendment's text , history , and jurisprudence "strongly suggest" that the amendment includes the right to carry a firearm in public "in some manner. .

conversely , while on the d.c .

circuit , justice kavanaugh wrote at length about heller 's meaning in his dissenting opinion in heller v. district of columbia ( heller ii ) , a ruling that evaluated several provisions of a comprehensive firearm scheme that the district of columbia had enacted in the wake of the supreme court's more - famous heller opinion .

unlike the majority of federal appellate courts , he did not appear to believe that second amendment claims should be evaluated under a particular level of constitutional scrutiny .

rather , he would have considered the second amendment's text , history , and tradition .

accordingly , these two new arrivals on the court may help shape post - heller second amendment jurisprudence .

indeed , the court's consideration of new york state rifle & pistol association , inc. this upcoming october 2019 term will likely clarify the framework that should be employed when evaluating second amendment claims .

further , the grant of certiorari appears to signal a willingness of the court to further develop its second amendment jurisprudence .

