from postal mail to social media , members of congress have regularly adopted and utilized new communications tools to better inform constituents about the workings of congress and important policy matters .

some of these communications advancements also facilitate better information within congress as it un dertakes its legislative work .

by the mid - 20 th century , radio and television broadcasts offered congress the ability , for the first time , to provide real - time information about events unfolding on the chamber floors or in committees .

the idea of offering live video broadcasts initially appealed to some , but others had reservations about the potential effects of broadcasting on congressional behavior .

technical challenges also existed , including setting up the necessary lights , microphones , cameras , and other equipment and making arrangements with media outlets for broadcast coverage .

although the house and senate experimented with television broadcasts as early as 1948 , regular coverage of the house floor began in 1977 and regular coverage of the senate floor began in 1986 .

many people are familiar with congressional video because it is continually broadcast on the privately operated , nonprofit cable - satellite public affairs network ( c - span ) .

one c - span channel was created for house proceedings in 1979 , another for senate proceedings in 1986 , and a third for additional congressional or public affairs programming in 2001 .

c - span operates independently from congress — it receives no financial support from the house or senate , and it does not have any contractual agreement with either chamber .

the house and senate separately administer their video feeds , and each chamber maintains exclusive control over its videos .

congressionally produced video feeds are available for free to any accredited news organization .

committees in each chamber often allow video coverage of public hearings or other proceedings , and have discretion to adopt additional rules to govern video coverage , which can include allowing media outlets to film using their own cameras .

beginning in 2011 and 2012 , respectively , the house and senate began streaming their floor video feeds directly to the public over the internet , in addition to allowing c - span and other media outlets to rebroadcast their video feeds .

most committees also provide internet video broadcasts of their open proceedings .

additional technological advancements in recent years , like the ubiquity of smartphones with video cameras and the ability to broadcast over wireless networks , may challenge the ability of the house and senate to maintain exclusive control over video coverage of their proceedings .

this report begins with a brief history of early congressional experiences with television coverage and background on the decisions to allow regular committee and floor broadcasts .

the next sections describe how video coverage is administered within congress , discussing rules , regulations , and authorities affecting video recording and broadcasting for house committees , house floor proceedings , senate committees , and senate floor proceedings .

a brief overview of c - span's history , organization , and operating structure is then provided .

the final sections of this report discuss some recent events related to congressional video and highlight some of the new challenges presented by smartphone and wireless broadcasting technologies .

prior to the 1979 house and 1986 senate decisions to broadcast proceedings , television cameras rarely covered floor proceedings in either chamber .

in 1947 , the house allowed television cameras to broadcast portions of the opening session of the 80 th congress , but no other regular sessions were broadcast over the next few decades .

the state of the union address was also first televised in 1947 , an event that continued to be broadcast and was often the public's only televised glimpse inside the house chamber .

the only video broadcast from the senate floor prior to 1986 was the swearing - in ceremony of vice president nelson rockefeller on december 19 , 1974 .

committee hearings , although not regularly televised , were more frequently broadcast than floor proceedings in this early period , at the discretion of individual committees .

in spring 1948 , the senate armed services committee became the first congressional committee to broadcast a hearing , and the house un - american activities committee followed a few months later .

in these instances , committees allowed camera operators from the television networks to attend and film the hearings .

this practice was formalized in the legislative reorganization act of 1970 , which provided that house and senate committees could , but were not required to , allow hearings to be filmed .

prior to this legislation , it was not universally agreed upon who exercised authority over committee broadcasts ; some believed that television broadcasts fell under the authority of house committees to open and publicize their own hearings , but others believed the speaker needed to grant the committees permission to broadcast .

in 1974 , the joint committee on congressional operations , a bicameral panel established by the 1970 act , expressed concern that the american public lacked information about how congress worked .

noting that the president had successfully utilized radio and television to increase executive branch exposure and prestige , the joint committee considered a number of ways to improve congressional mass communications , including televised floor proceedings .

instead of relying upon broadcast networks to air portions of congressional coverage in newscasts or in lieu of other programming , new cable and satellite technologies offered congress the possibility of its own designated channels that could provide all proceedings in their entirety .

the joint committee recommended that the house and senate provide radio and television coverage of their regular proceedings , but each chamber still needed to adopt the recommendation , establish broadcasting rules , and work out technical logistics and funding .

house floor proceedings and many house committee proceedings are available as live or recorded video footage which may be used by media outlets , members of the public , and congress itself .

regulations governing these videos are generally found in the rules of the house of representatives .

media outlets seeking access to house proceedings or house - provided video footage must be accredited by the house radio and television correspondents' gallery .

those approved may show portions of proceedings , as in part of a newscast , or show congressional proceedings in their entirety , as c - span chooses to do .

committees may adopt additional rules that affect how videos of their hearings , meetings , or other proceedings are produced or used .

the speaker of the house has the ability to administer and direct video coverage of house floor proceedings , and often delegates some responsibilities to other house offices .

for example , the house recording studio generally operates the video equipment to film the house floor and the clerk of the house maintains the online video services provided by the house .

video broadcasts and recordings of senate floor proceedings and many senate committee proceedings are available to the media and the public .

broadcast media outlets seeking to use senate - produced video or to transmit senate proceedings must be accredited by the senate radio and television correspondents' gallery .

c - span 2 has voluntarily committed to broadcast live senate floor proceedings and other related programming .

the standing rules of the senate enable senate committees to allow video coverage of their public proceedings , and committees may adopt additional rules to facilitate broadcasting or recording .

floor video coverage is authorized by a senate resolution , subject to oversight by the committee on rules and administration , and is operated by the senate recording and photographic studio .

although the house and senate each decided to produce video footage of their respective floor proceedings , neither chamber had the means to televise these proceedings to an audience beyond the capitol complex's closed - circuit system .

the cable - satellite public affairs network , commonly known as c - span , became the primary way most people would watch house and senate proceedings .

c - span and its related channels are owned and operated by the national cable satellite corporation , a private , nonprofit company .

c - span began as a television channel dedicated to carrying the live feed of the house of representatives in march 1979 .

in the early 1970s , brian lamb , the founder of the station , sought to provide more comprehensive public affairs coverage on television and recognized the ability of cable and satellite technologies to provide such a service .

at the same time , members of congress were considering ways to improve their communications with the public , which included proposals to televise floor proceedings .

during 1977 and 1978 , lamb met with members of the house to discuss his plans for a cable network devoted to house proceedings .

although c - span would become almost synonymous with congressional television in the following years , no formal contract or financial agreement has ever been made between the house or senate and c - span .

the original funding for c - span came from donations by individuals involved in the cable and satellite industries , and its operating expenses today come from license fees paid by cable operators .

the house chose to own its video recording equipment , hire its own camera operators , and maintain its own video feed .

c - span operates an independent public affairs television network , voluntarily committed to continuously distributing the house video feed .

when the senate decided to televise its floor proceedings in 1986 , c - span 2 began to show gavel - to - gavel senate floor proceedings under a voluntary commitment , similar to the way c - span operates with the house .

the senate maintains control over its cameras and produces its own video feed , and c - span 2 relies upon cable license fees to operate .

a third network , c - span 3 , was created in 2001 to show additional programming , including congressional committee hearings , political events , and original programs on american history .

c - span subscribers can also stream the television stations online at http: / / www.cspan.org / .

in 1997 , c - span launched a radio station , available in the washington , dc , area at 90.1 fm and nationwide via xm satellite radio subscription .

c - span and congress generally have a cooperative and symbiotic working arrangement , but the separate administration of the network and the congressional video feed has occasionally created challenges .

video ownership and camera control are two areas where some concerns have arisen .

c - span often uses its own cameras to record committee hearings , and its footage is copyrighted by c - span .

video feeds produced by the house and senate , however , are provided free of charge to any accredited media outlet and are not copyrighted .

in 1981 , for example , the speaker's advisory committee on broadcasting wanted c - span to provide its committee hearing coverage to the house free of charge .

when c - span would not make this footage available , the chair of the committee blocked c - span from airing on televisions in the house cable system .

more recently , in 2007 , the speaker of the house posted a video clip of a committee hearing from c - span on a website and was issued a cease - and - desist notification .

after this incident , c - span revised its copyright policy to allow for noncommercial copying , sharing , or posting of c - span videos online with attribution .

c - span has also sometimes requested permission to use its own cameras to cover floor proceedings , and these requests are regularly denied by the house and the senate .

c - span provides public affairs programming , much like local networks or public broadcasting stations , but c - span operates cable television channels , which has sometimes meant there are limits to its reach .

americans who do not pay for a cable subscription service , for example , do not have access to c - span channels , nor can they watch c - span live online .

moreover , cable companies are not required to include c - span in their subscription packages , which can mean that certain channel lineups may not include any or all of the c - span channels .

in recent years , wireless networks , video - hosting websites , and the abundance of cell phone cameras have resulted in a new media environment where specialized equipment is no longer required to produce and distribute video to a wide public audience .

these developments may present challenges for the house and senate traditions of chamber - controlled video feeds .

the house and senate maintain rules that prohibit individuals from filming or broadcasting footage from within their chambers , but it may be difficult for the chambers to fully prevent the use of such technologies .

the house and senate decided to provide video broadcasts of their proceedings after spending several years considering the impact cameras might have on policymaking and legislative behavior .

since the decisions were made to broadcast from the house and senate , the cameras have operated with little controversy .

video broadcasts have become a common part of congressional life , valued for facilitating public information about congress and information within congress .

this acceptance was illustrated when the chambers began their own internet broadcasts , which expanded access to house and senate video and was readily accepted as a necessary transition to help congress adapt to a new informational environment .

congress has largely embraced video coverage , but the house and senate have historically sought to retain control over the footage that is recorded and broadcast .

technological advancements have both enabled and hindered congress's ability to retain this control .

limited television bandwidth and signal strength , for example , initially prevented the house and senate from obtaining the unedited , gavel - to - gavel coverage they desired on existing networks .

cable and satellite technology made specialized , nationwide television stations , like c - span , possible .

the house and senate initially sought the commitment of a network to ensure an audience for their broadcasts , and c - span needed access to the video content exclusively provided by the house and the senate .

congress and c - span have maintained this partnership for many years , yet neither chamber has any formal agreement with c - span to cover their proceedings , nor do they grant c - span any special access .

today , the combination of cell phones or other pocket - sized cameras , wireless networks , and video broadcasting websites present new challenges to congressional video coverage controlled by the house and the senate .

although the house and senate typically discourage cell phone use within their chambers , their rules also recognize that members may bring their devices with them to the floor for productivity and safety reasons .

widespread cell phone video could affect congressional decorum ; however , when no official video coverage is available from the chambers , these alternative means of broadcasting might provide a way to keep the public informed about what is happening in congress .

as video footage becomes easier for anyone to produce and broadcast , the house and senate may continue to address institutional rules regarding technology use and video coverage of their proceedings .

