congress faces infrastructure funding decisions that would support shipping on the great lakes and st. lawrence seaway ( glsls ) .

in the water resources development act of 2016 ( h.r .

5303 , s. 2848 ) , congress may decide whether to permanently allocate 10% of certain harbor maintenance funds both to small ports and to great lakes ports as proposed in the senate - passed version of the bill ( s. 2848 , sections 2010 and 2018 ) .

also on the horizon is a debate over construction of a spare , parallel lock at sault ste .

marie , mi , to provide redundancy in case the existing lock should need to close for emergency repairs .

some members of congress also seek funding for the construction of a second coast guard heavy icebreaker vessel for the great lakes .

a new lock and a new icebreaker would likely cost several hundred million dollars and take several years to construct .

these funding decisions concerning the glsls come at a time when the system's traffic base is eroding .

there are reasons to think this trend will continue .

it is largely the result of technological changes in manufacturing and transportation , as well as the globalization of production — factors beyond the scope of infrastructure funding .

moreover , federal funds for harbor maintenance are derived from cargo taxes predominantly paid by shippers using coastal ports , not great lakes ports .

coastal ports , especially those experiencing steady increases in cargo volume , wish to retain more of the cargo taxes they generate for their own infrastructure needs .

in light of these pending funding decisions , this report examines in more detail the reasons for the glsls system's cargo decline , prospects for attracting more cargo , and current and alternative approaches to financing the system's capital needs .

the glsls system from the gulf of st. lawrence to duluth , mn , is 2,300 nautical miles .

it takes a ship six to seven days to sail from montreal to duluth or chicago .

there are two distinct categories of vessel traffic on the system: intra - lakes trade , and transits between the great lakes and the st. lawrence seaway .

winter closure of the seaway and the soo locks and the glsls system's intricate navigation requirements are likely two features that are holding back its development .

the size of the locks may not be as much of a hindrance as is often asserted .

while acknowledging the limitations of the glsls discussed above , one can identify two strategies for potentially attracting more cargo to the system .

one strategy would be to convince shippers that currently ship by rail or truck on routes that parallel the great lakes or seaway that shipping by water is a better alternative .

a second strategy would be to encourage industrial sectors that require waterborne shipping to locate new plants or expand existing plants on the great lakes rather than on some other waterway .

the st. lawrence seaway development corporation ( slsdc ) is pursuing both strategies ; the first it calls the "highway h₂o" strategy , the second it calls the "opportunity belt" strategy .

however , the 2015 annual report of one of the largest carriers states that it expects limited opportunity for growth on the glsls and therefore is looking to non - north american markets in order to grow its business .

the largest potential capital project on the glsls , as indicated above , is the construction of a second lock parallel to the poe lock at sault ste .

marie .

this project is primarily relevant to the transport of minnesota iron ore to steel mills within the great lakes .

the purported need for a second lock is for redundancy in case the poe lock must be closed for emergency repairs .

the corps of engineers has also cited sabotage from foreign ship crews as a risk .

reportedly , an unofficial cost estimate for a second lock is in the neighborhood of $600 million .

plans for a second lock have been studied by the corps since the early 1980s .

in a 1984 study , the corps recommended that the project proceed , based on its forecast that tonnage through the lock would reach 134 million tons by 2010 .

however , actual tonnage in 2010 was only 73 million tons , barely half the corps' forecast .

in 2009 , the corps built cofferdams at the two smaller locks so that the locks could be drained as a first step in the construction of the new lock .

two other capital needs also would require significant funding .

one is dredging of harbors and channels to maintain their depths , a continuing necessity on the great lakes .

the other is the disposal of the many lake - bottom sediments that are contaminated .

these sediments are disposed of in "confined disposal facilities" rather than dumped without containment in open water or upland .

many of the disposal facilities have reached their capacity , although new ones are planned .

the current capitalization strategy regarding st. lawrence seaway infrastructure emphasizes preservation and maintenance rather than significant capacity expansion .

this consensus , expressed in a 2007 binational study by several u.s. and canadian federal agencies , was achieved after studies of extending navigation capabilities through the winter and increasing the seaway's depths and lock dimensions .

since that study , there have been no major efforts toward keeping the seaway open during winter months or expanding the locks .

as discussed further below , past evaluations determined that these expansions were not worth the cost , economically or environmentally .

as mentioned above , the pelletization of iron ore increased pressure for winter operations because pellets do not freeze into a solid block like iron ore rock and thus can be handled and shipped in freezing temperatures .

while the seaway is closed in winter , portions of the western great lakes are kept open for navigation with icebreakers .

iron ore pellets can be sourced from the upper peninsula of michigan and shipped from escanaba ( see figure 1 ) , thus avoiding interruption due to the annual closure of the soo locks .

in the 1970s , congress funded demonstration projects over multiple winters to show the feasibility of extending navigation through the winter over the rest of the great lakes .

the demonstration used air hoses designed to push warmer water to the surface , reducing the thickness of the ice , as well as deployment of more icebreakers .

these experimental projects upset waterfront landowners such as coal - fired power plants because broken ice interfered with their intake pipes .

other waterfront property owners complained that ice floes caused shoreline erosion and damaged piers and docks .

the air bubbler system interfered with fish spawning and otherwise upset great lakes ecology in various ways .

there was concern for increased risk of fuel spills from ships and the difficulty of responding to spills in winter .

the air bubblers and icebreaking missions were found to be cost prohibitive .

in the early 2000s , the u.s. army corps of engineers evaluated whether to deepen the seaway and great lakes channels and ports by another 10 feet , widen the seaway locks by 28 feet , and lengthen them by 384 feet .

congress requested this study in 1999 .

the study asserted that this expansion would have net economic benefits , but it was widely criticized for not sufficiently supporting its freight forecasts and for misunderstanding container shipping economics .

for instance , the corps forecasted a steady increase in tonnage even without improvements , despite the recent history of declining annual tonnage .

opposition also came from environmental groups concerned about invasive species arriving aboard international ships , contaminated sediments from dredging , and reduced water levels from expanded outflow channels .

congress did not provide funds to the corps for the next step in project evaluation , a feasibility study that would have examined the costs and benefits of the project in more detail .

instead , u.s. and canadian officials instructed the committee conducting the 2007 study referenced above to determine "how best should we use and maintain the system , in its current physical configuration [emphasis added]. .

the binational study recommended that expansion of the system not proceed .

in february 2010 the army corps issued a supplement to its earlier study , agreeing with that recommendation .

as the 2007 binational and 2010 army corps studies recommended , the slsdc and slsmc are currently in the midst of a program to ensure that the locks , and the seaway in general , are kept in a state of good repair .

in fy2009 , the slsdc began a 10-year asset renewal program with an estimated total cost of $186 million .

assets being renewed include the two locks it maintains and operates on the seaway , as well as a highway bridge over the seaway , a tunnel under the locks , and a small fleet of vessels it uses to perform tasks on the seaway .

the agencies also are dredging to maintain seaway depth .

in fy2015 , the program's seventh year , slsdc spent about $15 million on these capital assets , roughly 40% of its budget .

the slsmc ( the canadian counterpart ) is also performing a 10-year asset renewal program .

in its most recent year , it spent cad$117 million ( approximately usd$94 million ) on its physical assets .

congress appropriates about $35 million annually for the slsdc from the harbor maintenance trust fund ( hmtf ) .

this fund also provides between $100 million and $150 million annually for the corps of engineers' dredging , maintenance of breakwaters and jetties , and operation of the soo locks .

the hmtf is funded from the harbor maintenance tax ( hmt ) on imported and domestic cargo shipped through coastal and great lakes ports .

the tax rate is $1.25 per $1,000 of cargo ( i.e. , 0.125% of cargo value ) .

this funding method greatly benefits the glsls because the great lakes and the seaway appear to generate far less hmt revenue than they receive in annual appropriations .

u.s. customs and border protection collects the hmt at each port but was not able to provide crs with hmt collections by port .

given the low value of cargo that is generally shipped on the glsls , it seems likely that hmt revenue generated by the system is a small fraction of the hmtf funding it receives .

thus , revenue received at u.s. coastal ports is likely sustaining ports in the great lakes - st. lawrence seaway system .

the slsmc charges tolls at the locks it operates on the seaway .

total toll receipts varied from cad$63 million to cad$72 million annually over the last three years .

the slsmc has a plan to increase tolls very slightly every year as part of an overall strategy to make the slsmc more financially self - sufficient .

the slsmc tolling scheme consists of a relatively small charge based on the size of the vessel and higher charges based on the amount and commodity being carried .

higher - value commodities pay more per ton .

for instance , the lowest fees are cad$0.68 per ton for grain and coal , while the highest charges are cad$2.40 per ton for steel slabs and cad$2.65 per ton for general cargo , such as containers .

the per - ton tolls are different for the locks on the welland canal than they are for the locks between montreal and lake ontario ; for some commodities they are higher , while for others they are lower .

average lockage fees amount to cad$1.70 to cad$1.80 per ton .

for a fully laden ship , this translates to cad$40,000 to cad$60,000 in tolls for a one - way voyage through the entire seaway , or about cad$2,000 to cad$4,000 per lock .

the agency recently implemented a reduced tolling scheme for new shippers on the seaway .

the slsdc originally charged tolls for passage through the two u.s. locks in order to recoup the construction costs of the seaway .

by the late 1960s , it was apparent that toll revenues were insufficient to repay the construction costs .

in 1970 , under a provision in the merchant marine act of 1970 ( p.l .

91-469 , section 43 ) , congress forgave the slsdc from repaying the interest on its debt ( about $6 million per year , plus an accumulated interest balance of $22 million ) .

this was thought necessary in order to prevent an increase in toll rates .

in 1982 , in the department of transportation and related agencies appropriations act ( p.l .

97-369 , section 311 ) , congress forgave the slsdc from repaying its remaining $110 million debt .

congress was responding to canada's decision to forgive the debt of the canadian seaway authority and canada's reduction in toll rates .

although the original seaway construction agreement between canada and the united states required that the countries mutually decide toll rates , a mutual decision did not occur in this case .

congress's view was that the slsdc could not achieve enough toll revenue to pay its debt as well as reinvest in the seaway .

with the debt forgiven , the slsdc was directed to use toll revenues to operate and maintain the seaway .

in 1986 , congress established the harbor maintenance tax and trust fund in the water resources development act of 1986 ( p.l .

99-662 ) , and in 1994 the hmtf replaced tolls as the means of funding the slsdc's costs .

in its fy2006 budget request , the george w. bush administration proposed reinstating tolls on the two u.s. locks .

the administration projected toll revenue of $17 million per year , equal to the budget of the slsdc at the time .

the hmt would no longer have been assessed on cargo passing through the seaway .

the administration asserted that reliance on tolls would provide the slsdc with a more flexible and stable source of funding , allowing it to function more like a private corporation .

the slsdc had found that the termination of tolls at the two u.s. locks in 1987 had no effect on shipping volumes and estimated that if those tolls were reinstated , all seaway tolls combined ( including canadian tolls ) would amount to only 2% to 3% of a ship's total operating costs through the seaway .

it therefore suspected , but without claiming certainty , that returning to a tolling scheme would not adversely affect tonnage through the seaway .

congress expressed no interest in this proposal .

the possibility that higher tolls might drive cargo off the seaway is still a concern .

user charges on potential competing waterways are minimal .

barges using the ohio and mississippi river system , a competitor to the great lakes in terms of site location for industrial plants and as an export pathway , have been assessed a fuel tax , now 29 cents per gallon , since 1978 .

this tax , which applies to barges using inland waterways other than the great lakes , generates around $100 million annually and is estimated to cover 5% to 15% of the federal government's cost of providing the inland waterway system .

thus , while the u.s. inland waterway system is no longer free to users , it is still heavily supported by public funds .

the relative user fee charges on the seaway versus those on the u.s. inland waterway system are among many cost elements influencing the relative attractiveness of these waterway routes .

financing the seaway with some kind of cargo fee , one logical way to raise funds , faces a paradox that is useful to acknowledge .

higher - value cargoes such as containerized goods or new vehicles are most capable of financing the seaway because these shippers are willing to pay more .

however , these shippers are the most difficult to attract to the seaway because the higher cargo value increases the importance of transit time and the cost of stockpiling inventory for the winter .

therefore , low - value cargo shippers are most likely to use the waterway .

since a cargo tax must be kept relatively low on these commodities , raising more funds requires a greater volume of cargo through the seaway .

in other words , the slsdc's strategy must be high volume , low margin .

this makes the price competitiveness of the seaway route important ( see last section ) .

the possibility of raising revenue from those who benefit from waterway improvements other than shippers is often raised in the context of debates over increases in inland river user fees .

such benefits might include water quality improvements ( eg , municipal drinking water ) , sewage treatment , recreation on waterway pools , irrigation , cooling water for power plants , hydropower , flood prevention , or an increase in the value of land along the waterway .

while often raised by barge shippers , at the federal level , congress has not required user fees from nonnavigation beneficiaries of waterway projects .

the state of florida has instituted a property tax to help fund one of its waterways .

the florida inland navigation district , a special tax district , is the principal state government entity that manages the atlantic intracoastal waterway from georgia to the florida keys .

this is a recreational waterway .

funding is provided by a property tax in the counties that border the waterway .

over the most recent year , the tax generated $22 million ; the navigation district has an available balance of $72 million .

the funds are used for dredging , and construction and maintenance of marinas and boat ramps .

this year , the district expects to spend $40 million for maintenance of the waterway ( mostly dredging ) and $15 million for infrastructure improvements .

as florida demonstrates , improvements to waterways located entirely within one state can be easier to pursue since they involve only one political jurisdiction .

this raises the question of new york state's interest in financially contributing to the seaway's development because the u.s. portion of the seaway is entirely within new york's borders .

as mentioned above , new york's original interest in the seaway project was primarily hydropower .

the hydropower facilities are under the jurisdiction of the new york power authority ( nypa ) , a state agency , which also maintains the dams at massena .

thus , the slsdc has no ability to generate revenues from these hydropower facilities .

revenues from the hydropower facilities may be used to maintain a potential rival waterway , the new york state canal system .

the nypa was recently made responsible for financing the maintenance and development of this system , which is capable of handling modern freight barges along its main stem between albany and buffalo and other routes .

the maintenance budget for the canals is about $55 million per year plus another $30 million for debt service .

freight traffic on the canal system is currently negligible , but new york continues to promote it as a viable freight waterway .

if new york were to succeed in attracting shippers back to its canal system , its toll rates could have some influence over seaway toll rates .

typically , congress has authorized far more federal waterway construction and maintenance projects than can be executed with the funds congress has appropriated .

this has caused multiyear delays in getting many projects under way and a resultant impatience by shippers or local beneficiaries .

in response , in the 2014 water projects authorization act , congress included provisions that potentially allow nonfederal interests ( port authorities , local governments , shippers , carriers ) to fund or otherwise initiate maintenance or construction projects in lieu of federal funding , but still under the approval and guidance of the corps of engineers .

the provisions incorporated the language of separate bills ( s. 566 and h.r .

1153 , 113 th congress ) calling for a pilot program of 15 corps projects that could be funded wholly or partly through a public - private partnership ( p3 ) .

p3s represent a significant departure from the corps of engineers' normal methods of completing projects .

thus far , only one project , involving flood control in north dakota , has been initiated under the new provisions .

at hearings concerning the corps of engineers' fy2017 budget in february 2016 , some members of congress expressed frustration that the corps was not further along in executing p3s and had not issued any policy guidance as to how such projects would be carried out .

expressing similar frustration , the house appropriations committee directed the corps not to initiate any additional p3 projects until it had issued a comprehensive policy .

some members of congress view p3s as a means of funding the dredging of recreational harbors on the great lakes .

turning over operations and management of the seaway to a private operator for a certain length of time is another method that might bring in private - sector capital and reduce costs .

canada offers an example .

in 1998 , the canadian government transferred management of the seaway from transport canada , the federal department of transportation , to a not - for - profit corporation controlled by canadian shippers and carriers that use the seaway .

the corporation has a 20-year contract and is allowed to increase tolls by 2% per year .

canada settled on this arrangement after finding no private entities interested in purchasing or leasing the seaway .

the private management company cut the size of the canadian seaway staff by more than half .

the overall intent of the new arrangement is that the slsmc be managed more efficiently and be more nimble in responding to rail competition .

the introduction of "hands - free" locking technology , discussed below , is one result of this increased attention to competitiveness .

the most promising strategy for attracting shippers to the glsls is for the system to offer a lower - cost alternative than the competition .

an adage in the shipping industry is that "shippers are always willing to pay less for better service. .

both the u.s. and canadian seaway corporations have measures under way that will marginally improve transit efficiency .

they are installing equipment that automatically adjusts a vessel's position in locks , negating the need for crew to handle lines .

they are also installing a more refined means of measuring a ship's draft requirement , in real time , as it moves through the channel .

this has allowed ships to move through with up to three more inches of draft , which can translate into as much as 15% more cargo per voyage .

the slsdc could also look into recent developments in electronic navigation that may make it possible to replace physical channel markings and buoys with virtual markers using gps , the automatic identification system ( a ship communication and tracking system ) , and electronic charts .

these technologies can potentially eliminate the significant cost of maintaining beacons and removing and repositioning buoys because of the winter season .

the slsdc maintains 99 lighted buoys and 112 fixed aids to navigation on the u.s. portion of the seaway .

on the great lakes , the coast guard has to remove or relocate over 1,200 buoys for the winter season .

however , there are significant cost elements outside the slsdc's control .

a worldwide practice in shipping is that foreign trading ships hire a "pilot" who has local knowledge of the navigation requirements for a particular harbor or waterway .

the pilot essentially captains the ship in and out of the harbor .

a ship navigating the entire system from the mouth of the st. lawrence river to the port of duluth , mn , must hire and pay for five pilots , two of them canadian for the eastern - most portions of the st. lawrence river .

in march 2016 , the coast guard increased pilotage rates so that the 37 american pilots each would receive a total compensation of $326,000 per year , with 10 days off each month during the nine - month shipping season .

the coast guard determined this rate based on the compensation of canadian pilots and its judgment as to the rate necessary to attract a sufficient number of pilots to avoid traffic delays .

that determination is controversial because it represents a 58% increase in pilotage rates , according to the great lakes ports association .

great lakes ports contend that the cost of pilotage at this rate now exceeds a ship's daily operating cost in the great lakes and is eroding the competitiveness of the great lakes navigation system .

they argue that ships sailing on the glsls ( west of montreal ) are competing with truck and rail modes and thus require lower costs than ships sailing to coastal ports .

great lakes ports have sued the u.s. coast guard , arguing its methodology for determining pilotage rates violates the administrative procedure act .

the slsmc is attempting to repeal the requirement that ships hire pilots on the two segments of the st. lawrence east of montreal .

this portion of the river is much wider and deeper than the portion farther upstream and appears to pose fewer navigational restrictions .

the seaway could also examine the policies of some u.s. ports that allow captains familiar with the harbor to pilot their own vessels and pay a reduced pilotage fee .

a model of how waterborne shipping can compete with railroads is demonstrated within the great lakes .

ships outcompete railroads in moving mesabi iron ore to great lakes steel mills .

this may be the only major domestic route on which ships have maintained a long - term advantage over a parallel rail service .

these ships operate 24 / 7 , as do the ports where they unload .

the ships unload with no onshore assistance ( no port workers ) ; each vessel is equipped with a conveyor in the hull and on deck .

bow and stern thrusters ( propellers ) that can move the ships sideways eliminate the need for tugs to push them into the docks .

the ships also do not require pilots because they are in domestic service .

in other words , these shipping lines have control over their own costs and have scheduling flexibility similar to that of railroads .

undoubtedly , part of the reason for the ships' advantage over rail has to do with the nature of the commodity: it is exceptional in the sheer volume needed and the density ( weight ) of the material .

the vertical integration of these shipping operations is also important because some of the iron mines are owned by steel companies that deliver ore to their own docks , load it aboard their own ships and barges , and offload it at their own steel mills .

nevertheless , it is possible that glsls shipping could compete more successfully with railroads and trucks by offering similar efficiencies .

