beginning with president theodore roosevelt , presidents have protected well over 100 areas under the antiquities act of 1906 .

these protected areas , totaling hundreds of millions of acres of land as well as large marine areas , are known as national monuments .

the antiquities act allows the president to declare national monuments by issuance of a public proclamation .

while early national monument proclamations were relatively concise documents describing the objects to be protected and reserving lands from appropriation or use under public land laws , some more recent national monument proclamations have set forth more detailed management terms and use restrictions .

some presidential proclamations of national monuments have been controversial .

disputes have arisen , for example , with respect to particular areas designated , monument size , the processes by which the monuments were created , and the management terms included in the proclamations .

national monument proclamations have sometimes been challenged in court , but courts generally have upheld them and construed broadly the authority granted by the antiquities act to establish monuments .

some national monuments have been abolished or significantly diminished by acts of congress .

however , it appears that presidential authority may be more constrained , although it remains unresolved whether a president could lawfully abolish , or the extent to which a president could significantly diminish , a previously proclaimed national monument .

no court cases have directly decided the issue of the authority of a president to revoke a national monument , but various analyses have suggested that the president would lack such authority .

debate continues regarding the scope of a president's authority to take actions other than revocation , such as significantly diminishing a monument's acreage , or curtailing or expanding monument uses .

both the president and congress can create "national monuments," a type of conservation unit created from federal lands .

national monuments generally preserve resources or attractions deemed significant , such as historical or archeological artifacts , natural features , or recreational opportunities .

most national monuments are managed by the national park service ( nps ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) , although other agencies , including the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) in doi and the forest service in the department of agriculture , also manage or co - manage some monuments .

in the antiquities act of 1906 , now codified at 54 u.s.c .

§§320301-320303 , congress delegated to the president certain authority to unilaterally reserve tracts of federal land by designating them as national monuments .

the act provides , in part: ( a ) presidential declaration. — the president may , in the president's discretion , declare by public proclamation historic landmarks , historic and prehistoric structures , and other objects of historic or scientific interest that are situated on land owned or controlled by the federal government to be national monuments .

 ( b ) reservation of land. — the president may reserve parcels of land as a part of the national monuments .

the limits of the parcels shall be confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected .

courts have expansively interpreted presidential authority to declare national monuments under the antiquities act .

use of the antiquities act was challenged after president theodore roosevelt issued a proclamation declaring more than 800,000 acres around the grand canyon to be a national monument .

in cameron v. united states , decided in 1920 , the supreme court held that the antiquities act broadly empowered the president "to establish reserves embracing 'objects of historic or scientific interest. .

the grand canyon , as stated in his proclamation , 'is an object of unusual scientific interest.' .

the court did not consider the size of the monument disqualifying .

subsequent cases also have upheld presidential proclamations designating national monuments and have affirmed the antiquities act's broad application .

the antiquities act is silent as to procedures to create a national monument , stating only that the president shall "declare" one by "public proclamation. .

because the antiquities act involves action by the president , presidential designation of a national monument does not trigger the procedures usually required for agency actions under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) ; the president lies outside of nepa's definition of a "federal agency. .

the overriding management goal for all national monuments is protection of the objects described in the proclamations .

limitations or prohibitions on certain uses may be included in the proclamations themselves , in management plans developed by the agencies to govern monument lands , in agency policies , or in other sources .

recent proclamations under the antiquities act have stated , among other provisions , that federal lands reserved as national monuments are "hereby appropriated and withdrawn from all forms of entry , location , selection , sale , or other disposition under the public land laws , from location , entry , and patent under the mining laws , and from disposition under all laws relating to mineral and geothermal leasing," or similar language , "subject to valid existing rights. .

the question has arisen whether a president lawfully could revoke or substantially modify a previously designated national monument .

at first glance , it would appear that this question may be answered in the affirmative: there is no clear distinction between proclamations and executive orders , and presidents generally have authority to revoke , modify , or supersede their own executive orders and proclamations or those issued by predecessors .

however , because the authority for national monument proclamations is provided by a specific statute , the authority to revoke such proclamations has been interpreted to be more limited .

congress can establish national monuments on federal land primarily pursuant to its authority under the property clause of the u.s. constitution , which states: "the congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states. .

congress has created several dozen specific national monuments .

also at least in part pursuant to the property clause , congress has clear constitutional authority to modify or abolish national monuments .

a number of national monuments originally proclaimed by presidents have subsequently been redesignated by congress as national historic sites , national parks , or other types of units .

congress also has power to revoke national monument proclamations by statute and has done so on occasion .

in some instances of abolishment of national monuments , the lands in question have been transferred to states .

congress also has expanded or reduced the acreage of some national monuments .

in addition to directly modifying or abolishing a national monument , congress also can influence or even largely block national monument implementation through funding restrictions .

congress has authority under article i to spend money and section 9 of article i prohibits the expenditure of money without an appropriation .

appropriations bills could prohibit funding for the enforcement of monument proclamations or particular usage provisions in a national monument proclamation or management plan .

for instance , funding for jackson hole national monument was limited for several years , until congress abolished the monument and made it grand teton national park .

some bills also have proposed to bar designation of certain areas as national monuments before any presidential proclamation has been made .

more broadly , congress has , at times , considered or enacted legislation to amend the antiquities act itself .

in 1950 , congress added a provision that "[n]o extension or establishment of national monuments in wyoming may be undertaken except by express authorization of congress. .

similar restrictions have been proposed for other states , but not enacted .

other proposed modifications to the antiquities act have included , for example: imposing new procedural requirements ; raising the standard for what can constitute a protected area from "the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected" to "the smallest area essential to ensure the proper care and management of the objects to be protected ; " creating sunset provisions in which national monument proclamations would expire after six months to two years unless approved by congress ; imposing size limitations ; or narrowing the scope of "objects of historic or scientific interest. .

for more information on legislative activity relating to national monuments , see crs report r41330 , national monuments and the antiquities act , by [author name scrubbed] .

