the size of the armed forces is a topic of perennial congressional interest and debate , as each year congress sets minimum and maximum strength levels for the active components ( ac ) ; and maximum strength levels for the reserve components ( rc ) .

the number of military personnel in each service is directly related to how many units of various types they can deploy for use in operational missions .

the number of military personnel also affects the cost of the military .

more personnel require additional funding for their pay and benefits ; combined into units , they require additional funding for training , operations , equipment , maintenance , and travel .

the number of military personnel also has a long - term impact on the cost of veterans benefits .

the house and senate versions of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2017 authorized differing levels for active duty personnel in each of the services , but these authorizations diverge most significantly with respect to the army .

this report provides an overview of active duty army personnel strength changes in recent years , highlights the factors which have contributed to these diverging approaches in the respective ndaas , and outlines some factors which congress may consider .

as congress continues to debate the appropriate size for the army several considerations are particularly significant .

these include the strategic environment , the role of the army within this environment , how the army might use additional end strength , the results of a congressionally directed study on the future of the army , and the constraints of the budget control act of 2011 .

each of these topics is discussed in more detail below .

the department of defense plans further reductions in the size of the army , proposing a fy2018 end strength of 450,000 .

to reconcile competing interpretations and judgments about the proper size of the army , congress may gather additional information from the army and outside experts .

some key questions congress may pose to them include include the following .

although the international security environment is arguably becoming more challenging and complex , the role of ground forces — relative to other services — in helping the nation meet those challenges is somewhat unclear .

what are the tasks that the army , specifically , needs to accomplish for the nation ? .

within a coalition context ? .

on behalf of the other u.s. military services ? .

compounding matters , the united states has a somewhat precarious track record when attempting to predict the type and character of future conflicts .

what might an agile army force structure , capable of more rapidly adapting to future security challenges , look like ? .

at present , it is not known what types of new units the army would create should it be provided with additional end strength , making it difficult to assess the benefit of any additional strength .

what would the army do with additional end strength ? .

would it build new units and , if so , what types ? .

would it augment existing units and , if so , in what ways ? .

how would these units enhance the capabilities or capacity of the army to perform essential missions ? .

what existing capability gaps would be addressed ? .

how quickly would the army be able to field these new or augmented units ? .

how would such plans coincide with or conflict with congressional priorities for army force structure ? .

additional military personnel generates costs beyond their pay and benefits .

when combined into units , they require additional funding for training , operations , equipment , maintenance , and travel so they can effectively conduct their designated mission .

what additional resources would be associated with creating new units or augmenting existing units — for example , equipment , training , facilities , and funding ? .

is there excess equipment that can be used or would there also be a requirement to procure new equipment and major weapon systems ? .

how long would it take to equip and train new units ? .

how much would this cost ? .

