this report examines marketplace lending , a type of nonbank lending done by online companies that make loans to consumers and small businesses using innovative technology .

the marketplace - lending industry has experienced rapid growth and , with that growth , an increase in scrutiny by regulators , the media , and the public .

marketplace lending could create both benefits and risks , and it raises several policy questions .

this report begins by providing an overview of the marketplace - lending industry .

the report then analyzes the potential benefits and risks the industry creates .

next , it describes existing regulation relevant to marketplace lending before examining some regulatory issues surrounding the industry .

the report concludes with an examination of possible future developments .

marketplace lending refers to certain online lending that relies on innovative financial technology , or f intech .

the industry is rapidly growing and evolving , and companies are continually developing new variants of existing business models .

in addition , incumbent lenders — including banks and nonbanks — are using and increasingly adopting some of the technologies and practices of marketplace lending to varying degrees .

for these reasons , it is difficult to construct a concise definition that neatly divides all lending into either marketplace or not marketplace .

instead , this report will examine certain characteristics central to the business model of marketplace lenders , compare and contrast the characteristics with those of more traditional lenders , and examine issues regarding future performance and regulation of the marketplace - lending industry .

marketplace lending combines all of the following characteristics: loans are made to individuals and small businesses .

marketplace lenders operate almost entirely online , with no physical retail space .

underwriting is almost entirely automated and algorithmic .

marketplace lenders are funded by issuing equity or selling loans to investors .

this report will treat marketplace lending as lending in which all of these characteristics are the basis for the lender's business model .

additionally , the following characteristics are common and important to an examination of the current state of the industry , although they are not universal across all marketplace lending: loans are unsecured , small , and short term .

loans are sold whole or in pieces as a security or "note" backed by a single loan , as opposed to the more traditional practice of pooling many loans together into a security backed by payments made across that portfolio of loans .

these characteristics can be found across all types of lenders .

for example , many banks and nonbank lenders may offer online and automated application processes .

however , lending done by a bank will not be considered marketplace lending , because bank business models also involve physical retail locations , loan officers to underwrite loans , deposit - taking as a funding source , and a diverse menu of available financial services .

other forms of nonbank lending deviate from marketplace lending models in ways that include pooling many loans together into a single security .

the distinction between marketplace lending and traditional forms of lending is becoming increasingly blurred as marketplace lenders expand their activities and traditional lenders adopt the practices of marketplace lenders .

nevertheless , the characteristics listed above are pertinent to discussion of benefits , risks , regulatory issues , and possible future developments in consumer and small - business lending related to innovative financial technology and so will be the focus of this report .

some industry observers assert that marketplace lending has inherent advantages over traditional lending , including the following: cost structures may be lower .

underwriting may be more accurate .

the application and underwriting processes may be faster , more convenient , and more aligned with certain customer preferences for financial - service delivery .

proponents argue that these advantages will allow marketplace lending to continue to grow and transform the way individuals and small businesses acquire credit .

furthermore , proponents assert that the changes will provide an opportunity for improvements in financial and societal outcomes: credit could become less expensive for individuals and small businesses .

credit could become more available , especially for traditionally underserved or unserved market segments , such as small businesses and people with thin credit histories .

returns for credit investors could be higher .

this section analyses those arguments .

some observers are concerned that a great deal of uncertainty surrounds the marketplace lending industry .

skeptics argue that the industry is creating risks for borrowers , investors , and the financial system .

the sources of potential risk include the following: underwriting accuracy and loan performance has not been tested by economic recession .

some marketplace lenders — including a number of the largest — generate revenue from origination fees but do not hold the resultant loans and are not subject to risk - retention rules , possibly creating an incentive to make excessively risky loans .

funding availability and demand for loans has been high during a period of economic expansion with low interest rates , but the ability to raise funds and attract borrowers in other economic conditions is unproven .

servicing of loans in the event of a failure of a marketplace lender could be disrupted .

these risks potentially threaten the borrowers of and investors in marketplace loans , marketplace lending companies themselves , and — if marketplace lending grows sufficiently in coming years — the financial system .

the adverse outcomes could include the following: loan delinquency and default rates could grow to an unexpectedly high rate , harming borrowers' future credit availability and inflicting large , unanticipated losses on investors .

credit determinations by marketplace lenders could disparately impact minorities and other protected groups .

loan demand or funding for marketplace loans could contract to the point that marketplace lenders fail , potentially stopping the flow of payments to loan investors .

if the industry grows sufficiently large in the future , bad underwriting , large losses on marketplace loans , or marketplace lender failures could create systemic stress .

this section analyses those arguments .

marketplace lending is subject to federal and state regulations and requirements .

the rules are numerous but will be generally described here in three groups: securities registration and disclosure .

consumer protection and fair - lending compliance .

state - level regulatory requirements .

although marketplace lending is subject to these rules and regulations , the existing regulatory system was designed prior to the advent of online marketplace lending .

as a result , there is some uncertainty related to how regulation should be applied and how effective it can be .

some issues include the following: potentially uncertain , inconsistent , or unnecessarily burdensome application of state regulation .

potential lack of supervisory oversight .

lack of risk - retention requirements .

the marketplace - lending industry is young and involves a degree of uncertainty .

several developments could reveal more about the future of the industry , including the following: traditional lender response to new innovations and companies .

marketplace lending performance during and after a recession .

resolution of outstanding regulatory issues .

marketplace lending is a rapidly growing and evolving industry involving new firms and technologies , individual borrowers and savers , institutional investors , and banks .

the industry's lack of track record and its interconnectedness result in many areas of uncertainty .

opportunities for benefits exist for borrowers ( including underserved borrowers ) , investors , and the financial system , but these opportunities come with potential risks .

the current regulatory system aims to balance benefits and risks , but it was developed before marketplace lending became prevalent .

as a result , it is not clear how effectively the existing system will regulate the marketplace - lending industry .

as the industry matures and if regulatory issues are resolved , the effects of marketplace lending for the financial system and the economy will become clearer .

