representative jeb hensarling , chairman of the house committee on financial services , released a discussion draft titled the financial choice act ( fca ) on june 23 , 2016 .

on july 12 , 2016 , the committee held a hearing titled , "making a financial choice: more capital or more government control ? .

much of the original draft text was introduced as h.r .

5983 on september 9 , 2016 .

the committee held a markup on h.r 5983 on september 13 , 2016 , and agreed by a voice vote to an amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by chairman hensarling .

no other amendments were offered .

the committee then voted to report the bill as amended by a vote of 30 to 26 .

the fca is a wide - ranging proposal with 11 titles that would alter many parts of the financial regulatory system .

many of the provisions can be categorized as providing regulatory relief to financial firms , investors , or borrowers .

other provisions alter the financial regulatory architecture or change the relationship between financial regulators and congress or the judiciary .

table 1 lists the federal financial regulators and their general responsibilities .

much of the fca is in response to the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ) , a broad package of regulatory reform legislation passed following the 2007-2009 financial crisis that initiated the largest change to the financial regulatory system since at least 1999 .

many of the provisions of the bill would modify provisions from the dodd - frank act , although others would address long - standing or more recent issues .

this report highlights major policy proposals in the bill , but it is not a comprehensive summary of the bill .

it provides context for these proposals in the form of background and policy debate .

this report also includes an experts' contact list for fca topics in the appendix .

as financial regulators have implemented the dodd - frank act and other reforms , some members of congress argue that the pendulum has swung too far toward excessive regulation .

as a result , they argue that additional regulatory burden — the cost associated with government regulation and its implementation — has stymied economic growth and restricted consumers' access to credit .

other members , however , contend the current regulatory structure has appropriately strengthened financial stability and increased protections for consumers and investors .

they are concerned that regulatory relief for financial institutions could negatively affect consumers and market stability .

in determining whether to provide regulatory relief , a central question is whether an appropriate tradeoff has been struck between the benefits and costs of regulation .

in other words , can relief be provided while maintaining the stability of the financial system and ensuring consumers and investors are protected , or would relief undermine those goals ? .

regulatory relief is generally focused on the financial services providers — such as banks , broker - dealers , and other institutions — but what effect would relief have on consumers , investors , particular markets , and market stability more broadly ? .

the answers to these and other policy questions will vary based on the particulars of the relief being proposed .

although "too big to fail" ( tbtf ) has been a long - standing policy issue , it was highlighted by the near - collapse of several large financial firms in 2008 , including bear stearns , fannie mae , freddie mac , lehman brothers , and aig , which led to a worsening of the financial crisis .

with the exception of lehman brothers ( which failed ) , all of these firms received government assistance under emergency authority to avoid insolvency .

financial firms are said to be tbtf when policymakers judge that the firms' failure would cause unacceptable disruptions to the overall financial system .

financial firms can be perceived as tbtf because of their size or interconnectedness .

in addition to fairness issues , economic theory suggests that market expectations that the government will not allow a firm to fail create moral hazard — if the creditors and counterparties of a tbtf firm believe that the government will protect them from losses , they have less incentive to monitor the firm's riskiness ( referred to as market discipline ) .

if this is the case , a firm that is perceived to be tbtf could have a funding advantage , which some call an implicit subsidy , compared with other banks .

conventional wisdom regarding regulators is that the structure and design of the organization matters for policy outcomes .

financial regulators conduct rulemaking , supervision , and enforcement to implement law and supervise financial institutions .

these agencies have been given certain characteristics that enhance their day - to - day independence from the president or congress , which may make policymaking more technical and less political or partisan , for better or worse .

independence also may make regulators less accountable to elected officials and can reduce congressional influence .

from a practical perspective , independence and accountability take various forms and each regulator has a unique group of characteristics that , along with tradition , determine its relative independence and accountability .

the rest of this section discusses issues related to independence and accountability raised by the fca .

each financial regulator has unique structural attributes .

how an agency is structured is believed to influence its policy outcomes .

two of the most fundamental structural elements are an agency's leadership structure and financing .

both elements would be modified for some financial regulators by the fca .

 table 3 summarizes some of the key characteristics of leadership structure at the financial regulators .

because each agency was created at a different time and in a different policy context , each agency's leadership has different structural features .

the president nominates individuals for leadership positions at financial regulators with the advice and consent of the senate .

currently , some financial regulatory agencies are led by a single leader and some are led by multimember boards or commissions .

multimember boards vary in size and in whether their membership has fixed , explicit ratios for party affiliations .

in each case where there is a board structure , the board has a chairman , whose powers vis - à - vis other members vary by agency .

vesting power in a board arguably encourages a diversity of views to be represented that may lead to more durable policy decisions .

in contrast , vesting power in one individual might arguably create stronger , more unified leadership and a single point of accountability , perhaps leading to faster and more numerous decisions .

the collegial structure itself is thought to increase the independence of an agency from the president .

where an agency is headed by a single individual , the appointee's views are more likely to reflect the views of the appointing president and his or her party ; the leadership is unitary and no consensus is necessary .

some of the characteristics of leadership positions that enhance independence from congress and the president include terms that exceed the length of a presidential term and are staggered and non - renewable ; requirements that nominees have issue expertise ; restrictions on outside employment during or after service ; and removal of agency heads only "for cause. .

the fca would convert the financial regulators with single leaders ( the occ , fhfa , and cfpb to multimember commissions .

the members of the commissions would be nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate to staggered , five - year , nonrenewable terms .

the president could choose no more than three members from the same political party .

these features are similar to current leadership of the sec and cftc .

board members would be removable by the president for "inefficiency , neglect of duty , or malfeasance. .

nominees would be required to have expertise and would be restricted from outside employment during but not after service .

the fca also would remove the heads of the occ and the cfpb from the fdic's board and would increase the membership of the national credit union administration's board from three to five .

the annual appropriations processes and periodic reauthorization legislation provide congress with opportunities to influence the size , scope , priorities , and activities of an agency .

currently , the two financial regulators whose funding is primarily determined through the appropriations process and who are subject to periodic reauthorizations are the cftc and the sec .

other financial regulators have more autonomy to determine their own budgets and assess fees to cover expenditures , typically subject to some general language regarding proportionality of budget and mission , as shown in table 4 .

most financial regulators generate income from various sources , particularly fees or assessments on entities that they oversee .

the two financial regulators that do not largely raise their own revenues are the cftc and the cfpb .

as noted above , the cftc's funding comes from treasury's general revenues and cfpb funding is transferred from the federal reserve's revenues .

the appropriations and authorization processes provide congress regular opportunities to evaluate an agency's performance .

during these processes , congress also might influence the activities of these agencies by legislating provisions that reallocate resources or place limitations on the use of appropriated funds to better reflect congressional priorities .

through line - item funding , bill text , or accompanying committee report text , congress can encourage , discourage , require , or forbid specific activities at the agency , including rulemaking .

alternatively , congress can adjust an agency's overall funding level if congress is supportive or unsupportive of the agency's mission or conduct .

thus , congressional control over an agency's funding reduces its independence from ( and increases its accountability to ) congress .

the fca would bring the rest of the financial regulators — the fdic , fhfa , ncua , occ , fed , and cfpb — as well as fsoc into the appropriations process .

for the fed , spending related to monetary policy would remain outside of the appropriation process .

the cfpb would no longer receive transfers from the federal reserve and thus would no longer have a dedicated source of revenues .

fees and assessments that agencies currently collect to fund themselves would appear as offsetting collections in the federal budget with certain exceptions , such as deposit insurance premiums .

in addition to the leadership and funding changes mentioned above , the fca also would make many agency - specific structural modifications .

fsoc .

the fca would change agency representation on fsoc .

currently , only an agency's director can vote and participate at fsoc , including for agencies with multimember heads .

the fca would require each agency's leadership to reach a consensus position using the agency's normal voting process on fsoc votes .

in addition , the fca would repeal fsoc's duties to mediate interagency disputes and make policy recommendations to member agency .

it would repeal fsoc's ability to rescind cfpb rules in limited cases .

the fca would also subject fsoc to the government sunshine act and open its meetings to members of the congressional committees of jurisdiction .

sec .

the fca would reauthorize the sec through fy2021 .

the amount authorized for fy2017 would equal the amount in the fy2017 appropriation passed by the house ( h.r .

5485 ) and would be $50 million less than its fy2016 appropriation .

the fca would also eliminate the sec's reserve fund , which was created by the dodd - frank act to allow the sec to spend up to $100 million independently of the appropriations process .

ofr .

the fca would eliminate the ofr .

currently , the ofr serves as a permanent staff supporting fsoc in addition to the staffs of the individual agencies represented on the fsoc .

the ofr has authority to gather data from and monitor financial markets and institutions .

it issues an annual report and publishes occasional research papers on specific financial - stability topics .

the ofr is funded by assessments on sifis .

although some may be concerned that the ofr creates another layer of regulatory reporting requirements , the ofr must first rely on existing regulatory sources for data prior to seeking information directly from industry .

arguably , if the fca repealed fsoc's designation authority , it would eliminate one of the principal duties that ofr supports .

fio .

the fca would effectively merge treasury's federal insurance office and the position of "independent insurance expert," who is a voting member of fsoc .

in their place , the fca would create the office of independent insurance advocate , a new independent bureau within treasury , with the head appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate .

the independent insurance advocate would be a voting member of fsoc and the office would take over many , but not all , of the duties of the fio .

cfpb .

the cfpb has been one of the more controversial products of the dodd - frank act and would be subject to more fundamental revision under the fca than other regulators .

since the cfpb was established , some have argued that the agency has too much independence and not enough accountability .

critics point to structural issues , such as the presence of a director rather than a board and funding that is outside the traditional congressional appropriations process .

supporters of the cfpb highlight other aspects that they argue provide sufficient transparency and accountability , including the cfpb director's biannual testimony before congress and the cap on the cfpb's non - appropriated funding .

other structural characteristics , supporters argue , are important for ensuring that the cfpb is somewhat insulated from political pressures and can focus on the technical aspect of policymaking .

the fca includes numerous sections that would modify the cfpb and its operations .

most notably , the fca would replace the cfpb's director with a five - member commission ( see " leadership structure " ) and subject the cfpb to the traditional appropriations process ( see " appropriations " ) .

in addition , the fca would rename the cfpb as the consumer financial opportunity commission ( cfoc ) and would alter the cfoc's mandate to require additional focus on "strengthening participation in markets by covered persons , without government interference or subsidies , to increase competition and enhance consumer choice. .

the fca includes numerous other modifications , including repealing the cfpb's authority to deem certain acts to be unlawful because they are "abusive" and raising the cfpb's supervisory threshold for depositories from $10 billion to $50 billion in assets .

fed .

the federal reserve is unique among financial regulators in that , in addition to its regulatory role , it is responsible for conducting monetary policy and operating parts of the payment system .

to shield monetary policy from undue political influence , the federal reserve is more independent from congress and the administration than other financial regulators .

nevertheless , it is still subject to congressional oversight .

the fca contains 11 sections related to the fed , including the following: a provision that would remove statutory restrictions on government accountability office ( gao ) audits of monetary policy and would require an annual audit that is not subject to current statutory provisions , such as confidentiality requirements .

effectively , this provision would expand gao's powers to allow it to evaluate the economic merits of fed policy decisions .

a provision that would require the fed to formulate a mathematical rule ( called the "directive policy rule" ) that would instruct it how to set monetary policy so as to achieve its mandate of stable prices and maximum employment based on macroeconomic variables .

the provision would also require the fed to calculate a traditional taylor rule ( called the "reference policy rule" in the bill ) and compare it to the directive policy rule .

if the fed did not comply , it would trigger a gao audit and testimony by the fed chair before the committees of jurisdiction .

a provision that would change the voting membership of the federal open market committee , which sets monetary policy .

the provision would dilute the voting power of the fed governors and the new york fed president by expanding the votes of the other regional bank presidents from four to six .

cftc .

the fca also includes a number of provisions found in the cftc reauthorization bill ( h.r .

2289 ) , which previously passed the house .

these provisions address issues including the authority of the commission over the agency staff , internal risk controls , limits on subpoenas , a requirement for a notice and comment process for agency guidance , and changes to judicial review of agency rules .

federal rulemaking is one of the basic tools that federal agencies use to implement public policy .

in enacting legislation , congress often grants agencies rulemaking authority , under which they are required or permitted to set standards and prescribe the details of certain federal policies and programs .

some rules an agency issues are promulgated under the agency's inherent authority , while others are in response to the specific requirements of legislation .

when they issue those regulations , agencies are generally required to follow a certain set of procedures established by congress .

the most long - standing and broadly applicable federal rulemaking requirements are in the administrative procedure act ( apa ) of 1946 , which applies to all executive agencies , including independent regulatory agencies .

the apa contains rulemaking requirements and procedures for agency adjudications , and it provides for judicial review of rulemaking and agency actions .

three proposals in the fca — requiring cost - benefit analysis ( cba ) , modifying the congressional review act , and overturning the judicial chevron doctrine — would modify regulator discretion and accountability in the rulemaking process .

in the rulemaking process , cost - benefit analysis is the systematic examination of estimated total costs incurred and benefits accrued if a proposed rule were to be implemented .

many regulatory agencies are required — by statute or executive order — to perform some analysis of the potential effects of the rule prior to finalizing it , but not necessarily a quantified cba .

the scope of consideration and the level of detail required of the analysis can vary between different departments and agencies , and financial regulators generally are not required to quantify and evaluate total economic costs and benefits .

financial regulators generally face requirements that involve a relatively narrow analysis of a specific effect of a regulation — such as the effect on small businesses or the burden of recordkeeping and reporting necessary to comply with a new regulation — or that leave the parameters of a cba to the discretion of the issuing agency .

also , because financial regulators are generally classified as independent regulatory agencies , they are exempted from executive order ( eo ) 12866 .

eo 12866 establishes analytical principles for federal cba and a review process — performed by the office of information and regulatory affairs within the office of management and budget — to ensure rulemaking adheres to those principles .

cba requirements help to ensure that regulators are held accountable during the development , issuance , and implementation of rules , by requiring regulators to demonstrate that their decisions are based on an informed estimation of likely consequences .

however , whether financial regulators should be statutorily required to perform certain types of cbas that are subject to judicial , presidential , or congressional review would change the balance between their independence and accountability .

one side of the debate asserts that financial regulators should not be subject to rigid legal structure when performing cba — especially in regard to quantification of costs and benefits .

one argument for this position is that attempts to quantify the effects of financial regulation are imprecise and unreliable , because they entail making causal assumptions that are contestable and uncertain and often face issues concerning data availability and accuracy .

the reason for this imprecise analysis is that financial regulation aims to induce behavioral , microeconomic , and macroeconomic responses , and its effects can be harder to quantify than other types of regulation , which generally require firms to take actions with more measurable effects .

others warn that increasing rulemaking requirements could lead to "ossification" of the rulemaking process , meaning agencies find it difficult to regulate because the rulemaking process becomes difficult , costly , and time consuming .

others assert that financial regulators should be subject to stricter cba requirements than is currently the case .

they argue that the cba — even in the case of financial regulation , when it might yield a wide range of estimates of cost and benefits or when technical experts might disagree over the accuracy — is necessary because it disciplines agencies in regard to what rules they implement and allows for an assessment of whether a regulation is desirable .

some also argue that the challenges of performing cba for financial regulations are not greater than for other industries , arguing that the necessary data are available and estimations of benefits and costs — while challenging — are possible .

the fca would require the financial regulators listed in table 1 to perform cba as part of the rulemaking process and lists 12 specified areas of analysis .

the 12 areas relate to verifying the necessity , efficacy , benefits and costs of the rule , and include a quantitative and qualitative assessment of all anticipated direct and indirect costs and benefits of the regulation ; an identification of available alternatives and an explanation of why the proposed rule is most effective ; an assessment of how the burden imposed by the regulation will be distributed among market participants ; an assessment of the degree to which the key assumptions underlying the analyses are subject to uncertainty ; and an explanation of predicted changes in market structure and behavior of market participants .

other provisions would restrict the implementation of rules depending on the findings of the cba and the agencies' adherence to the requirements of the bill .

for example , agencies would be prohibited from issuing a final rule if the expected quantified costs were greater than expected quantified benefits , unless congress granted a waiver by joint resolution .

also , the bill would entitle parties adversely affected by regulation to bring action to the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit for judicial review .

the court may vacate a rule if it finds the agency did not comply with certain requirements .

finally , the bill would require each financial regulator to conduct certain additional cba after the rule is issued and implemented , a type of analysis often referred to as retrospective analysis .

within five years of implementation of a rule , the agencies would be required to issue a report that examines the rule's realized economic effects , costs , and benefits .

the congressional review act ( cra ) is an oversight tool that congress can use to invalidate a final rule issued by a federal agency .

the cra requires agencies to report to congress on their rulemaking activities and provides congress with a special set of expedited parliamentary procedures , which congress can use to consider legislation striking down agency rules it opposes .

these "fast track" parliamentary procedures , which are available primarily in the senate , limit debate and amendment on a joint resolution disapproving a rule and ensure that a simple majority can reach a final up - or - down vote on the measure .

members of congress have specified time periods in which to submit and act on a joint resolution of disapproval invalidating the rule .

if both houses agree to such a joint resolution , it is sent to the president for his signature or veto .

if a cra joint resolution of disapproval is enacted , either by being signed by the president or by being enacted over his veto , the agency final rule in question "shall not take effect ( or continue ) . .

the act also provides that if a joint resolution of disapproval is enacted , a new rule may not be issued in "substantially the same form" as the disapproved rule unless the rule is specifically authorized by a subsequent law .

the cra prohibits judicial review of any "determination , finding , action , or omission under" the act .

congress has considered several cra joint resolutions of disapproval since 1996 .

the cra mechanism has successfully overturned one agency final rule: a 2000 occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) rule related to workplace ergonomics standards .

in addition to the osha disapproval resolution enacted , five disapproval resolutions were vetoed ; all five vetoes took place in the current 114 th congress .

the cra was enacted in 1996 in response to concerns expressed by members of both parties about congress's ability to control what many viewed as a rapidly growing body of administrative rules .

simply put , many members felt that as congress delegated more power to agencies to implement law , the traditional oversight tools congress possessed were not adequate .

the cra mechanism was structured to permit federal agencies to continue to promulgate regulations but provide congress with more information about that rulemaking process and give congress an expedited way to overturn rules it opposed .

two decades after the enactment of the cra , congressional concern about administrative rules is arguably as high as ever , but there is a growing bipartisan consensus that the cra has not been effective as an oversight tool .

as one house committee report noted of the expedited disapproval mechanism , "despite its conceptual promise , the cra has produced few results. .

perhaps the most widely cited reason why the cra has overturned only one agency rule in 20 years is the de facto supermajority vote required to enact a cra resolution of disapproval .

although all of the congressional votes related to a cra disapproval resolution are simple majority votes , the way the mechanism is structured all but assures that a veto override — requiring that a two - thirds super majority of both houses of congress — will be necessary to enact the disapproval resolution .

this is because a president is most likely to veto a joint resolution that attempts to strike down a final rule proposed by his or her own administration or by a like - minded independent agency .

as a result , observers have argued that the structure of the cra disapproval process tilts the playing field away from congress and toward the president in a way that renders the cra largely unworkable as an oversight mechanism ; unless congress can muster the supermajorities necessary to override a presidential veto — something that has been historically rare — an agency rule will go forward .

this concern has led in recent congresses to the introduction of several proposals that would restructure the cra disapproval mechanism from a resolution of disapproval to a resolution of approval .

under proposals of this type , instead of rules automatically going into force unless congress could enact a measure stopping them , some or all rules would become effective only upon the enactment of a law approving them .

chief among proposals of this type is the regulations from the executive in need of scrutiny act ( reins act ; h.r .

427 ) .

the reins act would keep the cra process the same for nonmajor agency rules but would require congress to vote to approve all so - called major rules before they could become effective .

h.r .

427 passed the house on july 28 , 2015 .

supporters of these proposals argue that amending the cra mechanism in this way would properly "flip" the balance of power in rulemaking to favor congress — the lawmaking branch — by requiring affirmative congressional action for a rule to become effective .

opponents of such an approach have expressed concern that it could make it difficult or impossible for agencies to issue needed rules and might significantly increase congressional workload .

in the case of financial regulators , the approach would reduce their independence from — and increase their accountability to — congress .

the fca would amend the cra in a manner virtually identical to that proposed in h.r .

427 , the reins act described above .

unlike those measures , however , the fca would apply this revised cra approval mechanism only to rules promulgated by a "federal financial agency," a term it defines as the financial regulators listed in table 1 .

the fca would require the agency to meet a number of reporting requirements to congress when issuing a rule .

the fca would require a joint resolution of approval for major financial agency rules to be enacted under "fast track" consideration before such rules could take effect .

 ( as noted above , currently , major rules automatically take effect unless a joint resolution disapproving them is enacted .

the bill defines "major rule" using the same definition as is currently contained in the cra. ) .

the fca would provide that if a joint resolution of approval is not enacted by the end of 70 session days or legislative days after the financial agency proposing the rule submits its report on the rule to congress , the major rule is not approved and will not take effect .

the fca would , however , permit a major financial rule to take effect for one 90-calendar - day period without congressional approval if the president determined that the rule was necessary because of an imminent threat to health or safety or other emergency , for the enforcement of criminal laws , for national security , or to implement an international trade agreement .

unlike the current cra , the fca would allow a court to review whether a financial agency has completed the necessary requirements for a final rule to take effect .

the fca contains a provision that would change how agency interpretations of the law would be reviewed .

before discussing the benefits or drawbacks of such an approach , it is important to discuss the current legal framework in which courts review agency interpretations of the law .

an administrative agency may generally only exercise that authority that is provided to it by congress .

often , however , congressional delegations of authority are imprecise and , as a result , agencies must construe ambiguous terms and make interpretive decisions to implement congress's delegation .

the supreme court , in chevron u.s.a. , inc. v. natural resources defense council , inc. , envisioned a limited role for courts in reviewing agency interpretations of law .

chevron has been a cornerstone of administrative law since being handed down more than three decades ago , having been cited and followed thousands of times by federal courts .

the chevron test requires courts to enforce the clearly expressed intent of congress .

in the absence of such clarity , generally chevron instructs reviewing courts to defer to an agency's construction of an ambiguous statute if the agency's interpretation is reasonable .

thus , under chevron , it is generally left to federal agencies , and not the courts , to resolve ambiguities necessary to interpret and implement authority provided to the agency by congress .

the chevron court explained that when congress delegates to the administrative agency the authority to interpret the statute , a judge must not substitute his or her own interpretation of the statute in question when the agency has provided a permissible construction of the statute .

in reaching its decision , the supreme court established a two - part test , commonly referred to as the chevron two - step , to be applied when a court is reviewing an agency's statutory interpretation .

the court announced: when a court reviews an agency's construction of the statute which it administers , it is confronted with two questions .

first , always , is the question whether congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue .

if the intent of congress is clear , that is the end of the matter ; for the court , as well as the agency , must give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of congress .

if , however , the court determines congress has not directly addressed the precise question at issue , the court does not simply impose its own construction on the statute , as would be necessary in the absence of an administrative interpretation .

rather , if the statute is silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue , the question for the court is whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible construction of the statute .

in chevron , the supreme court elucidated several reasons for favoring a restrained judicial role when reviewing an agency interpretation of an ambiguous statute .

first , the court noted that when congress enacts an ambiguous statute , it has , in effect , delegated to the agency the authority to clarify the ambiguity .

in other words , congress made a conscious choice in selecting a specific agency to implement the statutory delegation , and the courts , the supreme court reasoned , should respect congress's decision by granting the agency the ability to interpret the statute congress has charged it with administering .

moreover , the court noted that interpreting a statutory ambiguity is akin to making a policy decision on how to implement a statutory program .

in the court's view , agencies and legislators are best suited to balance applicable considerations and to resolve debates regarding competing , acceptable interpretations of an ambiguous delegation .

second , according to the court , agencies have technical expertise in the field in which they are acting and are , therefore , in a better position to make appropriate policy decisions as part of a large and complex regulatory scheme .

courts , on the other hand , generally lack such expertise .

in chevron , the court specifically acknowledged that "judges are not experts in the field" and thus "may not substitute [their] own construction of a statutory provision for a reasonable interpretation made by the administrator of an agency. .

finally , the chevron court noted that administrative agencies are politically accountable — though not directly — through the democratic process .

although courts are called to reconcile political preferences in certain circumstances , they should not do so when the power to implement the statute has been delegated to an administrative agency .

in the court's view , an administration has the authority to implement its policy judgments through the permissible interpretation of a statute .

if the agency's , and by extension the administration's , permissible construction of a statute is undesirable , the electorate may have its voice heard through the democratic process .

by contrast , when a federal court interprets a statute , the electorate cannot voice similar concerns to the unelected court .

some have argued , however , that judicial deference under chevron has allowed administrative agencies to exercise too much "power to expand the scope of their own authority ... to decide what and who they can regulate , and how to regulate," risking abrupt deviations from long - standing statutory interpretations .

thus , the argument has been made that a recalibration of judicial review of administrative rulemakings is necessary to ensure that laws are interpreted as intended by congress and to effectively hold agencies accountable in how they implement federal law .

by contrast , such a recalibration of the judicial review over agency decisions arguably could result in courts engaging more directly in policymaking decisions .

it also might increase the number of legal challenges to agency rulemakings , which could delay the time it takes for new regulations to take legal effect , as well as increase the costs of promulgating regulations .

the fca would upend chevron's policy of judicial deference to administrative rulemakings as it applies to certain federal financial regulators .

the provision would apply to regulations issued by the financial regulators listed in table 1 .

in lieu of deferring to the covered agencies' reasonable interpretations of silent or ambiguous statutes in accordance with chevron , the fca would require courts to apply a de novo review of administrative actions — that is , review wherein a court reviews an administrative agency's decision without any deference .

this would require courts to independently interpret a covered agency's statutory authority , rather than deferring to that agency's reasonable interpretations of the law .

 ( it should be noted that , while the focus of this section is on regulations , fca would require de novo review on not just administrative rulemakings but also the broader set of "final agency actions," which are subject to varying degrees of judicial deference. ) .

although the bill would not prohibit courts from taking into account the relevant agency's reasoning and technical expertise of the subject matter , courts would have much greater latitude to set aside , overrule , and modify agency interpretations if the fca were enacted into law .

another major administrative tool held by the federal financial agencies is their power to enforce laws within their jurisdictions .

the strength and effectiveness of an administrative agency's enforcement power can be impacted by , among other things , the scope of the agency's statutory authority ( eg , the types of entities that fall within its enforcement jurisdiction ; the type of enforcement powers , such as civil penalties , criminal penalties , restitution , and disgorgement , in the agency's arsenal ; maximum and minimum penalties available for certain violations ) and the enforcement - related resources ( eg , financial , personnel ) at its disposal .

the way in which federal financial regulators exercise their enforcement powers requires a balance between protecting consumers and investors from unlawful conduct , on the one hand , and ensuring that law - abiding financial institutions are not pushed out of certain markets and the costs of their products and services for consumers and investors are not unduly increased , on the other .

the fca would make a number of changes that would directly or indirectly affect the enforcement authorities of the federal financial regulators .

for example , the fca would increase the maximum civil penalties that could be assessed for violations of certain laws , such as the financial institutions reform , recovery , and enforcement act of 1989 .

the bill also would constrain certain sec and cftc enforcement powers by , for example , repealing the sec's current statutory authority to , under certain circumstances , permanently or temporarily prohibit individuals from serving as an officer or director of a securities issuer .

additionally , the fca's proposals to modify the way in which various federal financial regulators are funded ( see the " appropriations " section , above ) could indirectly impact the enforcement resources at the disposal of those regulators .

