intelligence community ( ic ) spending reveals much about the ic's structure , capabilities , missions , and customers .

program budgets provide resources ( money and manpower ) considered necessary to accomplish ic goals , directives , duties and responsibilities defined by the u.s. code and executive order ( e.o. ) .

12333 .

they fund intelligence and intelligence - related activities such as the collection , analysis and dissemination of information about any entity whose activities may pose a threat to the internal security of the united states , and "covert or clandestine activities affecting the relations of the united states with a foreign government , political group , party , military force , movement , or other association .

"1f ic program budgets fund the organizations charged with providing information of value to decisionmakers in the national security policy process .

such decisionmakers are thought of as customers — the president , national security council ( nsc ) , heads of departments and agencies of the executive branch , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , senior military commanders , members of congress , and others as the director of national intelligence ( dni ) determines appropriate .

the ic tends to group its customers into two categories: ( 1 ) national / strategic - level and ( 2 ) military / tactical - level .

based on the distinction between national and operational / tactical , ic spending is usually understood as the combination of ( 1 ) the national intelligence program ( nip ) , which covers the programs , projects , and activities of the intelligence community oriented towards the strategic needs of decisionmakers , and ( 2 ) the military intelligence program ( mip ) , which funds defense intelligence activity intended to support tactical military operations and priorities .

in fiscal year ( fy ) 2016 , the aggregate amount ( base and supplemental ) appropriated to these two programs totaled $70.7 billion ( nip $53b , mip $17.7 ) .

national / strategic - and military / tactical - intelligence differ primarily in where they fall along a continuum stretching from support to the highest levels of the policymaking process at one end to conduct of troop - level military operations at the other end .

they may also vary in terms of scope and detail .

national - level s trategic i ntelligence is associated with grand - scale ( big picture ) policy objectives .

operational intelligence narrows its focus to foreign military or military - related situations or activities within theaters or operational areas .

tactical i ntelligence is very detailed intelligence required for planning and conducting military operations at the troop level .

to help clarify these three levels of intelligence , table 1 provides an overview of the intelligence associated with what the department of defense ( dod ) refers to as levels of war .

organizations such as the central intelligence agency ( cia ) integrate intelligence from all sources into national intelligence in support of the policy process while organizations such as the defense intelligence agency ( dia ) are more focused on integrating service - specific intelligence into d efense intelligence for the warfighter .

furthermore , joint intelligence elements exist within the dod to provide a common , coordinated picture for military commanders by fusing national and theater intelligence information into all - source assessments and estimates .

both 50 u.s.c .

§3003 ( 6 ) and e.o .

12333 define the nip as including "all programs , projects , and activities of the intelligence community , as well as any other programs of the intelligence community designated jointly by the director [dni] and the head of a united states department or agency or by the president," but excluding , "programs , projects , and activities of the military departments to acquire intelligence solely for the planning and conduct of tactical military operations by u.s. armed forces. .

in reality , the nip budget is an aggregation of a number of subordinate programs that are often subdivided into defense nip and nondefense nip because they are managed separately .

these subordinate programs fund the activities of the ic elements .

they often assist the dni in his or her efforts to integrate the ic because a number of the subordinate programs are explicitly designed to coordinate intelligence agencies , budget requirements and mission execution across agencies .

electronic communications and connectivity between intelligence agencies ( and their customers ) is a good example of the integrating function associated with many nip - related funds because the secure email network connects all ic employees to one another .

nip programs compete for resources within the ic , not within the larger department budgets .

according to one account , this can be a "tremendous advantage to all the departmental intelligence organizations" because nip resources are protected from use by other organizations within their respective agencies .

this special protection is informally known as the nip fence .

the existence of this special protection is a long - standing practice .

according to a house permanent select committee staff study , the nip fence was already a "well established tradition" in 1981: dod internal guidance ( carlucci memorandum of april 17 , 1981 ) stated the policy that nfip 'resources are "fenced" and they are not to be increased , decreased , or transferred at any point in the fiscal cycle unless such action has been officially coordinated with the dci. .

this policy is deemed to continue and has never been seriously challenged .

thus , the concept of the nfip as a fenced program is well - established and accepted in the executive branch .

in contrast , mip funds are said to be protected but not fenced .

the mip's protected status is discussed more fully below in the " military intelligence program ( mip ) " section .

the resources ( manpower and dollars ) associated with the nip's subordinate programs are managed by program managers .

program managers are discussed later in the " program and component managers " section .

in contrast to the nip , the mip belongs to the secretary of defense .

a program is primarily mip if it funds an activity that addresses a unique dod requirement .

each mip program consists of a "wide range of diverse , disparate joint and tactical intelligence" assets and activities that all reside in the budget of a single dod component .

according to the mip charter directive: the mip consists of programs , projects , or activities that support the secretary of defense's intelligence , counterintelligence , and related intelligence responsibilities .

this includes those intelligence and counterintelligence programs , projects , or activities that provide capabilities to meet warfighters' operational and tactical requirements more effectively .

the term excludes capabilities associated with a weapons system whose primary mission is not intelligence .

intelligence budget expert robert mirabello explains the mip as providing "the 'take it with you' intelligence organic to the deployable units in all services at all echelons of command. .

mip programs are not capability based .

they support anything from language training to biometrics to any number of surveillance tools .

examples include the army's intelligence support to detainee operations ; the navy's ballistic missile data collection radar system known as cobra judy replacement ; the air force's global hawk unmanned aircraft system ; and dia's intelligence support to the combatant commands .

unlike the defense nip programs , mip programs compete for resources within the larger dod budget .

the mip label does not confer any special status on a program or activity .

mip funds are not fenced , but they are monitored closely , and cannot be reprogrammed without the approval of the usd ( i ) .

while mip - labelled resources are prote cted by the usd ( i ) from use by other organizations within the dod , they are still subject to dod budget constraints .

in other words , mip - funded people and programs can be subject to dod - wide requirements in ways that nip - funded people and programs are not .

for example , when the dod furloughed thousands of civilian employees for 11 days in 2013 ( for reasons related to congressionally mandated automatic budget cuts ) nip - funded civilian personnel were exempted but mip - funded civilian personnel were not .

table b - 1 identifies and briefly describes a number of mip programs .

funding associated with each mip program supports tactical - level intelligence activities associated with that entity's overall mission .

each mip program is managed separately by a component manager .

see " program and component managers " section below .

they are also listed in table e - 1 , appendix e .

based on the fy2017 president's budget request , the ic programs discussed in this report currently equate to approximately $70 billion dollars ( or roughly 11% ) of national defense spending .

observers point to a number of issues that may affect the ability of ic and dod leadership to make the best use of those resources .

to conclude this report , this section addresses issues associated with ic - wide integration , transparency and balance .

appendix a. ic collection disciplines appendix b .

intelligence programs: in brief appendix c. ciards and icma the central intelligence agency ( cia ) retirement and disability system ( ciards ) and community management account ( icma or cma ) are seldom discussed in ic - related literature .

they are unique ic programs because they were both created in statute , funding for each is disclosed in every intelligence authorization act ( iaa ) , and they are openly discussed in a number of congressional reports .

for example , the iaa for fy2016 authorized an appropriation of $514 million for ciards and an appropriation of $516 million and 785 positions for the icma .

ciards is also unique within the nip because its costs are driven by the number of recipients eligible as opposed to mission requirements .

cia retirement and disability system ( ciards ) overview the cia operates various retirement systems that cover its employees: the regular civil service retirement system for the majority of its employees and ciards .

the cia's regular civilian service retirement system includes both the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) and the federal employees retirement system ( fers ) — employee coverage depending on date of entry into federal service and by type of job performed .

all retirement benefits for cia employees ( csrs , fers or ciards ) are administered by cia , to protect employee personnel information .

most cia employees first hired into federal service prior to 1984 are covered by csrs and may be eligible for benefits identical to other csrs covered employees in the federal government .

however , certain pre - 1984 cia employees were covered by ciards .

when congress created fers in 1986 , ciards , like csrs , was closed to new entrants hired in 1984 or later .

thus , the ciards account applies only to those cia employees who were covered under ciards ( i.e. , first hired before 1984 ) .

as with other federal employees , all cia employees who joined the agency after december 31 , 1983 , are covered by fers .

the fers act ( p.l .

99-335 ) provided for those cia employees , who qualified for ciards - like retirement , by creating two special categories known as section 302 and section 303 employees ( for the applicable provisions in fers and the central intelligence agency retirement act of 1964 for certain employees , respectively ) .

under fers , section 302 and 303 employees are eligible for retirement benefits similar to those available to federal law enforcement officers .

background the central intelligence agency retirement act of 1964 for certain employees ( ciara ) ( p.l .

88-643 , title ii ) created ciards to meet the needs of certain cia employees who were less likely than other federal employees to be in federal service long enough to qualify for csrs retirement benefits .

a senate armed services committee report accompanying ciara explains that creating ciards not only addressed a cia need , but also created equity with systems already in place for law enforcement professionals and foreign service officers: with respect to central intelligence agency employees engaged in conducting and supporting intelligence activities abroad , it has been the experience of the agency that because of the conditions of service , not all of these employees can anticipate serving the period of time required in order to retire under the civil service retirement provisions .

a special retirement system is therefore needed in order for some of these employees to retire at an earlier age and with a less severe financial penalty than the present civil service system imposes .

the precedents for this type of legislation may be found in the provisions now applicable to certain personnel of the federal bureau of investigation and other federal investigative and criminal detection activities , and the separate provisions now applicable to foreign service officers .

discussions concerning the original intent for ciards occurred in 1973 , during hearings associated with amending ciards .

according to testimony by then - dcia james schlesinger , the purpose of ciara was to provide a retirement system for those cia employees who are actually involved in supporting or conducting our u.s. intelligence operations abroad .

as they become older and move into their early 50's , it is often not possible , because of the rigorous conditions of service , for them to usefully serve the further period of time that would otherwise be required to qualify them for immediate retirement under the normal civil services rules .

during a house armed services committee hearing on ciards , representative stratton recalled that ciards was set up "due to the special character of cia work , it was possible that an individual might burn himself out , or might have his cover removed at an early age and therefore would be required to retire at an early age. .

according to one former cia employee who is a current ciards beneficiary , the program was also used for other reasons to include ( 1 ) as an incentive for those cia employees who elected to serve overseas , and ( 2 ) as compensation for those cia employees whose work as field agents made them unsuitable for most types of post cia employment .

ciards eligibility in order to participate in ciards , cia employees had to meet the definition of ciards participant .

as the law was originally written , selected cia employees must have completed at least 15 years of qualifying service .

qualifying service , determined by the cia director ( dcia ) , included duties "in support of agency activities abroad hazardous to life or health or… so specialized because of security requirements as to be clearly distinguishable from normal government employment. .

in 1992 , congress passed the "ciards technical corrections act of 1992" as part of the iaa for fy1993 ( p.l .

102-496 , title viii ) to update and restate ciara .

the 1992 version incorporated the many changes made between 1964 and 1992 mandated by statute , executive order , and necessity ( eg , the change from csrs to fers ) .

under the new legislation , cia employees who have completed 5 years of qualifying service are eligible , and the definition of qualifying servic e has remained unchanged .

cia employees under ciards are eligible for retirement at age 50 with at least 20 years of service ; or at any age with at least 25 years of service .

these employees are also subject to mandatory retirement at the discretion of the dcia .

ciards funding most ciards participants make the required employee contribution of 7% of pay .

for individuals who are covered by social security , employee contributions are offset by social security contributions .

the required agency contribution on behalf of ciards - covered employees is set out in current law at 7.0% of pay for most participants .

the dcia manages the ciards fund in the u.s. treasury .

cia is responsible for the government's portion of the pension plan .

current law requires the dcia to have actuarial calculations made of the funding status of the ciards fund at least once every five years .

these actuarial calculations are used to produce estimates of the annual appropriations needed to meet the normal cost of the ciards for each year minus the required employee contributions .

the combination of ciards employee and agency contributions do not cover the normal cost of benefit payments .

therefore , the ciards fund has accrued an unfunded liability and additional appropriations are required to ( 1 ) finance ciards benefit payments , which are mandatory entitlements , and ( 2 ) pay down the unfunded liability of ciards in order to maintain its solvency .

appropriations the appropriated payment of funds to the ciards is set out as an entitlement under 50 u.s.c .

§2091 ( d ) & ( e ) .

this funding has been part of annual appropriations acts since fiscal year 1977 .

the dollar amount in the iaa represents the amount of money the congress has authorized the dni to receive in order to meet the actual ciards pension payments anticipated in a given fiscal year .

the appropriated entitlement payment of funds to finance the non - employee contribution portion of ciards was established in 1976 , in statute titled , "an act to amend the central intelligence agency retirement act of 1964 for certain employees" ( p.l .

94-522 , section 102 ) .

p.l .

94-522 also specified that annual appropriations to the ciards fund were authorized to include amounts to pay down unfunded liabilities ; more specifically , each fiscal year in such sums as may be necessary to provide the amount equivalent to ( 1 ) interest on the unfunded liability computed for that year at the interest rate used in the then most recent valuation of the system , and ( 2 ) that portion of disbursement for annuities for that year which the director estimates is attributable to credit allowed for military service , not to exceed the following percentages of such amounts: 70 per centum for 1977 ; 80 per centum for 1978 ; 90 per centum for 1979 ; and 100 per centum for 1980 and for each fiscal year thereafter .

community management account the icma replaced an account used to support the dci's intelligence community staff ( ics ) from 1972 through 1992.the icma was established in 1992 to support a community management staff ( cms ) created by then - dci robert gates to coordinate cross - program activities , improve budget oversight , and strengthen community management .

when the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( irtpa ) of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) abolished the position of dci and the dci's cms , it created the new position of dni assisted by an odni .

the odni absorbed the functions of the old cms and gained new ones .

although the cms was abolished , the cma continued and is sometimes referred to as the icma .

the icma funds expenditures associated with personnel and day - to - day activities of the organizational elements that make up the office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) .

intelligence community staff the intelligence community staff ( ics ) was created in response to a 1971 directive from president nixon , issued in response to recommendations made by then - director of the office of management and budget , james schlesinger .

president nixon directed dci richard helms to plan and review all intelligence activities , produce national intelligence , chair and staff all community committees , and reconcile intelligence requirements and priorities with budgetary constraints .

dci helms responded , in part , by renaming and expanding the authority of the national intelligence programs evaluation ( nipe ) staff — formalizing the name change to the "intelligence community staff" on march 1 , 1972 .

language authorizing the ic staff is included in the ssci's first ic budget authorization bill from 1977 .

according to s. 1539 , section 201 ( a ) : "there is authorized to be appropriated for the intelligence community staff for fiscal year 1978 the sum of $8,950,000 to provide the support necessary to permit the director of central intelligence to fulfill his responsibility for directing the substantive functions and managing the resources of the intelligence community. .

language in the senate select committee on intelligence ( ssci ) report 95-214 is instructive in regards to committee intent as to the responsibilities of the ic staff: the intelligence community staff requested $10.5 million and 196 personnel in fiscal year 1978 to support the director of central intelligence in fulfilling his responsibilities for overall management and direction of the intelligence community .

this includes: ( 1 ) developing national intelligence requirements and priorities , ( 2 ) assessing the performance and quality of national intelligence collection and production activities , ( 3 ) improving the community's long - range planning process , and ( 4 ) monitoring the allocation and management of community resources .

the ic staff was authorized in subsequent iaas , until 1992 , when it was statutorily replaced with the previously discussed community management staff ( cms ) in the iaa for fy1993 ( p.l .

102-496 ) .

community management staff the end of the cold war prompted many efforts to reform and reorganize the ic .

according to a 1992 house permanent select committee on intelligence ( hpsci ) report , the committee perceived a "lack of consistently exercised central management authority," and desired a dci "ultimately accountable for the performance of its [the ic's] components. .

then - dci robert gates commissioned a number of task forces to review the operation of elements of the ic and make recommendations for change .

acting upon those recommendations , gates abolished the ics and created the cms in order to: "strengthen centralized coordination and management ; " "identify cross program trade - offs ; " "establish divisions of labor ; " "reduce unneeded or unwanted duplication of effort ; " "evaluate competitive proposals for investment from the community ; " "look for efficiencies and cost savings ; " "manage the overall intelligence requirements process , to ensure coordination among the major collection disciplines ; " and "evaluate performance in satisfying policymaker needs for information. .

the new cms was headed by an executive director for ic affairs , located within cia headquarters , and unlike the ics ( which was staffed almost exclusively by cia personnel ) , was staffed by employees from across the ic .

the staff included the new position of open source coordinator who will catalog the entire intelligence community's open source ( that is , unclassified ) holdings , establish a comprehensive requirements system for acquiring new open sources , improve the sharing of such sources throughout the community , and work with the managers of the other types of intelligence collection to ensure that they do not spend time and resources collecting intelligence that can be collected openly .

the iaa for fy1993 ( p.l .

102-496 , section 104 ) endorsed dci gates's management decision by recognizing a new "community management staff. .

according to ssci report 102-324 , section 104 authorizes appropriations and personnel levels for fiscal year 1993 for the community management staff of the director of central intelligence .

this provision supersedes what had , in previous authorization bills , been the separate , public authorization for the intelligence community staff .

pursuant to recent action by the director of central intelligence , the existing intelligence community staff was formally abolished , and many of its functions were dispersed to other elements within the intelligence community .

to carry out the dci's residual responsibilities for the intelligence community , the dci created an executive director for intelligence community affairs to head a smaller community management staff located at cia headquarters .

office of the dni the irtpa of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) created the new position of dni assisted by an odni .

the odni absorbed the functions of the old cms and gained new ones .

the icma now funds the staffs of the dni , the principal deputy dni ( pddni ) , deputy and associate dnis , and all activities associated with the odni's mission and support activities ( msas ) — those offices and organizations directly responsible for providing ic - wide substantive intelligence , ci , strategic analysis , research and development , and training and education .

some of the larger msas include: cyber threat intelligence integration center ( ctiic ) ; national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) ; national counterproliferation center ( ncpc ) ; national counterintelligence and security center ( ncsc ) ; national intelligence university ( niu ) ; intelligence advanced research projects activity ( iarpa ) ; and national intelligence council ( nic ) .

a number of odni offices focus on ic - wide concerns such as acquisition , budget , human capital , policy and strategy , and systems and resource analysis .

oversight offices such as the general counsel , inspector general , and the civil liberties and privacy protection office focus on ic - wide activities including compliance with u.s. law , investigating allegations of fraud , waste , and abuse , and other issues .

appendix d. homeland security intelligence program ( hsip ) when the dhs office of intelligence and analysis ( oia ) was incorporated into the ic , there was no separate hsip , although oia's customers were extremely diverse .

it was entirely funded through the nip .

in the words of francis taylor , the current under secretary for intelligence and analysis ( dhs / i&a ) , "i&a has one of the broadest customer bases in the ic , ranging from the secretary , to dhs policymakers and operators , to thousands of state and local officials and private sector partners — each of whom have different information classification requirements and limitations. .

in time , the dni and dhs leadership argued that because oia supported both an ic - wide mission and a department - specific mission , it needed both nip funds to support dni requirements , and separately controlled hsip funds to support dhs requirements .

in response , the congressional intelligence committees established the hsip within dhs / oia to include those "intelligence activities ... that serve predominantly departmental [dhs] missions. .

for example , some of dhs's cyber support , and some of the governance activities associated with the homeland security intelligence council staff have been funded with hsip dollars .

in s.rept .

112-192 , accompanying the iaa for fy2013 , the senate intelligence committee stated its support of the concept , but maintained its jurisdiction over the hsip: the oia is currently funded through the nip .

the committee supports the request of the secretary and dni to fund oia through the nip and a new hsip but is continuing to study the question of whether other intelligence activities of the department should be included in the hsip .

the committee intends to continue oversight of and authorize the hsip .

the iaa for fy2015 ( p.l .

113-293 §324 ) requires the dhs / i&a to provide the congressional intelligence committees with a report on each intelligence activity of each intelligence component of the department that includes , among other things , the amount of funding requested , the number of full - time employees , and the number of full - time contractor employees .

in addition , section 324 requires the secretary of homeland security to submit to the congressional intelligence committees a report that examines the feasibility and advisability of consolidating the planning , programming , and resourcing of such activities within the hsip .

according to the joint explanatory statement accompanying the iaa for fy2015: the hsip budget was established to fund those intelligence activities that principally support missions of the dhs separately from those of the nip .

to date , however , this mechanism has only been used to supplement the budget for the office of intelligence and analysis .

it has not been used to fund the activities of the non - ic components in the dhs that conduct intelligence - related activities .

as a result , there is no comprehensive reporting to congress regarding the overall resources and personnel required in support of the department's intelligence activities .

in summary , within dhs , the nip budget funds activities within the oia that support national - level , ic - wide roles and responsibilities .

the nip does not fund oia department - specific activities .

the nip budget provides no funds to operate dhs intelligence activities such as its immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) office of intelligence because ice is not an ic element .

because it is not part of the nip , management of the hsip does not belong to the dni ; it belongs to the secretary of homeland security .

thus , the secretary of dhs manages intelligence - related budgets ( that fall outside the nip ) that include: department specific , intelligence - related activities of an ic component ; and intelligence - related activities of non - ic components within their departments .

the same can be said of the secretary of defense , who manages the mip and intelligence - related activities of non - ic components within the dod .

other department secretaries , such as the attorney general , and the secretary of treasury manage the intelligence - related activities of non - ic components within their departments , not the dni .

it is unclear how well the myriad of intelligence - related activities that fall outside the nip or mip are managed , coordinated or overseen on a day - to - day basis .

appendix e. ic leaders and selected management hats appendix f. budget processes ( ippbe and ppbe ) appendix g. nip mip program integration appendix h. selected acronym .

