c ongress has created numerous federal agencies charged with carrying out a broad array of delegated statutory responsibilities .

agencies administer their delegated authority in a variety of ways , including by promulgating rules and regulations that bind the public , advising regulated parties of an agency's enforcement priorities via guidance documents , bringing enforcement actions against private individuals or corporations for violation of a statute or regulation , and determining whether to grant a benefit or license .

these agency actions , in turn , often generate questions about the legitimacy of an agency's decision .

individuals affected by an agency decision can sometimes challenge that action in federal court as violating a legal requirement .

the u.s. constitution vests the judicial power in the supreme court and any inferior courts established by congress , limiting the power of federal courts to the context of a of a "case" or "controversy. .

pursuant to this authority , congress has established federal courts below the supreme court of the united states to hear a variety of cases , both criminal and civil .

federal legislation authorizes courts to adjudicate challenges to actions taken by government officials and agencies in a variety of contexts .

federal courts are , however , courts of limited jurisdiction — they must adhere to limits placed on their authority by congress and the constitution .

the circumstances under which a federal court will review the actions of a u.s. government agency or official thus involve complicated questions of statutory and constitutional law .

this report offers a brief overview of some of the most important issues arising when individuals bring suit in federal court to challenge agency actions .

the administrative procedure act ( apa ) is perhaps the most prominent modern vehicle for challenging the actions of a federal agency .

enacted in 1946 following the new deal era , during which the size of the administrative state was expanded , the statute represents the first government - wide attempt to "systematize" requirements on the actions of federal agencies .

the apa functions as the most prominent authorization of judicial review of agency action , including for agency compliance with substantive legal requirements — such as an agency's "organic," or authorizing , statute .

in addition , the apa imposes various procedural requirements on federal agencies and authorizes courts to review agency's compliance with these requirements .

accordingly , the focus of this report is largely centered on judicial review of agency actions under the apa .

the report opens with a discussion of the circumstances in which federal courts are empowered to review agency actions and follows with a look at the scope of review authorized by the apa .

it then continues by describing the mechanics of a federal court's review of an agency's statutory authority , as well as the standards employed in the review of an agency's discretionary decisions .

the report concludes with a brief examination of judicial review of agency compliance with statutorily prescribed procedural requirements .

not every agency action is necessarily subject to judicial review .

whether judicial review of agency action is available in federal court turns on a number of factors , including constitutional , prudential , and statutory considerations .

courts must possess statutory jurisdiction to adjudicate a lawsuit , and plaintiffs must generally rely on a cause of action that allows a court to grant legal relief .

disputes must also present "cases" or "controversies" that satisfy the requirements of article iii of the constitution .

finally , a suit must be presented to a court at the proper time for judicial review .

the apa permits judicial review of final agency actions .

however , the statute sets important limits on particular matters and entities that qualify for judicial examination under its terms .

once a court finds that it has jurisdiction to hear a challenge to an agency's action , one relevant consideration will be whether the challenged action complies with the law .

the apa authorizes courts to "set aside" agency action that is "in excess of statutory jurisdiction , authority , or limitations , or short of statutory right" or otherwise "not in accordance with law. .

courts thus must often interpret the meaning of statutory provisions to determine if the agency's actions accord with its statutory authority or contradict a legal mandate .

this means that courts will invalidate agency actions that contravene the meaning of a governing statute .

courts will also examine an agency's interpretation of its own regulations .

just as ambiguities arise in statutory provisions that agencies implement , similar uncertainties sometimes accompany agency regulations .

supreme court doctrine , reiterated in auer v. robbins , instructs courts to defer to an agency's interpretation of its own regulations unless the agency's position is "plainly erroneous. .

functionally , " auer deference" to an agency's interpretation of a regulation seems to operate in a similar fashion as does chevron deference .

so long as the agency's interpretation of its regulation is reasonable , courts must give that interpretation "controlling weight. .

importantly , auer deference can extend to a broader scope of agency interpretations than does chevron deference , including positions developed without formal procedures , such as statements made during the course of litigation .

that said , auer deference is not applicable to all agency interpretations of a regulation .

for example , if an agency regulation simply "parrot[s]" or "paraphrase[s]" the relevant statutory language , then the agency possesses no special authority to interpret the regulation .

auer deference also does not apply "when the agency's interpretation is plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the regulation. .

however , whether an inconsistent agency interpretation of its own regulation receives auer deference appears to be unresolved .

in recent years , a number of justices signaled some disapproval of the doctrine and a willingness to reconsider the practice in an appropriate case .

however , the only evidence of auer 's potential demise emerges primarily from concurring or dissenting opinions .

consequently , while some justices certainly do wish to reconsider the doctrine , it is unclear whether a majority might be assembled in the future to cabin the scope of auer deference or eliminate it altogether .

in addition to statutory review of agency actions , another important basis for judicial review under the apa concerns an agency's factual determinations and certain discretionary decisions .

courts are authorized to "hold unlawful and set aside agency actions , findings , and conclusions found to be arbitrary , capricious , [or] an abuse of discretion. .

this "catch - all" provision of the apa applies to factual determinations made during "informal" proceedings , such as notice - and - comment rulemaking , and most other discretionary determinations an agency makes .

the seminal supreme court decision elaborating this standard , motor vehicle manufacturers association v .

state farm auto mutual insurance co . , explains that the scope of this review is "narrow," as "a court is not to substitute its judgment for that of the agency. .

however , courts will invalidate agency determinations that fail to "examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for its action including a 'rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.' .

when reviewing that determination , courts must "consider whether the decision was based on a consideration of the relevant factors and whether there has been a clear error of judgment. .

in general , the court noted , an agency decision is arbitrary if the agency has relied on factors which congress has not intended it to consider , entirely failed to consider an important aspect of the problem , offered an explanation for its decision that runs counter to the evidence before the agency , or is so implausible that it could not be ascribed to a difference in view or the product of agency expertise .

given the broad scope of federal agency actions that are subject to judicial review , whether an agency decision is arbitrary and capricious is largely a situation - specific question .

importantly , the supreme court has clarified that it is not arbitrary and capricious for agencies to change their policies .

in fcc v. fox television stations , inc. , the supreme court held that review under the arbitrary - and - capricious standard is not heightened or more stringent simply because an agency's action alters its prior policy .

an agency must acknowledge such change when it occurs , but so long as the agency's action is permissible under its authorizing statute and supported by good reasons , agencies are not required to show that new policies are better than old ones .

in other words , an agency may be authorized to pursue a range of policy outcomes under its statutory authorization , and courts may not scrutinize such change more strictly than other agency decisions .

in general , the arbitrary - and - capricious standard requires an agency to demonstrate that it engaged in reasoned decisionmaking when reaching its determination .

importantly , courts "must judge the propriety of [an agency's] action solely by the grounds invoked by the agency," and they may not create their own justifications to support an agency's decision beyond the reasons presented by the agency .

further , courts require agencies to provide the "essential facts upon which the administrative decision was based" and explain what justifies their determinations with actual evidence beyond a "conclusory statement. .

an agency's failure to provide an adequate explanation for its decision will typically result in remand or invalidation of its decision .

among other things , this requirement plays an important role in judicial review of agency regulations .

thus , an agency's failure to explain its reasoning in response to significant comments raised during notice - and - comment rulemaking will be considered arbitrary and capricious .

beyond those circumstances in which courts find that an agency failed to provide an adequate explanation for its decision , courts may also find the decision itself to be arbitrary and capricious .

for example , courts will invalidate agency actions that are the product of "illogical" or inconsistent reasoning .

in addition , courts will find an agency action to be arbitrary and capricious if the agency simply failed to consider an important factor relevant to its action , such as the policy effects of its decision or vital aspects of the problem in the issue before it .

likewise , courts may invalidate or remand a determination to the agency if the agency decision failed to consider regulatory alternatives that would similarly serve the agency's goals or provide "less restrictive , yet easily administered" options .

it bears mention that courts are particularly deferential to agencies' expertise when making predictive judgments based on scientific or technical determinations .

because of the wide range of statutory authorities and agency missions , what counts as a relevant factor that must be considered by an agency when reaching a decision can be context specific .

an illustrative case is judalong v. holder , where the supreme court found the board of immigration appeals' ( bia's ) policy for deciding whether resident aliens may apply for relief from removal to be arbitrary and capricious .

the court noted that the relevant factors for the bia to consider were the "purposes of the immigration laws or the appropriate operation of the immigration system. .

because the agency failed to root its determination in consideration of such factors and instead based its policy on an "irrelevant comparison between statutory provisions" unconnected to the merits of a removal decision or the administration of immigration laws , the court held that the agency's determination was arbitrary and capricious .

other examples of agency actions found to be arbitrary and capricious include failing to consider circumstances that "warrant different treatment for different parties" ; reaching a conclusion that contradicts the underlying record ; justifying "its decision on a premise the agency itself has already planned to disrupt" ; taking rulemaking action that undercuts another simultaneous rulemaking by the same agency ; "fail[ing] to provide any coherent explanation for its decision" ; contradicting the "expert record evidence" without explanation ; failing to consider a relevant and important factor in making a decision ; issuing a rule that was based on "pure political compromise , not reasoned scientific endeavor" ; failing to "exercise sufficiently independent judgement" by deferring to private parties ; and utilizing a model for studying risk that was inconsistent with the underlying data .

in addition to authorizing judicial review of agency actions , the apa also imposes various procedural requirements that agencies must follow depending on the type of agency action .

the apa makes two important distinctions in categorizing the actions of an agency .

first , it distinguishes between rulemaking — the agency's process for promulgating and repealing a rule — and adjudications — the agency's "process for the formulation of an order. .

a rule applies generally to a group of individuals or the public , while an adjudication is an individualized decision .

second , the apa distinguishes between formal and informal proceedings .

formal proceedings are subject to more stringent procedures than informal proceedings and are required when the agency's decision must be made "on the record. .

according to the apa , every agency action falls into these categories , resulting in four types of agency decisions .

first , although such instances are rare , an agency may conduct a "formal rulemaking," in which it provides a formal , public hearing before promulgating a regulation .

second , and much more commonly , an agency may engage in informal rulemaking , in which it offers the public notice and an opportunity to comment on the proposed rule .

third , an agency may conduct a "formal adjudication" in which it provides a trial - type hearing for a particular individual before an administrative law judge .

finally , an agency may make a decision subject to the "informal adjudication" procedures of the apa .

agencies enjoy substantial discretion under this standard to formulate their own procedures , subject to the requirements of the due process clause of the fifth amendment .

these categories of agency actions are shown in table 1 .

importantly , agency actions can be challenged for failing to comply with "procedure[s] required by law. .

consequently , assuming that a court is otherwise authorized to adjudicate a case , individuals aggrieved by agency conduct may challenge an agency's failure to comply with the procedures mandated by the apa or another statute .

for example , before engaging in "informal" rulemaking under section 553 of the apa , agencies must provide the public with advance notice and an opportunity to meaningfully comment on the proposed rule .

such regulations are often referred to as "legislative rules. .

however , "nonlegislative" rules , such as interpretive rules and policy statements , are exempt from this requirement .

federal courts will thus remand or invalidate an agency document issued without notice - and - comment procedures if a court concludes that it qualifies as a legislative rule .

courts doing so will sometimes review the issue de novo , refusing to grant any deference to the agency because congress has not granted the agency authority to administer the apa .

in addition , the apa's "good cause" provision permits agencies to bypass these requirements if compliance would be "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest. .

for example , in 2004 , the d.c .

circuit upheld on security grounds the federal aviation administration's rule , promulgated without notice and comment , covering the suspension and revocation of pilot certificates .

the court accepted the agency's contention that the regulation was necessary to protect the public against security threats , ruling that the "legitimate concern over the threat of further terrorist acts involving aircraft in the aftermath of september 11 , 2001," supported the good cause finding .

nonetheless , the appropriate standard of review for determining what constitutes "good cause" under the apa is unsettled .

similarly , parties may challenge the procedures used in agency adjudications .

when conducting "formal" or "on the record" adjudications , agencies must provide trial - type procedures during the hearing before the agency .

while agencies are generally free to choose between utilizing rulemaking or adjudications to set policy , certain legal requirements nevertheless apply to adjudications .

formal adjudications require trial - like procedures and must be conducted before an administrative law judge ( alj ) or agency head ; informal adjudications have fewer procedural requirements and need not take place before an alj .

an agency's choice to adjudicate an issue with informal procedures rather than formal ones may be challenged as violating the apa .

importantly , the supreme court has consistently ruled that courts may not add to the procedural requirements imposed on agencies in the apa .

agencies enjoy discretion to develop and apply their own procedures that supplement the apa's requirements , but courts lack authority to impose additional requirements upon agencies .

in the past , lower federal courts had required agencies to adopt additional procedures not spelled out in the text of the apa .

in the context of informal rulemaking , the supreme court's 1978 decision in vermont yankee nuclear power corporation v. natural resource defense council , inc .

ruled that courts may not require agencies to utilize additional procedures beyond those mandated by the apa's notice - and - comment requirements .

likewise , the court's 2015 decision in perez v. mortgage bankers association held that courts may not require agencies to undergo notice - and - comment rulemaking if the apa exempts the agency action from those requirements .

in other words , the apa "sets forth the full extent of judicial authority to review executive agency action for procedural correctness. .

the constitution confers congress with expansive authority to define the jurisdiction of federal courts , determine the types of agency actions subject to judicial review , and subject agencies to certain procedural requirements when implementing their statutory authority .

important constitutional limits also determine when a federal court may render a decision .

the circumstances in which federal courts will review the actions of agencies are thus informed by complicated statutory , constitutional , and prudential considerations .

perhaps the most prominent of such statutes , the apa , subjects a broad scope of agency decisions to judicial review , subject to important limitations .

judicial interpretation of the apa's provisions consequently plays a central role in determining what types of agency actions are subject to review in federal court .

these developments are , nonetheless , subject to future modification by congress , which enjoys authority to alter the apa or any other statute to shape the contours of judicial review of agency action .

