congress has long supported efforts to identify , detain , and remove noncitizens who have been convicted of crimes in the united states .

more generally , all unauthorized aliens within the united states are potentially subject to removal , and "interior enforcement" ( i.e. , alien removals originating from within the united states ) is a basic element of immigration control .

the criminal alien population , to which such enforcement efforts are targeted , is complex .

it is defined in broad terms , challenging to quantify , and sufficiently large and diverse in its criminality that priorities have been established or modified to direct law enforcement efforts .

this report discusses four programs operated by the department of homeland security's ( dhs ) immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) to identify and remove criminal and other removable aliens .

the criminal alien program ( cap ) is an umbrella program for marshaling the agency's resources to identify and remove criminal and other removable aliens .

cap is guided by the priority enforcement program ( pep ) , which represents a set of enforcement priorities that describe which foreign nationals should be removed and in what priority order .

pep also comprises a data sharing infrastructure or "interoperability" between dhs and the department of justice that screens for immigration violations when individuals are booked into jails .

ice's §287 ( g ) program allows dhs to delegate certain immigration enforcement functions to specially trained state and local law enforcement officers , under federal supervision .

the national fugitive operations program ( nfop ) pursues known at - large criminal aliens and fugitive aliens outside of controlled settings ( i.e. , administrative offices or custodial settings ) .

pep , its predecessor secure communities , and the §287 ( g ) program have all contributed to dhs removing large numbers of aliens in the past decade .

yet , these programs also have been controversial .

because interoperability screens 100% of people passing through law enforcement jurisdictions , critics often charged ice with removing many people who either committed minor crimes or who had no criminal record apart from unauthorized presence in the united states .

other critics charge that revisions to the set of enforcement priorities through pep have since contributed to a sizable decline in the number of enforcement actions .

the §287 ( g ) program has raised concerns about the role of state and local law enforcement agencies in immigration enforcement .

inconsistent policies and practices among jurisdictions and allegations of racial profiling , among other issues , caused ice to revise the program in fy2012 and allow certain §287 ( g ) agreements with law enforcement agencies to expire .

since then , immigration enforcement advocates have questioned why ice has curtailed the program's use .

ice has recently expressed interest in expanding it .

for these and other reasons , congress may be interested in measures of enforcement levels by program , the level of appropriations for different criminal alien programs , and the role of state and local law enforcement agencies in immigration enforcement .

this report begins by defining the criminal alien population and quantifying a portion of it with the limited publically available data .

next it presents the most recent ice enforcement priorities that emerged with the introduction of pep in november 2014 .

the report then describes the major ice immigration enforcement programs that target criminal aliens .

the final section discusses selected policy considerations for programs targeting criminal aliens .

this includes a discussion of current levels of enforcement and program appropriations , as well as state and local involvement in immigration enforcement .

u.s. immigration law identifies certain crimes that make an alien ineligible for admission to the united states and / or subject to removal .

such crimes include crimes of "moral turpitude" ; crimes involving controlled substances ; certain firearm offenses ; and crimes related to espionage , sabotage , and related offenses .

yet the term "criminal alien" is not specifically defined in immigration law or regulation , and people use it to refer to several different types of noncitizen offenders .

at the broadest level , a "criminal alien" is any noncitizen who has ever been convicted of a crime in the united states .

this report adopts this broad definition unless otherwise noted .

 ( see appendix a for a glossary of additional related terms. ) .

criminal aliens can be further distinguished by legal status , which in turn affects removability .

unauthorized aliens have made up roughly half of all u.s. noncitizens in recent years .

the unauthorized alien population includes not only persons who entered without inspection or overstayed the terms of their temporary visas but also persons who have what some refer to as a "quasi - legal" status ( eg , temporary protected status , parole , deferred action ) that affords them relief from immediate removal .

hence , not all unauthorized aliens living in the united states are subject to removal .

most unauthorized aliens , however , are removable ; but few have been convicted of a crime and are classified as criminal aliens ( unlawful presence in the united states itself is a civil violation , not a criminal offense ) .

three groups of criminal aliens can be distinguished .

all criminal aliens include both unauthorized aliens , most of whom are potentially removable , and legal aliens who may or may not be removable depending on specific crimes committed .

this population contains the set of criminal aliens who are removable on the basis of specific crimes committed .

criminal aliens who have been convicted of removable criminal offenses are subject to removal under the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) even if they are otherwise legally present .

for example , a legal permanent resident ( lpr ) convicted of cocaine possession is subject to removal , but an lpr convicted of public intoxication is not .

this population also includes aggravated felons .

criminal aliens who have been convicted of aggravated felonies are ineligible for most forms of relief from removal and are ineligible to be readmitted to the united states .

as noted above , all three of these subpopulations — criminal aliens , removable criminal aliens , and aggravated felons — comprise an unknown mix of legally present noncitizens and unauthorized aliens .

in addition , criminal aliens can be distinguished by whether they are currently incarcerated in federal and state prisons and local jails .

accordingly , the criminal alien population can include noncitizens convicted of crimes but who are not incarcerated , noncitizens convicted of crimes who are currently incarcerated , and noncitizens who have ever been convicted of crimes in the past , who have served their sentences , and who have been released from prison and reside in the united states .

having defined the criminal alien population , this report next turns to the issue of quantifying its size .

this issue is complicated by the lack of data and published estimates on the criminal alien population .

crs is not aware of any authoritative current estimate for the total criminal alien population .

dhs has produced its own estimates of the removable criminal alien population , a subgroup of the total criminal alien population .

in 2013 , ice published estimates indicating that approximately 900,000 aliens were arrested for crimes every year ; that approximately 550,000 criminal aliens convicted of crimes exited law enforcement custody every year ; and that 1.9 million removable criminal aliens currently resided in the united states .

this crs report presents data on authoritative published measures that quantify one portion of the criminal alien population — the noncitizen population incarcerated in federal and state prisons and local jails .

incarcerated noncitizens represent a subset of criminal aliens , but given the paucity of data on the criminal alien population , it represents one consistent annual measure that can be compared both across time and relative to the total u.s. incarcerated population .

this section presents incarceration data from 2002 through 2013 .

it then discusses the quality and limitations of publically available data pertaining to the criminal alien population .

because ice screens 100% of people passing through most law enforcement jurisdictions , it identifies potential removable aliens ( including criminal aliens ( see table 2 ) ) .

given the relative size and the range of criminality of potentially removable unauthorized and criminal aliens , ice's parent agency dhs — like one of its predecessor agencies , the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) — has prioritized certain aliens for removal .

it has done so by publishing agency memoranda on enforcement priorities and criteria for exercising prosecutorial discretion .

the most current enforcement priorities are guided by the president's 2014 immigration accountability executive action , which is discussed below .

using its enforcement priorities to guide immigration enforcement efforts , ice operates the following programs targeting criminal aliens .

as noted above , the criminal alien program ( cap ) is an umbrella program that marshals ice agency resources to identify , detain , and remove criminal aliens .

cap is guided by the priority enforcement program ( pep ) .

ice's §287 ( g ) program allows dhs to enter into partnerships with local law enforcement agencies .

as such , the program acts as a force multiplier for ice that can expand its capabilities .

the delegation of such enforcement authority occurs through memoranda of agreements that allow ice to train and rely upon state and local law enforcement officers to handle certain immigration enforcement functions , under federal supervision .

another program that ice operates to target criminal aliens , the national fugitive operations program ( nfop ) , pursues known at - large criminal aliens and fugitive aliens identified and targeted for removal by ice .

while cap operates mostly within administrative or controlled custody settings , ice officers who work for nfop are generally field - based .

policy issues for criminal alien programs involve the enforcement levels and costs of the various programs , and the appropriate role of state and local law enforcement agencies in enforcing immigration laws .

some of ice's major immigration enforcement programs that target criminal aliens contain components that have been controversial with both immigrant advocacy groups and immigration enforcement advocates .

in response , the obama administration , like earlier administrations , has modified and revised the program's policies and priorities .

although cap began three decades ago , it received greater scrutiny in 2008 with the inception of secure communities .

immigrant advocates contended the program frequently removed noncitizens who either had committed minor crimes or had no criminal records , and that many of those removed had established family and community ties in the united states , including u.s. - born children .

after several years of modifying secure communities , the obama administration ultimately replaced it with a revised set of priorities under the priority enforcement program .

similarly , the §287 ( g ) program has raised concerns among immigrant advocacy groups about local law enforcement's involvement in immigration enforcement , specifically inconsistent policies , possible racial profiling , and possible damage to community policing through the conflation of immigration enforcement and general law enforcement .

in response , the administration tempered its §287 ( g ) program by revising all memoranda of agreements to ensure greater consistency across jurisdictions .

in response , however , immigration enforcement advocates have raised questions about why a potentially useful "force multiplier" has been limited rather than expanded .

appendix a. glossary of terms definitions are based on crs's analysis of statutory definitions where noted and of dhs usage and prevailing definitions in other cases .

absconder : see "fugitive alien. .

aggravated felon : a noncitizen who has been convicted of an aggravated felony ( see below ) ; aggravated felons are subject to removal from the united states , ineligible for certain forms of immigration relief , and ineligible to be readmitted to the united states .

aggravated felony : a crime identified in §101 ( a ) ( 43 ) of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , a provision that includes numerous state and federal offenses ranging from murder , rape , and trafficking in controlled substances to theft , bribery , and obstruction of justice .

crimes committed outside the united states may also be considered aggravated felonies if the term of imprisonment was completed within the previous 15 years .

at - large criminal alien : a noncitizen who has been convicted of a crime in the united states and is not currently incarcerated .

not all at - large criminal aliens are removable .

civil immigration offense : a violation of federal immigration law under title 8 of the u.s. code , the most common being residing in the united states without authorization .

a person cannot be sent to prison for a civil immigration offense .

they can be penalized by being deported from the united states , which technically is not classified as punishment .

criminal alien : a noncitizen who has been convicted of a crime in the united states .

not all criminal aliens are removable ( see " defining "criminal aliens" " ) .

despite its widespread use , no consistent definition of the term "criminal alien" exists .

in this report , crs uses "criminal aliens" to refer to any noncitizen who has ever been convicted of a crime in the united states .

certain criminal offenses also have immigration - related consequences , such as being grounds for removal ; and certain categories of criminal ( and noncriminal ) aliens are also the subjects of special ice enforcement programs , including those described in this report .

criminal immigration offense : a violation of federal criminal immigration law under title 8 or title 18 of the u.s. code .

the most common of such violations for which aliens are convicted are 8 u.s.c .

§1326 ( reentry of a deported alien ) , 8 u.s.c .

§1324 ( bringing in and harboring certain aliens ) , 15 u.s.c .

§1546 ( fraud and misuse of visas , permits , and other documents ) , and 8 u.s.c .

§1325 ( entry of alien at improper time or place ) .

fugitive alien : an alien who has failed to leave the united states following the issuance of a final order of removal , deportation , or exclusion .

fugitive aliens were referred to as "absconders" prior to fy2007 .

fugitive aliens may or may not have criminal records .

removable alien : an alien subject to formal removal ( deportation ) from the united states .

this includes aliens who are inadmissible under ina §212 or deportable under ina §237 , including nonimmigrant aliens who enter legally but violate the terms of their visas or overstay their visas .

most removable aliens have never been convicted of a criminal offense .

removable criminal alien : an alien who has been convicted of a removable criminal offense ; such an alien is subject to removal from the united states .

removable criminal offense : a criminal offense described in §237 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , including crimes of moral turpitude , aggravated felonies , high - speed flight from an immigration checkpoint , failure to register as a sex offender , drug offenses , firearm offenses , and immigration - related document fraud , among others .

appendix b .

history of criminal alien removal programs in 1986 , with passage of the immigration reform and control act ( p.l .

99-603 ) , congress made deporting aliens who had been convicted of certain crimes a formal enforcement priority .

the law required the attorney general "in the case of an alien who is convicted of an offense which makes the alien subject to deportation … [to] begin any deportation proceeding as expeditiously as possible after the date of the conviction. .

the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) established a pair of programs in 1988 to comply with this requirement: the institutional removal program ( irp ) and the alien criminal apprehension program ( acap ) .

the programs forged partnerships with corrections facilities to identify deportable aliens convicted of crimes before their release from prison .

they also worked with the department of justice's executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) to initiate deportation proceedings against aliens serving sentences for deportable offenses during their period of incarceration .

the irp and acap initially focused on aggravated felons , a class of serious criminal aliens created in immigration law by the anti - drug abuse act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-690 ) and enumerated in §101 ( a ) ( 43 ) of the ina .

the anti - drug abuse act defined aggravated felonies to include aliens convicted of murder , drug trafficking , or illegal trafficking in firearms or destructive devices .

between 1990 and 1996 , congress enacted a series of measures that expanded the definition of aggravated felons and created additional criminal grounds for removal .

the mandates of the irp and acap likewise expanded to include this broader list of offenses .

in 1999 , the ins issued an interior enforcement strategy , which named as the agency's top interior enforcement priority the identification and removal of criminal aliens and the minimization of recidivism ( i.e. , illegal reentry by previously removed aliens ) .

accordingly , between 1998 and 2002 the ins devoted more resources to the removal of criminal aliens than to all other interior enforcement priorities combined .

in the wake of the september 11 terrorist attacks , the new department of homeland security ( dhs ) focused its enforcement activities on suspected terrorists and homeland defense , but with the continued growth of the foreign - born population after 2000 , programs targeting criminal aliens also remained an enforcement priority .

within dhs , the irp and acap initially were managed jointly by immigration and customs enforcement's ( ice ) detention and removal operations ( dro ) and its office of homeland security investigations .

between 2005 and 2007 , the irp and acap were combined into a single criminal alien program ( cap ) program within dro .

in 2010 , dro was renamed enforcement and removal operations ( ero ) .

on november 20 , 2014 , the president issued his immigration accountability executive order that ended the secure communities program and replaced it with the priority enforcement program ( pep ) .

dhs fully implemented pep in july 2015 .

