the united states has a long history of providing benefits to those who have served in the defense of the nation .

what began as a disability compensation and pension program for veterans during the early years of the republic has grown into a comprehensive veteran benefits and services system .

the federal responsibility of managing this system has been entrusted by congress primarily to the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

the va carries out its veterans programs nationwide through the following three administrations and an appeals board: the veterans health administration ( vha ) is responsible for veteran health care programs .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) is responsible for disability compensation , pension , vocational rehabilitation , education assistance , home loan guaranty , and insurance , among other benefits .

the national cemetery administration ( nca ) is responsible for providing burial space and maintaining national cemeteries , among other responsibilities .

the board of veterans appeals ( bva ) renders final decisions on appeals regarding veteran benefits claims .

the vha , the largest and most visible operating unit , is predominantly a direct service provider of primary and specialty care , similar in many ways to a large private sector health care system .

however , some aspects of the vha are very different from a private health care system .

not only does the vha employ health professionals to provide health care services directly , but the vha also purchases care for certain veterans from community health providers .

further , the vha provides social services and other supportive services — such as housing assistance , home health aide services , and adult day health care — that are rarely tied to private sector health care providers or financed by private health insurance or medicare .

beyond the provision of health care and other support services to veterans and eligible family members , the vha is statutorily required to conduct medical research into the special health care needs of veterans , to train health care professionals , to serve as a contingency back up to the department of defense ( dod ) medical system during a national security emergency , and to provide support to the national disaster medical system and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) as necessary .

in addition to providing inpatient , outpatient , and a range of other medical care services , the vha has been authorized by congress since the 1960s to provide nursing home care to eligible veterans in va facilities , private nursing facilities contracted by the va , and state veterans homes .

although the vha initially provided only institutional - based long - term care , va long - term care services have expanded to include a full range of long - term services and supports ( ltss ) — both institutional and non - institutional .

these services include programs of care directly provided by the va , such as home - based primary care and geriatric evaluation , as well as services purchased by the va , such as home health aide and home respite care .

the va typically refers to programs under this broad umbrella as geriatrics and extended care ( gec ) programs ( see figure 1 and text box for terminology used in this report ) .

these programs share a primary goal: to support veterans to remain safe in the least restrictive environment .

this report provides an overview of the long - term care services offered by the va , whether directly provided or purchased from the community .

it first provides a brief history of legislation relevant to va long - term care services .

next , it provides information on veteran eligibility for care and enrollment , to give a picture of who these programs serve .

it then provides an overview of the structure of the vha to explain how care is administered , followed by a description of the various long - term care programs that the va offers .

finally , the report discusses potential issues of interest for congress .

in general , eligibility for va long - term care services depends on several factors , including veterans' need for the service , as determined by the va ; whether the service is institutional or non - institutional ; and , for certain programs , veterans' service - connected status .

however , to understand eligibility for va long - term care services , it is important to understand eligibility for va health care in general , the va's enrollment process , and its enrollment priority groups .

unlike medicare or medicaid , va medical care is not an entitlement program .

contrary to numerous claims made concerning promises of "free health care for life," not every veteran is automatically entitled to health care from the va .

the va offers long - term care in both institutional and non - institutional settings .

institutional settings may include both inpatient acute care and nursing home care , although the majority of long - term care the va provides in institutional settings occurs in a nursing home setting , which is the primary focus in this report .

non - institutional care includes outpatient or ambulatory care settings , as well as care that occurs in the home or another community - based setting .

these services cover a full spectrum of care needs , spanning veterans who are largely independent , to those who require significant assistance with basic daily activities , to those who are near the end of life .

some long - term care services are provided directly by va staff , while other services are purchased from providers outside the va .

the subsection below describes non - institutional services provided and purchased by the va .

the next subsection provides information about long - term care provided in institutional settings .

long - term care expenditures are a small but not insignificant part of the vha medical care budget , at just over one - tenth of the vha's total medical care budget .

in fy2015 , the vha spent $7.4 billion , just over 13% of its total medical care spending ( $55.8 billion ) , for veteran's long - term care ( see table 5 ) .

institutional care accounted for almost $5.3 billion , or 71% of va's total long - term care spending , while non - institutional care accounted for $2.1 billion , or 29% .

while total appropriated funding for vha medical care has increased 25% ( in nominal dollars ) since fy2010 , the proportion of total appropriations spent on long - term care has remained relatively unchanged .

however , non - institutional long - term care expenditures doubled from fy2010 to fy2015 ( non - inflation adjusted dollars ) .

as a proportion of total va long - term care spending , non - institutional care increased from 19% to 29% from fy2010 to fy2015 .

as table 5 shows , the percentage of total vha medical care spent on long - term care ranged from approximately 12% to 13% from fy2010 to fy2015 .

three broad issues emerge for congress when considering va long - term care eligibility , financing , and delivery .

the first issue is veterans' access to care , specifically access to long - term care services .

the second issue is the setting where long - term care services are provided and the appropriate balance between home and community - based versus institutional services .

the third issue involves veteran's health coverage options and federal coordination of financing and health care delivery within the va health care system and across federal programs .

the veteran population , on average , is older than the general population .

further , the number of veterans who have disabilities that are rated as 70% or more service - connected , and therefore are eligible for va - paid nursing home care , has increased .

this growth may lead to more veterans needing access to long - term care services in order to remain in the community , as well as a greater number of veterans eligible for nursing home care at va's expense .

however , the current policy discussion has primarily focused on reforming access to care within the va health care system , particularly in relation to primary and specialty care .

the veterans access , choice , and accountability act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-146 ) , as amended , required two different external assessments of the va .

the first was an independent assessment of the va offering multiple broad recommendations for next steps for the va .

the second assessment , conducted by the commission on care , made various recommendations regarding the future of the va in a report published in july 2016 .

both sets of recommendations acknowledge the challenges associated with an increasing number of aging and disabled veterans , but they were largely silent on how such demographic implications will affect the demand for va long - term care services .

the va's capacity to meet the needs of aged and disabled veterans over time depends on its ability to provide that care directly , but also to purchase care from the community .

this challenge raises several questions for policymakers: in the context of va health system reform , are there access issues to be considered for long - term care as well as for specialty and primary care areas ? .

how can the va maximize quality and efficiency , recognizing that access to long - term care services and care coordination across acute and long - term care may prevent the frequency or need for more expensive care , such as acute inpatient stays or emergency department visits ? .

does the va have the right size and mix of geriatric and extended care health professionals to meet the demands of the disabled and aging veteran population both now and in the future ? .

does the va have the flexibility it needs to negotiate with community partners who provide much of va's home and community - based care ? .

over the past two decades , federal financing and delivery of long - term care , particularly for the largest federal payer of ltss ( medicaid ) has shifted toward the provision of care in home and community - based settings rather than institutional care .

in fy1995 , the proportion of medicaid ltss spending on institutional care was 82% , with 18% spent on home and community - based services ( hcbs ) .

almost 20 years later , the proportion of medicaid ltss spending on institutional care has decreased to 47% , with more than half of spending ( 53% ) on hcbs ( data for fy2014 ) .

medicaid's shift toward more hcbs occurred with various administrative efforts and activities , as well as financial incentives and broader statutory authority from congress for states to provide such services .

in part , medicaid hcbs expansion was prompted by the u.s. supreme court decision in olmstead v. l.c .

 , which held that the institutionalization of people who could be cared for in community settings was a violation of title ii of the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) .

the movement to expand hcbs has occurred alongside the shift to more patient - centered and consumer - driven models of care , which seek to honor the preferences of the individual .

most individuals express a strong preference for remaining in their homes and communities rather than in institutions .

similarly , the va has expressed a desire to move toward "a more balanced offering of home and community - based services. .

however , in fy2015 , 29% of va long - term care spending was on non - institutional care versus 71% of spending on institutional care .

one issue that may affect the balance of long - term care services offered is va's statutory requirement to provide nursing home care to veterans with 70% or more service - connected disability , as well as the requirement to provide nursing home care to veterans who are service - connected and need care for their service - connected disability .

thus , similar to federal medicaid statute , which requires states to provide nursing home care to certain eligible beneficiaries , the va operates under a mandate to provide such care to certain veterans .

moreover , the current design of the state veterans home ( svh ) program generally favors institutional care over hcbs .

as stated previously , under this federal - state partnership , the va provides grants to states to build , modify , or acquire nursing home , domiciliary , and adult day health care facilities — a federal grant to the state may not exceed 65% of the total project cost .

in addition to providing grants to states for facility construction , the va provides a fixed per diem to states for each veteran who receives care in a state veteran's home .

thus , under the current program design , states generally have an incentive to continue to maintain long - term and extended care facilities rather than explore non - institutional alternatives .

according to the va , hcbs is less costly than facility - based options and growth in ltss expenditures can be moderated by moving toward the provision of more hcbs .

however , in the aggregate ltss spending can be moderated only if hcbs spending increases as institutional spending decreases .

va's requirement to maintain a specific level of long - term care beds and staffing , as well as the mandate to provide institutional care to certain veterans , may create barriers to shifting care to hcbs .

to efficiently use the institutional resources it has , the va must keep the institutional beds occupied .

further , whether beds are occupied or not , the cost to maintain the physical infrastructure of facilities owned and operated by the va is a consideration .

current contracting requirements may limit the va's ability to purchase institutional care in the community , thereby offsetting the need for institutional settings owned and operated by the va .

such requirements may also limit the va's capacity to provide care to veterans in their communities .

unless va institutional spending can be reduced , spending on more hcbs may be an additional cost to the va rather than a shift in cost .

this issue raises several questions for policymakers: what is the right proportion of va ltss spending on institutional versus non - institutional care ? .

does the va have the appropriate number of clc beds offering the right types of care ? .

does the va have the ability and flexibility needed to partner with community long - term care facilities to provide care to veterans in their communities and potentially reduce demand for va - owned and operated clcs ? .

should congress review the va's long - term care infrastructure , comparing projected demand against capacity ? .

and , finally , how might congress compel the va to shift care from institutions to home and community - based settings ? .

not all veterans rely on the va exclusively for their health care .

many veterans access care through other sources of health coverage , and most enrolled veterans have more than one source of coverage .

according to the 2015 vha survey of enrollees , approximately 78% of veterans enrolled in the vha have some type of public or private health care coverage in addition to va health care .

for example , 51% of veterans reported they were enrolled in medicare , 7% had medicaid , 19% had tricare , and 28% had private insurance ( note that individuals may have reported more than one source of coverage ) .

only 20% of veterans surveyed reported having no other health coverage .

veterans with more than one coverage option may choose to access the va instead of care covered under another health care program or insurer for a variety of reasons: personal preference , lower or no out - of - pocket costs ( copayments ) for certain services , or access to services that may not be available through traditional health insurance or medicare .

veterans who have medicare or private health insurance may seek services not covered by those plans from the va , such as adult day health care or respite care .

although the va offers some long - term care services similar to medicaid ( eg , home health aides to assist with personal care ) , unlike medicaid , the va does not require veterans to spend down assets or meet strict income guidelines to receive long - term care .

conversely , some eligible veterans may elect other coverage options and choose to receive their health care in the community due to personal preference , proximity , or more timely access to a provider .

veterans' reliance on va health care varies ; some veterans rely solely on the va , whereas others use the va intermittently for certain health care services .

this discrepancy presents a challenge for the va in understanding current demand , and predicting future demand , for health care services .

as veterans age , they may come to rely more on va's long - term care services , which are not covered by medicare or private health insurance .

veterans enrolled in the vha are likely to receive health care in other settings and through other forms of coverage .

coordination across federally financed health care programs is important to ensure efficient , appropriate , and high - quality health care .

it is also critical to avoiding service duplication and overutilization — aspects that may further constrain va's health care system resources and capacity .

this raises several questions for policymakers: where are there inefficiencies or duplication that could be limited or coordination that could be enhanced ? .

when , or for what services , should veterans access medicaid , medicare , and the va ? .

what do the va and cms know about veterans dually enrolled in medicare or medicaid and the vha , or enrolled in all three programs , that could inform care coordination ? .

how can the va best plan for future demand when veterans have multiple care options and may ultimately seek none , some , or all of their care from the va ? .

appendix a. vha copayments for long - term care services veterans who are enrolled in the va health care system do not pay any premiums ; however , some veterans are required to pay copayments for certain services and outpatient medications related to the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

table a - 1 summarizes which priority groups are charged copayments for long - term care services .

only veterans in priority group 1 ( those who have been rated 50% or more service - connected ) and veterans who are deemed catastrophically disabled by a va provider are never charged a copayment , even for treatment of a nonservice - connected condition .

for veterans required to pay long - term care copayments , these charges are based on three levels of nonservice - connected care , including copayments for inpatient , non - institutional , and adult day health care .

however , actual copayments may vary depending on a veteran's financial situation .

for example , p.l.114-315 , the jeff miller and richard blumenthal veterans health care and benefits improvement act of 2016 exempted medal of honor recipients from paying ltc copayments for both service and nonservice connected ltc .

certain va long - term care programs have associated costs other than a va copayment .

for example , regardless of service - connected status , veterans residing in medical foster home or community residential care homes pay out of pocket for room and board .

the out - of - pocket cost varies by geographical area and amount of care needed .

there is no additional va copayment .

similarly , veterans who reside in state veterans homes may have out - of - pocket costs ; this varies from state to state and is often on a sliding fee scale .

the payment is made to the state veterans home , and there is no additional va copayment .

conversely , there is no copayment or cost to the veteran of any kind for va hospice services , regardless of veterans' income or service - connected status .

appendix b .

veterans priority groups figure b - 1 lists the veterans priority groups 1 through 8 and their eligibility criteria .

