this report is part of a suite of reports that discuss appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fy2017 .

it specifically discusses appropriations for the components of dhs included in the fourth title of the homeland security appropriations bill — in past years , this has been u.s .

citizenship and naturalization services ( uscis ) , the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) , the science and technology directorate ( s&t ) , and the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) .

in fy2017 , the administration proposed moving the domestic nuclear detection office into a new chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives office ( cbrneo ) , along with several other parts of dhs .

congress has labeled this title of the bill in recent years as "research and development , training , and services. .

the report provides an overview of the administration's fy2017 request for research and development , training , and services , and the appropriations proposed by the senate and house appropriations committees in response .

rather than limiting the scope of its review to the fourth title of the bills , the report includes information on provisions throughout the bills and report that directly affect these components .

the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to dhs appropriations , with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the reports do not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor do they systematically follow other legislation related to the authorization or amending of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of specialized budgetary concepts .

the appendix to crs report r44621 , department of homeland security appropriations: fy2017 explains several of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act ( p.l .

112-25 ) .

a more complete discussion of those terms and the appropriations process in general can be found in crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , by jessica tollestrup and james v. saturno , and the government accountability office's a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process .

generally , the homeland security appropriations bill includes all annual appropriations provided for dhs , allocating resources to every departmental component .

discretionary appropriations provide roughly two - thirds to three - fourths of the annual funding for dhs operations , depending how one accounts for disaster relief spending and funding for overseas contingency operations .

the remainder of the budget is a mix of fee revenues , trust funds , and mandatory spending .

appropriations measures for dhs typically have been organized into five titles .

the first four are thematic groupings of components: departmental management and operations ; security , enforcement , and investigations ; protection , preparedness , response , and recovery ; and research and development , training , and services .

a fifth title contains general provisions , the impact of which may reach across the entire department , impact multiple components , or focus on a single activity .

the following pie chart presents a visual comparison of the share of annual appropriations requested for the components funded in each of the first four titles , highlighting the components discussed in this report .

the research and development , training , and services ( title iv ) of the dhs appropriations bill is the second smallest of the four titles that carry the bulk of the funding in the bill .

in fy2016 , title iv included uscis , fletc , dndo , and s&t .

the administration requested $1.63 billion in fy2017 net discretionary budget authority for components included in this title , as part of a total budget for these components of $5.52 billion for fy2017 .

the appropriations request was $133 million ( 8.9% ) more than was provided for fy2016 .

part of the reason for the requested growth in title iv was the inclusion of the administration's newly proposed cbrneo in this title , which incorporated dndo , as well as the office of health affairs and part of the national protection and programs directorate from title iii , and part of the office of policy from title i .

together , this represented a transfer of components funded at over $140 million in fy2016 in other titles of the bill into title iv .

senate appropriations committee - reported s. 3001 would have provided the components included in this title $1.50 billion in net discretionary budget authority .

this would have been $132 million ( 8.1% ) less than requested , and less than $1 million ( < 0.1% ) more than was provided in fy2016 .

it did not include the reorganization to form cbrneo , or funding for the new office .

house appropriations committee - reported h.r .

5634 would have provided the components included in this title $1.63 billion in net discretionary budget authority .

this would have been $1 million ( 0.1% ) more than requested , and $134 million ( 9.0% ) more than was provided in fy2016 .

the house bill included funding for the new cbrneo .

these bills were not voted on in either body , and no annual appropriations bill for dhs was enacted prior to the end of fy2016 .

on september 29 , 2016 , the president signed into law p.l .

114-223 , which contained a continuing resolution that funds the government at the same rate of operations as fy2016 , minus 0.496% , through december 9 , 2017 .

a second continuing resolution was signed into law on december 10 , 2016 ( p.l .

114-254 ) , funding the government at the same rate of operations as fy2016 , minus 0.1901% , through april 28 , 2017 .

for details on the continuing resolution and its impact on dhs , see crs report r44621 , department of homeland security appropriations: fy2017 .

table 1 lists the enacted funding level for the individual components funded under the research and development , training , and services title for fy2016 , as well as the amounts requested for these accounts for fy2017 by the administration , and proposed by the senate and house appropriations committees .

the table includes information on funding under title iv as well as other provisions in the bill .

three activities dominate the work of the u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) : ( 1 ) processing and adjudication of all immigration applications and petitions , including family - based petitions , employment - based petitions , nonimmigrant change of status petitions , work authorizations , and travel documents ; ( 2 ) adjudication of naturalization petitions for legal permanent residents to become citizens ; and ( 3 ) consideration of refugee and asylum claims , and related humanitarian and international concerns .

uscis funds the processing and adjudication of immigrant , nonimmigrant , refugee , asylum , and citizenship benefits largely through its fee revenues deposited into the immigration examinations fee account .

in the last decade , the agency has received annual appropriations from the treasury that have been directed largely towards specific projects such as reducing petition processing backlogs and operating the e - verify program .

the agency receives most of its revenue from adjudication fees of immigration benefit applications and petitions .

the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) provides basic and advanced law enforcement instruction to 91 federal entities with law enforcement responsibilities .

fletc also provides specialized training to state and local law enforcement entities , campus police forces , law enforcement organizations of native american tribes , and international law enforcement agencies .

by training officers in a multi - agency environment , fletc intends to promote consistency and collaboration across its partner organizations .

fletc administers four training sites throughout the united states , but also uses online training and provides training at other locations when its specialized facilities are not needed .

fletc employs approximately 1,100 personnel .

the s&t directorate is the primary dhs organization for research and development ( r&d ) .

led by a senate - confirmed under secretary for science and technology , it performs r&d in several laboratories of its own and funds r&d performed by the department of energy national laboratories , industry , universities , and others .

it also conducts testing and other technology - related activities in support of other dhs components .

the president's budget request proposed consolidating several offices and activities into a new chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives office .

this new office would contain the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) ; the office of health affairs ( oha ) ; the cbrne threat awareness and risk assessment activities of the science and technology directorate ; the cbrne functions of the office of policy and the office of operations coordination ; and the office of bombing prevention from the national protection and programs directorate ( nppd ) .

on december 10 , 2015 , the house passed h.r .

3875 , the department of homeland security cbrne defense act of 2015 .

this act would restructure the dhs cbrne activities consistent with the structure in the budget proposal .

the senate has not passed a similar bill .

under h.r .

3875 , the new office would be headed by an assistant secretary and have the mission "to coordinate , strengthen , and provide chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives ( cbrne ) capabilities in support of homeland security. .

the house appropriation bill followed the structure of the president's request and h.r .

3875 , whereas the senate bill was consistent with the current dhs structure .

for fy2017 , the administration requested $501 million in discretionary budget authority for the new cbrne office .

according to the dhs budget justification , this is $29 million ( 6.1% ) more than was provided in fy2016 for comparable activities in dndo , oha , and other components in the department .

s. 3001 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , did not fund the proposed cbrne office .

rather , it recommended funding levels for components as organized in the current dhs structure .

it included $348 million in discretionary budget authority for dndo .

this is $1 million ( 0.3% ) more than was provided in fy2016 and according to the senate committee report , it is $6.2 million ( 1.8% ) less than the administration's request for comparable activities .

s. 3001 also included $108 million in discretionary budget authority for oha .

this is $17 million ( 13.6% ) less than was provided in fy2016 and according to the senate committee report , it is $12 million ( 10.0% ) less than the administration's request for comparable activities .

h.r .

5634 , as reported by the house appropriations committee , included $504 million in discretionary budget authority for the cbrne office .

this is $3 million ( 0.6% ) more than was requested by the administration , and $31 million ( 6.6% ) more than was provided for comparable activities in fy2016 .

in 2013 , congress directed dhs to review its programs relating to chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear threats and to evaluate "potential improvements in performance and possible savings in costs that might be gained by consolidation of current organizations and missions , including the option of merging functions of the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) and the office of health affairs ( oha ) . .

the report of this review was completed in june 2015 .

in july 2015 , dhs officials testified that dhs plans to consolidate dndo , oha , and smaller elements of several other dhs programs into a new office , led by a new assistant secretary , with responsibility for dhs - wide coordination of chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives "strategy , policy , situational awareness , threat and risk assessments , contingency planning , operational requirements , acquisition formulation and oversight , and preparedness. .

the president's fy2017 budget request reflected this reorganization .

the house passed h.r .

3875 , the department of homeland security cbrne defense act of 2015 , which would restructure the dhs cbrne activities consistent with the structure in the budget request .

the senate has not passed a similar bill .

proponents of such a reorganization suggest that consolidating cbrne activities would create a stronger focus within the department and improve interagency and interdepartmental coordination for these activities .

however , skeptics of reorganization have questioned whether the benefits would outweigh the cost of disrupting current efforts , how well the differing agency cultures and missions would mesh , and why the new office would conduct research and development for nuclear defense but not biodefense .

the biowatch program deploys sensors in more than 30 u.s. cities to detect the possible aerosol release of a bioterrorism pathogen , in order that medications could be distributed before exposed individuals became ill. operation of biowatch accounts for most of oha's budget .

the program had sought for several years to deploy more sophisticated autonomous sensors that could detect airborne pathogens in a few hours , rather than the day or more that is currently required .

however , after several years of unsuccessful efforts to procure a replacement for the existing system , dhs announced the termination of further procurement activities in april 2014 .

the administration requested $82 million for biowatch , approximately the same amount as was provided in fy2016 .

the senate committee recommended $12 million ( 14.6% ) less than the requested amount for biowatch for fy2017 .

it recommended redirecting this $12 million to the s&t directorate to "speed the development of a new bio - detection technology" rather than funding the "recapitalization , training , and other support activities of the current system. .

the house committee recommended providing the requested amounts for biowatch for fy2017 , including $1 million to support the replacement and recapitalization of current generation biowatch equipment .

however , the committee expressed concern about the effectiveness of the current system and dhs progress towards improving this system .

the committee directed dhs to "more clearly articulate future technology requirements for the program to the private sector and innovators who are being called upon to help address those needs. .

