since 1971 , when it created amtrak to operate a skeletal network of passenger trains , which were being discontinued by freight railroads , congress has provided funding to support intercity passenger rail service .

until recently , almost all of that money went to amtrak , a government - owned corporation , to cover its operating losses and finance capital improvements to amtrak - owned infrastructure , mainly in the northeast and michigan .

amtrak's northeast corridor — between washington , dc , and boston , with spurs to harrisburg , pa , and springfield , ma — offers the fastest rail service in the united states ; the route , laid out over a century ago , allows trains to hit 160 miles per hour ( mph ) for short distances , but the fastest service between major cities averages around 80 mph .

this is far slower than many high - speed rail services in other countries .

in 2008 and 2009 , congress took a different approach , appropriating significant amounts to finance development of higher - speed intercity passenger rail services by state governments .

to date , however , the results of this investment are not readily apparent in the form of new , faster , or more frequent services .

this report examines the high - speed intercity passenger rail ( hsipr ) grant program and highlights related issues of potential interest to congress .

prior to 2008 , congress rarely provided funding for intercity passenger rail purposes outside of the annual funding for amtrak .

this changed with passage of the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 ( priia , division b of p.l .

110-432 ) in the fall of 2008 .

priia , which reauthorized amtrak , included language authorizing the first federal grants to states to develop intercity passenger rail service .

two grant programs for helping states finance rail facilities , infrastructure , and equipment were authorized at a total of $2.225 billion over five years .

this legislation was passed after a number of states expressed interest in expanding intercity passenger rail operations .

president barack obama , who took office in january 2009 , proposed spending on high - speed rail projects as part of a larger economic stimulus program to address a deep recession .

congress approved the passenger rail program in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) , which appropriated $8 billion for grants to states to develop high - speed and intercity passenger rail services .

in april 2009 , two months after the passage of arra , the president declared that development of high - speed rail ( hsr ) was a priority for his administration and said he would ask congress to appropriate an additional $1 billion annually for that purpose .

this priority was reflected in the fy2010 department of transportation appropriations act ( division a , title i , p.l .

111-117 ) , in which congress appropriated $2.5 billion for high - speed and intercity passenger rail grants to states .

since that time , congress has not appropriated further amounts for the hsipr program , although the administration has repeatedly requested billions of dollars in additional funding for intercity passenger rail development .

indeed , the 112 th congress rescinded $400 million previously appropriated for this purpose .

in december 2015 congress reauthorized federal surface transportation programs in the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act ( p.l .

114-94 ) .

the act authorized $2.2 billion for grants to states and rail carriers for improving intercity passenger and freight rail transportation systems , in addition to funding for amtrak .

however , this funding was authorized from the general fund , not from dedicated funds , and whether any of the funding is actually appropriated will be determined by congress through the annual department of transportation ( dot ) appropriations acts .

for fy2016 , the fast act authorized $200 million for such grants , but congress did not appropriate any funding for this purpose .

table 1 provides a detailed chronology of recent congressional actions to support new or improved intercity passenger rail service .

fra in dot has primary responsibility for federal grants for passenger rail projects .

the fra had primarily been a rail safety regulatory agency throughout its history , with virtually no experience in grantmaking until september 2008 , when it awarded the $30 million congress appropriated for grants in fy2008 .

five months later , congress appropriated almost 300 times that amount — $8 billion — for rail grants in arra , giving fra four months to issue interim guidance to implement the new program .

although high - speed rail grabbed the headlines , congress directed that the arra funding was also to be used for other intercity passenger rail service and for grants to relieve congestion on the railroad network .

in its program guidance fra combined the grant programs authorized in priia , the funding in arra , and the fy2009 dot appropriations act to produce four categories ( "tracks" ) of grants: track 1 — projects: for small - scale construction that could be completed within two years ; track 2 — programs: for a set of interrelated projects that improve all or a portion of a corridor ; track 3 — planning: to support work needed to advance a project to the point of applying for funding under tracks 1 or 2 to create a pipeline of future construction projects ; and track 4 — fy2009 appropriations projects: an alternative to track 1 , using the fy2009 funding ( which required a 50% match , while the arra funding did not require a match ) .

fra gave states a relatively short window for submitting grant applications , although it provided a bit more time for the more complex applications for track 2 grants ( see table 2 ) .

it required would - be applicants to submit preapplications , in part to help fra judge the staff resources it would need to administer the program .

many of the hsipr grants were for relatively small projects — often planning and / or preliminary engineering work — that have already been completed .

with two exceptions — the california high - speed rail corridor project , which is the largest and most complex transportation project ever undertaken in the united states , and the chicago - iowa city project , the completion of which is in question — the major projects described above are scheduled for completion by fall 2017 , seven years after receiving funding .

the considerable time required to complete the projects has been a focus of criticism .

however , it is not clear that the projects are in fact taking a long time , relative to surface transportation projects of similar complexity .

although some planning and environmental clearance work had been done on several of the projects prior to their receipt of hsipr grants , the grants themselves , which constituted the majority of the funding for these projects , were not awarded until 2010 .

an analysis in 2001 found that the average time required to complete surface transportation projects was 13 years after the beginning of the preliminary engineering phase , with some projects — typically those that encounter significant community opposition or environmental , funding , or land acquisition issues — taking much longer .

in addition to the complexities typically faced by major surface transportation projects , the hsipr projects have faced two challenges not faced by highway projects — the need for many grantee states to create rail planning and project management agencies , and the occasional and unpredictable availability of federal funding for hsipr projects .

many states had no rail development programs prior to 2008 , and had to hire engineering professionals , planners , and managers with experience in passenger rail project implementation in the united states before projects could advance .

they then had to undertake environmental reviews , design , engineering , and , in some cases , land acquisition before construction could proceed .

in some cases , project completion has required additional federal assistance beyond what was provided through the hsipr program , and that assistance was uncertain .

for example , construction of a new station in raleigh , nc , as part of the southeast high - speed rail corridor project relies on two grants from dot's transportation investment generating economic recovery ( tiger ) program .

these grants were approved in 2012 and 2013 , well after north carolina received a $520 million hsipr grant .

the largest and most complex of the hsipr projects , the california high - speed rail corridor , illustrates the challenges involved .

the project has been in development for many years .

the initial environmental impact statement was completed in 2004 , but no funding was then available to advance the project .

a state referendum to approve borrowing funds for the project was postponed twice before being put before voters in november 2008 .

the referendum was approved , and a few months later congress authorized the hsipr grant program in arra .

in 2010 , fra awarded the project an hsipr grant .

subsequently , as the project has proceeded through final design and more detailed environmental clearances , it has faced lawsuits by entities wishing to alter its route or stop its construction .

these lawsuits , some of which are still in process , have limited the ability of the project to draw on state funding and have delayed activities such as land acquisition .

the project , which involves crossing earthquake fault zones and mountain ranges , also faces significant environmental and engineering challenges .

it also faces questions about further funding .

as additional engineering has brought the details of the project into focus , the cost estimate has increased , and the current estimate of around $64 billion for phase 1 ( in dollars reflecting inflation during the construction period ) is several times greater than the amount of funding currently identified for the project .

the project's business plan calls for a significant portion of the total cost to be covered by federal funding , but there is no obvious source of additional federal funds beyond the almost $4 billion of hsipr grants already obligated .

the state of california has dedicated some receipts from auctions of state carbon dioxide emissions permits to the project , but the rate at which these funds will be received is uncertain .

if the united states is ever to have true high - speed rail service , this will likely require significant government funding .

financing high - speed rail projects through private investment is very difficult , because vast amounts of money must be spent to build the service before a project starts to earn any revenue — and even then , very few high - speed rail lines anywhere in the world have generated sufficient revenue to cover both construction costs and operating costs .

although the sponsors of a proposed high - speed rail line in texas have stated , "this project is not backed by public funds," news reports have indicated that the project is likely to depend on long - term loans from the federal government's railroad rehabilitation and improvement financing and transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act ( tifia ) programs .

similarly , while all aboard florida , a company related to the florida east coast railroad that is developing a passenger rail service between miami and orlando , has stated that it has requested "no state or federal grant money" and that "no ongoing taxpayer subsidies [are] required," the venture has received federal money to improve rail - highway grade crossings and is proposing to issue bonds that would benefit from a federal tax subsidy .

given the important role of federal support for high - speed and other intercity passenger rail projects , lessons drawn from experience to date may prove useful for the future .

each time federal highway and transit programs are reauthorized , a central point made by the states and localities that receive grants through those programs is the great value of having a long period of predictable funding .

a predictable level of funding enables the recipients to plan and implement projects efficiently , avoiding the uncertainty of not knowing how much money will be available in a given year and the higher costs that come with that uncertainty .

funding certainty also facilitates the hiring and retention of people with expertise in transportation project development and implementation , without which projects will be more difficult to complete .

another consequence of unpredictable funding is project delay .

for example , the mandatory environmental impact analyses for some of the hsipr projects had already been completed prior to the availability of hsipr funding , but the projects had not progressed .

since conditions change over time , environmental impacts need to be reevaluated after a period of time , typically five years .

hence , in some instances earlier environmental analyses needed to be repeated , delaying the start of construction .

although the term "shovel - ready projects" was frequently used to refer to projects funded under arra , the major hsipr projects were far from shovel - ready ; many of the states previously had no reason to invest significant resources in planning for intercity passenger rail projects , and little time was provided for them to develop applications for the suddenly available funding .

fra faced a similar challenge , as it was given responsibility for awarding billions of dollars for rail projects quickly although it had little capacity for grant management .

fra struggled to implement the new grant program while also responding to increased responsibilities in other areas as assigned in priia .

as it worked to build the capacity to administer the hsipr grant program , fra faced two conflicting responsibilities: to approve grants quickly to meet the legislative intent of stimulating the economy , while also being careful to ensure that the money was well used .

the fra inspector general later reported that fra's efforts to minimize the misuse of funds had delayed some short - term hsipr projects because limited staff resources had been devoted to working with the long - term project grantees .

major transportation projects typically take decades to come to fruition .

as such , in addition to their engineering and financial challenges , they face political risk: the prospect that a change in the political environment will bring them to a halt .

the impact on the hsipr program of the change from the 111 th congress to the 112 th congress was dramatic: after having been appropriated $10.6 billion over a span of 10 months , the program received no further funding over the next six years , as well as having $400 million of the funding already appropriated to it rescinded .

it is unclear whether any significant amounts of funding will be provided in the future to continue the development set in motion by the hsipr grants .

political uncertainty exists at the state level as well .

as noted above , changes in state administrations in florida , ohio , and wisconsin led to withdrawal of state support for hsipr projects that had previously been approved .

while these funds were subsequently redirected to other grantees , their unexpected arrival may have interfered with efforts to use the money quickly .

the hsipr program lacked predictable funding in part because there was no dedicated revenue source for the program , as there is for federal programs that make grants for aviation , highway , and transit construction .

in the context of the federal appropriations process it is difficult to provide significant amounts of funding on a predictable basis to a grant program that depends on the treasury general fund , as it must compete with many other programs for the limited amount of funding congress appropriates each year .

this problem is exacerbated by the limits on overall discretionary spending that were imposed by the budget control act of 2011 .

supporters of passenger rail service have long called for a dedicated funding source for rail projects , and the obama administration has echoed such calls .

to date , however , congress has not taken such a step .

intercity passenger rail development projects for low - and moderate - speed service have relatively modest costs , in part because they generally involve improvements to existing tracks rather than extensive bridge construction and the land acquisition needed for building new lines .

high - speed rail lines are considerably more expensive .

this poses both a financial and political challenge to a federal program that would support development of high - speed rail: not only must significant amounts of funding be provided over a long period of time , but there must also be a willingness for large portions of that funding to be granted to a small number of projects in relatively few states .

this is in contrast to federal programs that distribute resources throughout the country , and to rural as well as urban areas .

most of the intercity passenger rail projects that have received federal assistance will operate at speeds below 125 mph , and cannot properly be described as high - speed rail .

given the limited funds available in hsipr , the program might have been more successful at building a true high - speed rail line had congress directed fra to concentrate funding on a single project .

congress did not direct fra to do so .

many members of congress have objected to funding for both the california high - speed rail corridor project and amtrak's northeast corridor improvement project ; politically , both projects face a challenge in that their direct benefits are limited to relatively few states .

similar political considerations may pose an obstacle to future congressional support for high - speed rail .

others have objected to funding intercity passenger rail in general , contending that it is economically inefficient , requires larger per - passenger subsidies than other modes of travel , is not suited to the economic geography of the united states , and may be superseded by future technologies .

