casework , in a congressional office , refers to the response or services that members of congress provide to constituents who request assistance .

as part of the process of determining how to carry out their congressional duties , members of congress largely determine the scope of casework and their other constituent service activities .

typically with casework , members and their staffs help individual constituents deal with federal administrative agencies by acting as facilitators , ombudsmen , and , in some cases , advocates .

some congressional offices may consider their liaison activities between the federal government and local governments or businesses concerned with the effects of federal legislation or regulation to be casework .

other offices may include interactions with communities and nonprofit organizations seeking federal grants or other assistance as casework .

common congressional casework requests include tracking a misdirected benefits payment ; helping to fill out a government form ; applying for social security , veterans' , education , and other federal benefits ; explaining government activities or decisions ; applying to a military service academy ; seeking relief from a federal administrative decision ; and immigrating to the united states or applying for u.s. citizenship .

contrary to the widely held public perception that members of congress can initiate a broad array of actions resulting in a speedy , favorable outcome , there are significant limitations on the degree of permissible intervention from a member office .

more of these restrictions are described later in this report: see " 3 .

what rules govern casework ? .

" .

casework is not required of members of congress , but it is commonly expected by constituents .

some constituents may view a member's office as the best point of a contact for assistance with the federal government .

it appears that each member office today provides some type of casework , reflecting a broadly held understanding among members and their staff that casework is integral to the representational duties of a member of congress .

some also believe that casework activities can be part of an outreach strategy to build political support among constituents .

casework may also be viewed as an evaluative stage of the legislative process .

some observers suggest that casework inquiries afford members the opportunity to evaluate whether a program is functioning as congress intended .

constituent inquiries about specific policies , programs , or benefits may also suggest areas in which programs or policies require additional oversight , or further legislative consideration .

federal statute prohibits members of congress , chamber officers , and congressional staff from representing anyone before the federal government , except in the performance of their official duties .

house and senate rules and federal law also prohibit ex parte , or off - the - record , communications with agency employees reasonably expected to be involved in case adjudication .

generally , a member of congress may do the following on behalf of eligible individuals seeking their assistance , under house and senate guidelines: request information or a status report ; urge prompt consideration ; arrange for interviews or appointments ; express judgments ; call for reconsideration of an administrative response that the member believes is not reasonably supported by statutes , regulations , or considerations of equity or public policy ; or perform any other service of a similar nature consistent with the provisions of the rules of the house or senate .

under the privacy act of 1974 , executive branch agencies cannot share records containing an individual's personally identifiable information with any outside entity unless that individual has authorized the release of that information .

agencies may request a particular format or types of information on a privacy act release .

requests involving medical information might require an additional waiver , pursuant to rules promulgated under the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) .

because casework is often viewed as a representational activity , the primary recipients of an office's casework services are usually considered to be individual constituents residing within a house member's district , or a senator's state .

yet there are reasons why other persons or entities might seek assistance from a member's office .

for example , foreign - born individuals seeking to immigrate to the united states may contact a member of congress for assistance .

a family member or other concerned party outside of a member's district may contact an office on behalf of a resident constituent .

strict definitions of who is eligible for casework assistance are not provided by the house or senate ; however , other guidelines may imply certain parameters .

senate rule xliii recognizes that not everyone who seeks assistance from a senator will be a constituent of the state the senator represents , and uses the term "petitioner" to refer to the casework requester .

no such distinction is drawn in the house ethics manual , which uses the term "constituents" to refer to the recipients of members' casework services .

in the house , guidance issued by the committee on ethics suggests that "particular care should be exercised when providing assistance to individuals who are not from the member's congressional district. .

the guidance also indicates that a member should not use official resources to provide casework for individuals who live outside the district the member represents .

when a member of the house is unable to assist a non - constituent , the member may refer the person to his or her own house member or senators .

matters regarding the management of casework activities are at the discretion of individual congressional offices , subject to the rules of their respective chambers , relevant law , and the priorities of that office .

the number and type of constituent requests , how an office defines casework , member priorities , and the distribution of responsibilities among office locations and staff are some of the factors that can affect a congressional office's casework policies and procedures .

most casework is conducted by staff in state or district offices , and staff are commonly hired in these locations to work on casework or other constituent services .

offices often establish and document procedures for how they handle casework ; this is not required , but some offices find it useful to specify casework goals , management procedures , or expectations of staff .

this can help ensure that all cases are addressed in a similar manner , and that all appropriate staff can process new casework requests and access casework records if needed .

offices sometimes create their own forms to serve as privacy act waivers or to gather necessary case - related information from constituents .

most constituents expect that offices will handle their personal information carefully and discreetly .

casework and other records created in a congressional office are considered to be the personal property of the member ; the house and senate provide guidance for managing these materials .

many state or district offices have enough constituent requests to assign at least one staff member to work specifically on casework .

congressional staff serving as caseworkers typically act as liaisons between constituents and federal agencies .

the decision to hire a caseworker , the specific qualifications for that role , and job responsibilities , however , are left to each member office to determine .

in some offices , certain caseworkers work with particular agencies or on certain types of cases ; in other offices , all caseworkers work on all types of cases .

for some staff , casework is their primary job responsibility ; others perform casework alongside another role in the office .

caseworkers generally first obtain information about the constituent's situation from the person requesting assistance .

this often involves understanding the problem presented by , or on behalf of , the constituent .

caseworkers may need to establish what services or benefits the constituent may be eligible for .

they may also need to request documentation , like copies of birth certificates or military service or other records , to provide to the agency in support of a case .

caseworkers also identify the appropriate way to address the constituent's concerns .

often , this involves contacting a federal agency's congressional liaison .

to receive any information from federal agencies about a constituent , caseworkers must provide a privacy act waiver , signed by the constituent , which allows the agency to share the constituent's personal information with a member .

throughout the process , caseworkers try to communicate with the constituent about realistic expectations .

while many congressional offices focus on national agencies , some issues presented by constituents may lead caseworkers to contact state or local governments , or nonprofit or community organizations ; in some instances , these entities may be able to provide intermediary or alternative assistance to constituents .

caseworkers also determine when a case may require additional support from a member of congress , other officials , or other staff .

additional information for caseworkers on working with constituents is available on the crs casework resources website ( http: / / www.crs.gov / resources / casework ) or by contacting crs .

often , federal agencies have designated legislative affairs or congressional relations staff assigned as general points of contact for congressional caseworkers .

many of these contacts are listed in crs report 98-446 , congressional liaison offices of selected federal agencies .

congressional liaisons generally are not agency decisionmakers , and essentially serve as a resource available to assist members and congressional staff on legislative and constituent service matters .

individuals serving in this capacity commonly work in an agency's legislative or intergovernmental affairs office .

although most of these congressional liaisons are located in washington , dc , agency locations , they can refer caseworkers to the appropriate local or regional office staff members , if needed , for further assistance .

caseworkers may also need to identify other sources of assistance for constituents .

frequently , caseworkers can utilize contacts known to their offices .

this can include local leaders or community organizations that may be able to provide alternative means of assistance for constituents .

caseworkers may also learn about helpful points of contact through other caseworkers who have worked on similar issues in another congressional office .

in addition to developing a broad network of contacts , caseworkers often develop expertise through their interactions with agencies and insights into what agency acronyms or terminology mean in practical terms for the constituent .

this sometimes enables caseworkers to provide information to constituents that the constituents may not have otherwise gleaned from the agency's formal response .

although members and caseworkers are limited in how much they can directly intervene in an agency's decisionmaking process on behalf of a particular case , there are several reasons why agencies typically are responsive to congressional concern .

congress , broadly , is responsible for creating federal agencies and programs , determining their scope , providing their funding , and overseeing their activities .

because some constituents seek congressional assistance only after other means of working with an agency have failed , agencies may view congressional casework inquiries as micro - level exercises of oversight and respond to them accordingly .

response times , whether for an acknowledgment that a case inquiry has been received , or for a response the agency considers final , can vary considerably from agency to agency .

waiting periods may be determined in part by the priority agencies place on constituent service , the type or complexity of an individual case , or the volume of cases to which an agency responds .

in some instances , agency response practices might result in slower response than constituents and some congressional offices expect or would prefer .

federal agencies might have different protocols that apply for emergency or time - sensitive situations , and congressional liaisons can share these methods with caseworkers .

there are , however , limits on what caseworkers and agency officials can do to expedite requests .

as constituents wait for an agency response , caseworkers might try to provide information about how long the process could take , based on information from or past work with the agency .

caseworkers may choose to provide regular updates to constituents at defined intervals to help assure constituents that their case is still being considered by the agency .

federal agencies are required to comply with statutes and regulations governing their activities , including decisions regarding services and benefits provided to constituents .

as a consequence , an agency might sometimes be unable to provide a response that is satisfactory to the constituent .

if there is reason to believe that incomplete information was available to the agency , or that an agency decision was not in keeping with its statutory or regulatory requirements , a member office may , pursuant to house or senate rules , request reconsideration of a constituent's concerns .

caseworkers can sometimes refer constituents to state , local , or community resources that might address some of the challenges a constituent is experiencing .

nonfederal entities that provide services to veterans , the elderly , or others with specific needs might offer services while a constituent awaits an agency decision or fashion a remedy if no agency resolution is available .

crs has a number of casework resources for congressional offices , accessible online through http: / / www.crs.gov / resources / casework .

these resources include an introductory video on casework ( crs video wvb00093 , introduction to congressional casework ) ; a longer report on casework practices ( crs report rl33209 , casework in a congressional office: background , rules , laws , and resources ) ; a report on u.s. service academy nominations ( crs report rl33213 , congressional nominations to u.s. service academies: an overview and resources for outreach and management ) ; and a list of frequently updated congressional liaison contacts ( crs report 98-446 , congressional liaison offices of selected federal agencies ) .

crs periodically hosts seminars for district and state staff that can provide additional information ; upcoming programs are listed at http: / / www.crs.gov / events .

congressional offices may also contact crs analysts directly to address more specific questions or concerns related to casework .

further case support may be obtained by contacting local or state officials , professional associations , or community groups that help individuals facing similar situations ; these entities may have access to additional resources that can help resolve or alleviate a constituent's problem .

caseworkers working in district offices may find it useful to contact staff in the member's washington , dc , office for additional information about policies or programs that affect casework .

similarly , information from fellow caseworkers in neighboring states or districts where constituent and agency experiences may be similar can be useful in providing caseworkers with contacts , resources , or advice .

