security cooperation provisions in the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) have escalated ongoing debates over u.s. security sector assistance to foreign countries and raised questions regarding whether existing authorities are able to meet current and evolving requirements .

as the 114 th congress winds down , members of congress are expected to reconcile remaining differences in the fy2017 ndaa .

policymakers and observers anticipate that the outcome of conference deliberations could significantly change the security cooperation and security sector assistance policy landscape .

since world war ii , the u.s. department of state has served as the lead agency in guiding u.s. security assistance to foreign countries , with long - standing authorities codified in title 22 ( foreign relations ) of the u.s. code and funded through congressional appropriations to the state department .

such engagements have been viewed by many , including in congress , as a tool of foreign policy .

the u.s. department of defense ( dod ) implements some of these programs , but for many decades , it otherwise relegated the training , equipping , and assisting of foreign military forces as a secondary mission on its list of priorities , far below war - fighting .

over time , however , and particularly since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congress has granted dod new authorities in annual ndaas and in title 10 ( armed services ) of the u.s. code to engage in "security cooperation" with foreign militaries and other security forces — now considered by dod to be an "important tool" for executing its national security responsibilities and "an integral element of the dod mission. .

this trend underlies a significant expansion of dod direct engagements with foreign security forces and an accompanying increase in dod's role in foreign policy decision - making .

the incremental nature of congress's adjustments to dod's title 10 authorities , however , has resulted in some 80 or more provisions that are described as an unwieldy "patchwork," which complicates the management , application , and oversight of such engagements .

congress enacted many of these dod authorities to respond to emerging threats , but also imposed limits on their scope , application , and duration , sometimes based on country - or region - specific conditions and concerns .

for at least 15 years , dod's security cooperation authorities ( and funding ) have grown with its counterterrorism responsibilities , involvement in overseas contingency operations , evolving national security priorities , and efforts to counter asymmetrical threats .

some practitioners view today's mix of provisions as an obstacle to dod's effective planning and execution of its objectives .

some also view the patchwork as problematic for state department coordination of foreign policy .

while some legal restrictions appear to stem from congressional oversight concerns , those restrictions may also complicate congressional oversight efforts in practice .

in many respects , proposed provisions in the fy2017 ndaa seek to address existing concerns about how the security cooperation enterprise functions and to improve the ability of congress to evaluate dod's application of an expanded repertoire of security cooperation authorities .

provisions in the fy2017 ndaa , particularly those in the senate - passed version of the bill ( s. 2943 ) , could also alter the way in which dod conducts security cooperation programming , the relationship between dod and the state department on security cooperation and security sector assistance matters , and congress's oversight of related funding and programming .

in april 2016 , following a review of its security cooperation authorities , dod formally submitted 10 proposals for the fy2017 ndaa to congress that would consolidate several authorities already located in title 10 of the u.s. code and codify other temporary authorities and reporting requirements into a new chapter within title 10 , entitled "security cooperation. .

the proposals were sponsored by the under secretary of defense for policy and vetted and approved through the interagency process , including by the office of management and budget and the state department .

one of dod's overarching goals in its proposals was to organize and consolidate existing authorities .

another goal was to standardize statutory language , in an effort to provide more clarity to security cooperation planners and improve their ability to use existing authorities more effectively .

although some existing authorities would remain unchanged in substance as part of the proposals , others would be modified .

five authorities would be repealed for lack of use or redundancy .

dod also proposed consolidating several congressional reporting requirements on certain security cooperation authorities .

the house and senate responded to dod's proposals in different ways .

the house - passed version of the fy2017 ndaa , h.r .

4909 , included some of dod's proposals , but only those that make no or minor changes to existing authorities .

recognizing calls for further security cooperation restructuring , but not incorporating major changes in the fy2017 ndaa , h.r .

4909 included a provision ( §1206 ) that would require an "independent assessment" of dod security cooperation programs .

the senate - passed version of the fy2017 ndaa , s. 2943 , would incorporate nearly all of dod's proposals into a new security cooperation chapter in the u.s. code .

furthermore , s. 2943 proposed several new , interrelated measures intended to better align dod's programs and funding with what authorizing committee members have advanced as current and evolving strategic requirements , while also seeking to address existing challenges associated with executing security cooperation activities .

in addition , s. 2943 offered provisions that would centralize all dod security cooperation programs under a new funding mechanism ; create a professionalized security cooperation workforce ; support budgeting transparency ; and require assessment , monitoring , and evaluation of security cooperation programs and activities .

proposals would also variously alter the statutorily required role of the state department in overseeing security cooperation programs by changing existing requirements that the secretary of state approve or jointly formulate certain existing dod programs and activities .

the senate armed services committee's ( sasc's ) markup of the fy2017 ndaa , from which the security cooperation proposals of s. 2943 originate , explained its purpose and objectives: in an effort to respond to the complaints of our military commanders and the department more broadly , the ndaa contains a major reform designed to modernize and streamline dod's security cooperation enterprise... .

together these steps will substantially reduce the cumbersome patchwork of legal authorities and sources of funding and significantly improve operational outcomes , program management , congressional oversight , and public transparency .

by breaking down existing stovepipes , these reforms will also enable the department to better align security cooperation activities with strategic objectives .

in july 2016 , the fy2017 ndaa went to conference to resolve differences between the house - and senate - passed versions , and the lame duck session beginning in november is expected to address the ndaa conference report .

security cooperation provisions in the conference report may differ substantively from proposals contained in h.r .

4909 and s. 2943 , as passed by the house on may 18 , 2016 , and the senate on june 14 , 2016 , respectively .

for an overview and comparison of provisions associated with the proposed enactment of a new chapter in title 10 on security cooperation , see appendix a .

as part of the proposed enactment of a new chapter in title 10 of the u.s. code devoted specifically to security cooperation , nearly 60 existing provisions in title 10 or public law may variously be transferred , codified , modified , consolidated , repealed , or otherwise affected .

key proposed changes involve ( 1 ) changes to dod's "global train and equip" authority , ( 2 ) changes to broaden the scope of existing dod authorities , ( 3 ) changes to the state department's role , ( 4 ) creation of a security cooperation enhancement fund ( scef ) , and ( 5 ) changes to dod's security cooperation management .

some of the proposed security cooperation provisions in the fy2017 ndaa — including the senate's proposed security cooperation workforce development program and its measures for improved budget transparency and program accountability — have broad appeal among analysts , policymakers , and practitioners .

others have emerged as flashpoints in a broader debate over dod's role in security cooperation .

this debate , which has been the focus of several hearings in the 114 th congress , pits those who believe that enhancing dod's toolkit for security cooperation engagement and management is necessary for accomplishing u.s. strategic objectives , against those who caution against the "militarization" of u.s. foreign policy .

this perceived militarization entails perceived shifts in the balance of dod and state department funding , resources , and relative bureaucratic and policy influence .

in its june 7 , 2016 statement of administration policy on s. 2943 , the obama administration welcomed some of the senate's proposals .

in particular , the administration approved of the senate's incorporation of its own proposals .

the administration , however , cautioned against the risk of unintended harm to security cooperation and force readiness efforts , as well as the risk of undermining the state department's lead role in foreign policy and security sector assistance .

where mechanisms already exist or were proposed in dod's fy2017 package of security cooperation authority revisions , the administration expressed a desire to maintain state department oversight mechanisms , including secretary of state concurrence and joint formulation of programs with dod .

some members and outside observers have publicly expressed similar sentiments , including questions about whether the proposed changes could negatively affect u.s. diplomacy and foreign policy , including with respect to u.s. promotion of human rights .

representative adam smith , ranking member on the house armed services committee ( hasc ) , stated in an interview that the u.s. military's involvement in broad security development and stabilization activities is concerning because it is "not their area of expertise. .

house foreign affairs committee ( hfac ) chair representative ed royce , who is a conferee on the fy2017 ndaa , stated to the media that he would resist any changes that would weaken the state department's involvement in international security programs and that he would advocate for the house's approach , as passed in h.r .

4909 , as opposed to the proposals in s. 2943 .

a news report described a closed sfrc hearing in june 2016 in which member concerns were reportedly expressed that some existing dod security cooperation programs and activities hamper broader foreign policy goals in the absence of sufficient state department oversight .

sfrc chair senator corker reportedly raised similar concerns with sasc chair senator john mccain .

in july 2016 , senators patrick leahy , richard durbin , ranking members of the state - foreign operations and defense appropriations subcommittees , respectively , joined with senators corker and cardin , chair and ranking member of sfrc , respectively , to write a letter to hasc and sasc regarding the security cooperation and assistance changes proposed in s. 2943 .

the senators reportedly opposed provisions that would not strengthen statutory requirements for state department coordination , consistent with its lead role in security assistance policy .

in an effort to modify certain aspects of s. 2943 's security cooperation provisions , senators corker and cardin submitted an amendment ( s.amdt .

4420 ) to the bill .

although the amendment was ultimately tabled and no further action was taken prior to s. 2943 's passage , it signaled several foreign policy concerns in the legislation .

proponents of security cooperation proposals in the fy2017 ndaa argue that changes are necessary to provide for flexible and robust dod - led security cooperation authorities that will better serve u.s. strategic and military objectives than the current policy architecture .

dod's deputy assistant secretary of defense for security cooperation , for example , has argued that defense security cooperation should be viewed as a core element of military strategy , as it contributes specifically ( 1 ) to mitigating u.s. security risks by enabling partners to operate in coalition with the u.s. military or independently against shared objectives , ( 2 ) to deterring adversaries , and ( 3 ) to setting theater conditions that enable successful u.s. military operations .

sasc has insisted , meanwhile , that its security cooperation provisions in s. 2943 are intended to improve dod and state department integration on security cooperation efforts .

according to sasc , s. 2943 could also address other critiques of dod's current security cooperation programs and activities , through its provisions to professionalize the security cooperation workforce and provide more tools for dod to manage its security cooperation programs , including multi - year funding and authority to sustain capacity - building efforts .

on july 8 , 2016 , the fy2017 ndaa went to conference amid pressure from various stakeholders to reconcile disparate viewpoints on security cooperation reform .

while the conference report is not yet released , it is expected to be brought before the house and senate during the lame duck session .

the implementation of changes to dod's security cooperation authorities may be affected by near - term appropriations decisions .

security cooperation programs and activities are currently funded through december 9 , 2016 , under the continuing appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

114-223 ) .

the house version of the fy2017 dod appropriations ( h.r .

5293 ) , which passed the house on june 16 , 2016 , does not include reference to funding for s. 2943 's scef or any additional changes to dod's security cooperation authorities , programs or activities .

the senate version ( s. 3000 ) , which was reported out of committee on may 26 , 2016 , also does not include funding for the scef .

it does , however , provide for a maximum of $850 million in o&m , defense - wide funds to remain available until september 30 , 2018 and "be available to provide support and assistance to foreign security forces or other groups or individuals to conduct , support or facilitate counterterrorism , crisis response , or security enhancement activities in accordance with the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017. .

beyond the fy2017 ndaa , broader efforts to review u.s. security sector assistance and explore models of interagency collaboration and alternative budgeting mechanisms , including transfer authorities between dod and the state department , are likely to persist .

many anticipate that security cooperation policy questions will continue to challenge policymakers in the next administration and the 115 th congress .

key policy questions include the following: does the current statutory framework adequately reflect today's strategic environment ? .

if not , would the proposed changes in the fy2017 ndaa meet the needs of existing and emerging threats ? .

if gaps remain , what legislative proposals could be anticipated in future ndaas ? .

how does security cooperation contribute to u.s. national security and foreign policy objectives ? .

what are the national security implications of unsuccessful security cooperation programs and activities ? .

how should the effectiveness of security cooperation programs and activities be measured and assessed ? .

to what extent should security assistance be viewed as a tool to achieve u.s. military objectives ( and thus , a potentially central dod mission ) , versus a tool to further u.s. diplomatic partnerships with foreign nations ( and thus , primarily a state department function ) ? .

can those two potentially competing objectives be harmonized ? .

if so , how ? .

what are the key differences between security assistance carried out under title 22 ( state department ) of the u.s. code and security cooperation programs and activities carried out under title 10 ( dod ) authorities ? .

what are the implications of potentially duplicative authorities ? .

what challenges does the state department face in meeting its responsibility of "continuous oversight and general direction" of military assistance , education , and training programs , among other features of the conduct of foreign affairs ? .

what aspects of security sector assistance are a shared responsibility ? .

how might changes in dod's security cooperation authorities affect interagency relations , global perceptions of u.s. civil - military balance , and foreign government interactions on security sector issues ? .

what is the appropriate role for dod and the u.s. military to play vis - a - vis the domestic and / or civilian security forces , such as police , of foreign countries ? .

in what contexts , if any , is dod the agency best - placed to train and equip these forces ? .

what risks may be associated with such engagements ? .

how might proposals in the fy2017 ndaa change the scope of dod's security cooperation mission and the distribution of funding among combatant commands ? .

what are the implications of any such changes ? .

if provisions in the senate - passed version of the fy2017 ndaa were enacted , would it be feasible for dod to implement those provisions within timeframes required by the legislation ? .

what would be the implications of delays ? .

how might reforms strengthen or weaken congressional policymaking control and oversight of security cooperation , including implications for committee jurisdiction over such matters ? .

to what extent should congress place limits ( temporal , geographic , human rights - related , etc. ) .

on dod's ability to provide assistance to foreign security forces ? .

to what extent do such restrictions support , or impede , congressional oversight ? .

in addition to appropriations decisions and funding constraints in the near - term , the next administration's management and execution of security sector assistance could be affected by future national - level and agency - specific policy decisions .

further debate on this issue could inspire subsequent rounds of proposals for fy2018 and beyond .

appendix a. overview and comparison of security cooperation provisions in the fy2017 ndaa , as of november 1 , 201 .

