t he united states is party to 14 international free trade agreements ( ftas ) with 20 countries .

these agreements impose a wide variety of international obligations on the united states and its trading partners .

such obligations address import tariffs , as well as potential nontariff trade barriers in areas such as agriculture , customs procedures , foreign investment , government procurement , intellectual property protection , and services trade .

a country that is party to an fta and that maintains laws , regulations , or practices that violate one of these obligations may be subject to trade retaliation ( eg , increased tariffs imposed by other fta parties on its exports ) or may have to pay a fine or monetary compensation to an fta partner or injured investor .

during the past decade , some have suggested that the united states should attempt to renegotiate — and possibly withdraw from — the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

these people have argued , among other things , that the united states' elimination or reduction of tariffs on imported products in accordance with the agreement has negatively impacted u.s. workers .

such statements have prompted congressional interest in domestic and international legal issues pertaining to u.s. termination of , or withdrawal from , an fta .

no u.s. fta has been terminated ; one has been suspended .

the united states and canada agreed to suspend operation of the u.s. - canada fta when nafta entered into force on january 1 , 1994 .

this report provides brief answers to frequently asked legal questions about withdrawal by the united states from an fta .

the answers in the report assume that a court would find a case raising these questions to be justiciable ( i.e. , that a court could hear the case ) and that the plaintiffs had standing ( i.e. , that a party had a legal right to bring a dispute before a court or other tribunal for possible resolution of the issues in the party's complaint ) .

the report does not analyze other implications ( eg , economic ) of u.s. withdrawal from an fta .

unless the united states and other parties to the fta otherwise agree — or the fta otherwise provides — withdrawal from , or termination of , an fta in accordance with its provisions would release the united states from its international obligations under that fta from the date that withdrawal or termination became effective .

thus , generally speaking , the united states would not be subject to dispute settlement or investor - state proceedings under the fta for breaches of agreement obligations that took place after the effective date of withdrawal .

however , dispute settlement or investor - state arbitration proceedings that had commenced prior to withdrawal or termination — and potentially those that commenced after termination but were based on alleged violations preceding termination — could likely proceed unless the parties agreed otherwise or the fta provided otherwise .

most u.s. fta implementation laws contain language providing for repeal of most provisions in the implementing law in the event that the fta terminates .

for example , the u.s. - korea fta implementation act states the following in section 107: ( c ) termination of the agreement. — on the date on which the agreement terminates , this act ( other than this subsection and title v ) and the amendments made by this act ( other than the amendments made by title v ) shall cease to have effect .

as a further example , cafta - dr states the following in section 107: on the date on which the agreement ceases to be in force with respect to the united states , the provisions of this act ( other than this subsection ) and the amendments made by this act shall cease to have effect .

the nafta implementing law , by contrast , lacks clear language on repeal of provisions implementing the agreement .

however , it does contain language that could potentially be construed as repealing some provisions of the nafta implementing law at the time the united states determines not to apply the agreement with respect to a nafta partner country as a result of u.s. withdrawal from the agreement .

of course , congress may enact legislation altering these repeal provisions , as it did when the united states and canada agreed to suspend the u.s. - canada fta .

in addition , it is important to note that not all u.s. laws consistent with a particular trade agreement obligation are contained in the act implementing that trade agreement .

although these repeal provisions do not specifically mention the president , they arguably represent an implied delegation of authority from congress to the president to determine unilaterally when the agreement has terminated , and thus when the law implementing the agreement , and amendments thereto , become ineffective .

such a delegation by congress to the president of authority to repeal , unilaterally and permanently , existing provisions of law upon termination of an fta may raise an issue of whether the delegation violates separation - of - powers principles by contravening the presentment clause of the constitution , which requires that legislation passed by congress be presented to the president for his signature or veto before it can become law .

in clinton v. city of new york , the supreme court struck down the line item veto act ( liva ) , a law that authorized the president , within five days of signing a bill into law , to make partial cancellation of certain tax and spending provisions in the law if the president determined certain criteria were met .

the court held that the liva violated the bicameralism and presentment requirements of the constitution because the president could effectively repeal acts of congress without going through the regular legislative process involving house and senate passage of legislation and presentment of it to the president for his signature or veto .

although the court's opinion does not provide clear guidance as to when a law violates these constitutional requirements , the court did indicate that congress may grant another branch of government the authority to "repeal" laws "upon occurrence of a particular event through provisions of law known as contingent legislation. .

the court's opinion also suggests that a provision may be deemed constitutional when ( 1 ) it authorizes the president to suspend or repeal a law contingent upon a condition that did not exist when congress passed the law ; ( 2 ) it imposes a duty on the president to suspend or repeal the law upon determining the contingency had occurred ; and ( 3 ) suspension or repeal of the law was "executing the policy that congress had embodied in the statute. .

finally , the court also suggested that congress might be able to delegate a greater degree of authority to the president in the areas of foreign trade and foreign affairs .

although application of the clinton decision to an fta repeal provision may present difficulties for a reviewing court , this decision presents a few reasons why a court might deem the "repeal" provisions in ftas to be constitutional .

first , the president's authority to exercise the power depends on a condition that did not exist when congress passed the fta implementing law: termination of the underlying fta .

such an event will likely take place long after the president has signed the bill into law .

second , the repeal provisions do not appear to give the president discretion as to whether to repeal the law upon termination of the fta .

instead , the provisions set forth which fta implementing law provisions "shall cease to have effect" on the date the agreement terminates .

third , repeal of the implementing laws would arguably execute congress's policy in enacting the trade agreement insofar as it ensured that when the agreement terminated as a matter of international law , its implementation in domestic law ( eg , tariff concessions for imports from fta partners ) would also cease .

fourth , the repeal provisions do not allow the president to choose which provisions will terminate .

thus , it does not appear that the president may "effect the repeal of laws for his own policy reasons. .

finally , the repeal provisions delegate to the president authority in the area of foreign trade and foreign affairs , where a court would likely accord to congress's delegations more deference .

the constitution grants congress the power to impose tariffs on imports of products from other countries .

the supreme court has upheld congress's authority to delegate to the president the power to set tariffs in accordance with limits set forth in statute .

in fta implementing laws , congress has authorized the president to proclaim modifications to tariff rates to implement u.s. obligations under the agreements .

subsequently , the president has issued proclamations altering tariff rates in the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states ( htsus ) to implement fta obligations in accordance with the terms of the delegation from congress .

in order to adjust tariff rates on products imported from fta partner countries to what they would be in the absence of the fta ( generally , a higher most favored nation ( mfn ) rate in column 1 of the htsus marked "general" ) , the president would have to rely upon statutory authority .

as noted above , many fta implementing laws contain provisions providing for automatic repeal of the implementing laws upon termination of ( and arguably , u.s. withdrawal from ) an fta .

assuming such provisions are constitutional and that congress did not amend or repeal them , these provisions would repeal tariff modification authority granted to the president under the fta implementing bill , arguably rendering invalid presidential proclamations reducing tariffs under these authorities .

generally speaking , tariff rates would then return to what they would be in the absence of proclamations issued by the president under the authority of the implementing law for that particular trade agreement .

if the implementing law was not repealed upon termination of , or u.s. withdrawal from , the fta , on the other hand , then the president might rely on certain provisions in that law to adjust tariff rates to what they had been before the fta .

in addition , section 125 ( e ) of the trade act of 1974 , which congress has made applicable to most ftas entered into by the united states , specifically addresses changes to tariff authority when an fta is terminated or the united states withdraws from it .

that provision authorizes the president to proclaim the restoration of tariff rates to what they would be without the fta ( generally , the mfn rate ) , but states , in general , that the president must recommend to congress within 60 days of termination or withdrawal "appropriate rates of duty for all articles which were affected by the termination or withdrawal. .

the president cannot make laws , and thus repeal of federal statutory provisions implementing u.s. fta obligations requires action from congress .

although provisions in fta implementing laws may delegate to the president the authority to effect the repeal of some federal statutory provisions implementing non - tariff trade agreement obligations , such provisions do not apply to all federal statutes implementing fta obligations .

in addition , congress could enact legislation altering this language on repeal .

this section addresses what the president could do to avoid enforcement of federal laws implementing ftas .

broadly speaking , if the president identified a federal regulation , order , or practice that implements fta obligations , the president might be able to rely on constitutional or statutory authorities to repeal or limit the effect of the measure .

for example , a federal executive branch agency acting within , and consistent with , existing statutory authority could repeal a rule implementing an fta obligation ; issue a new rule that narrowed the regulatory scope of the rule ; or alter or issue guidance documents or interpretive rules to indicate less enforcement or more relaxed interpretations of a rule .

to the extent that an fta requires the united states to enforce certain of its laws , the executive branch could also exercise enforcement discretion in order to avoid implementing fta obligations .

in circumstances in which the executive branch's implementation of a particular fta obligation depends on the president's exercise of discretionary statutory authority , the president could choose to exercise that authority in a manner that would not implement trade obligations .

for example , many u.s. fta implementing laws amend the trade agreements act of 1979 to authorize the president to waive domestic content restrictions for federal procurement ( eg , the buy american act ) for eligible goods and services of fta partner countries .

the president could rescind waivers of these restrictions in contravention of fta procurement obligations .

such actions by the president or an executive branch agency could potentially be subject to judicial review on various grounds , including that an agency has exceeded its statutory authority or failed to enforce the law .

