prior to enactment of the postal reorganization act of 1970 ( pra ) , mail delivery in the united states was the responsibility of the u.s. post office department , a cabinet - level department in the executive branch .

pra reform efforts were driven largely by the view that the post office department was ill equipped to meet the demands of the growing u.s. population and the changing economy .

mail volume had risen sharply and the post office department lacked the institutional flexibility to quickly respond to market changes .

today , the u.s .

postal service ( usps or postal service ) faces similar challenges but for different reasons .

between 2006 and 2015 , total mail volume dropped sharply .

market changes and global economic conditions contributed to the postal service's financial challenges and affected its efforts to control expenses and expand revenue .

statutory mandates , such as the requirements to maintain six - day delivery and prefund health benefits for future retirees , may limit the actions usps might take to mitigate these challenges .

according to the postal service , "many of the structural reforms needed to ensure long - term financial viability , such as the resolution of our unsupportable [retiree health benefit] liability , can only be achieved with comprehensive legislation. .

this section of the report covers the current financial responsibilities , challenges , and limitations facing usps .

these issues are the result of a confluence of factors including ( 1 ) the usps's statutorily designed organizational and financial structure , ( 2 ) u.s. and global economic conditions over the past decade , and ( 3 ) the impact that technological innovations have had on the demand for postal products and services .

on the one hand , the usps must sell enough postal products to maintain self - sufficiency and meet other statutory requirements , such as the retiree health benefit prefunding obligation .

on the other hand , the usps generally cannot expand its operations beyond the scope of postal products and services and other limited nonpostal products authorized by statute .

statute also limits the usps's ability to raise rates on certain postal products .

these facts underlie many of the challenges facing the usps and are also at the core of many of the reform efforts undertaken by the usps and considered by congress .

usps's challenging financial circumstances have prompted the agency to implement several cost - cutting strategies , one of which has been to reduce the size and cost of the usps workforce .

the sections below discuss three usps initiatives to reduce its workforce size and cost: ( 1 ) attrition and separation incentives , ( 2 ) increased use of non - career employees , and ( 3 ) non - personnel initiatives that could impact workforce size and cost .

the sections focus on implementation of these three initiatives since fy2007 , at which time the usps began to experience substantial revenue losses .

this section provides information on the u.s .

postal service's current five - year business plan and several ongoing usps reform initiatives .

the reform initiatives discussed in this section cover a wide range of issues and various aspects of postal operations .

in many instances , these initiatives are underway , pursuant to the usps's current legal authorities .

continuation of these initiatives does not require legislative action by congress .

in some cases , however , congress has proposed legislation that would halt or amend actions that the usps has already initiated .

to fulfill its mission of providing "prompt , reliable , and efficient" postal services to its customers , the usps has a fleet of approximately 190,000 delivery vehicles .

these vehicles transport more than 153 billion pieces of mail each year to more than 150 million delivery points .

approximately 75% of the delivery fleet ( 142,000 vehicles ) is comprised of long - life vehicles ( llvs ) , which have an expected useful life of 24 years .

many llvs were purchased in the late 1980s and early 1990s , and have now met or exceeded their life expectancy .

indeed , the average age of an llv reached 23 years in 2015 .

moreover , the usps oig determined the current fleet can only meet delivery needs through fy2017 .

given the need to replace much of its aging delivery fleet , the usps has proposed acquiring up to 180,000 new delivery vehicles through its next generation delivery vehicle ( ngdv ) acquisition program .

the ngdvs would cost between $25,000 and $35,000 each , and have a life span of 20 years .

the new fleet would differ from the current llv fleet in several ways , notably that they would be configured to handle a larger number of packages — which analysts believe will continue to grow in volume in coming years .

the ngdvs would also use less fuel and more advanced safety features than the current llv fleet .

the ngdv acquisition program will take an estimated five to seven years to complete .

in january , 2015 , the usps issued a request for information ( rfi ) , which provided prospective suppliers with the specifications of the ngdvs , and invited interested parties to submit information that demonstrated their ability to meet the manufacturing and production requirements of the program .

based on responses to the rfi , the usps developed a list of "prequalified" suppliers who showed they could meet the program's requirements .

only the prequalified suppliers are eligible to participate in the next phase of the program .

in october , 2015 , the usps issued a request for proposal ( rfp ) seeking a qualified supplier to design and manufacture six "fully functional" prototypes of its ngdvs .

the usps anticipates that this phase of the program — the design , build , and testing of the prototypes — will take about two years to complete .

the final phase of the program , the production and delivery of the ngdv fleet , would begin in 2017 .

at that point , a second rfp would be released , which would establish the final ngdv production requirements , and indicate whether the usps will purchase the vehicles , lease them , or both .

the usps has stated that while it is likely that just one supplier would be awarded the contract , it is possible that more than one supplier may be selected .

the paea defines postal services as "the delivery of letters , printed matter , or mailable packages , including acceptance , collection , sorting , transportation , or other functions ancillary thereto" and prohibits the usps from offering all but a limited number of excepted nonpostal products and services .

this restriction prevents the postal service from offering or developing new nonpostal products ( eg , expanded banking and financial services ) or expanding into new markets that might increase its market share and revenue .

under the paea , the postal service is currently authorized to offer 11 nonpostal products and services , including two market dominant and nine competitive products .

the two market dominant products are usps / public sector alliances , eg , moversource , which allows the usps to provide free change - of - address services by including moving tips and related advertisements ; and philatelic sales intended for stamp collectors , eg , uncut press sheets , framed stamps , binders for storing stamps , and philatelic guides .

the nine competitive products are private sector advertising on usps.com , within u.s. post offices , or in other postal venues ; licensing of usps's copyrights and trademarks ; mail service promotions , which "allow merchants who offer web - based customers the ability to create mail pieces through an online service. .

prices for these products are negotiated between the merchant and the postal service ; sale of officially licensed usps retail products ; u.s. passport photo services ; photocopying services ; rental , leasing , and non - sale of usps property ; use of usps training facility and courses ; and the usps electronic postmark ( epm ) program , which "authorizes vendors to provide their customers with postal service - authorized timestamps. .

in fy2015 , revenues from nonpostal market dominant products were $75 million and expenses were $13 million , for a net gain of $62 million .

for nonpostal competitive products , revenues were $106 million and expenses were $17 million , for a net gain of $89 million .

this was an increase of 13% and 4% from fy2014 nonpostal market dominant and competitive revenues , respectively .

the postal service is also authorized , with limitations , to conduct short - term market tests that may include nonpostal products .

market tests are generally limited to two years and have included the sale of gift cards , a same - day delivery service ( metro post™ ) , and an international ecommerce shipping service ( gem merchant ) .

the usps oig suggested grocery delivery as another possible market test in its june 2016 oig blog post .

select postal reform legislation introduced in the 113 th and 114 th congresses would provide the usps with authority to offer additional nonpostal products and services .

the nonpostal products and services covered in recent bills include public internet access ; drivers' license services ; hunting and fishing license services ; voter registration ; and postal banking and financial services .

further , legislation introduced in the 114 th congress , such as s. 2051 , improving postal operations , service , and transparency act of 2015 ( ipost act ) , and h.r .

5714 , postal service reform act of 2016 , includes provisions that would allow the usps to offer a range of nonpostal products and services that are currently prohibited under the paea .

in looking for ways to grow usps's nonpostal products and services , one option is to expand the financial services it offers ( eg , international money orders , prepaid cards ) .

the usps offered select financial products in the 20 th century , but they have not been available since the termination of the postal savings system in 1967 .

one reason that postal financial services are still raised as a potentially beneficial product line may be the example provided by other nations .

countries with some form of postal financial services include the united kingdom , france , japan , germany , south korea , and brazil , in addition to many others .

these examples also highlight the numerous different models that a postal system can utilize to provide financial services .

in some cases , the postal service offers its own financial products through a separate entity established within the postal department .

in other cases , the postal service facilitates the sale of financial services that are managed by a private financial institution .

some nations have implemented a hybrid of these two approaches .

for example , south korea uses a system wherein its postal service ( korea post ) offers its own financial services while also handling deposits made to private banks .

to further explore this idea , the usps oig issued a white paper in early 2014 to study whether the usps is well positioned to offer financial services .

in this report , the usps oig determined that financial services are the best opportunities for the usps to generate new revenue .

in addition , the report estimated there would be significant demand for these services from populations currently underserved by private banks .

following the publication of the initial white paper , the usps oig completed a second study in 2015 that examined the statutory authority required to offer financial services and offered possible models that could be used .

first , the report stated that the usps could simply expand its current offering of financial products , which includes paper money orders , gift cards , and check cashing .

this approach would provide limited growth opportunities , but would also incur relatively low implementation costs and is permissible under current statutory authority .

the usps oig estimates that after a five - year period of developing these services , the usps could generate $1.1 billion in additional revenue annually .

beyond this approach , the white paper also identified four alternative models that draw heavily on the experience of other countries .

for each of these approaches , the upfront costs would be higher and the usps oig states additional statutory authority would be needed .

these four approaches are ( 1 ) a partnership with one outside firm to offer services through the usps ; ( 2 ) partnerships with multiple outside firms that are specialized for each individual product ; ( 3 ) a marketplace model wherein the usps facilitates many options for each financial service ; and ( 4 ) a full - fledged postal bank , which would offer financial products wholly managed by the usps or an entity within the agency .

the work of the usps oig began a national conversation around the merits of developing postal financial services at the usps , with many advocates for and against the concept .

as mentioned above , proponents of postal financial services believe that such an expansion would offer financial services to underserved populations and provide needed revenue to the postal service at a time when demand for their traditional product line of first class mail delivery is declining .

recently , many journalists and organizations have recommended a postal savings system as a way to reach households and individuals that do not currently make use of an insured financial institution and instead rely on alternative financial services ( afs ) .

according to a 2013 report from the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , this population is relatively large .

the report found that 7.7% of all u.s. households were unbanked , meaning they had no account at an insured financial institution , while 20% of households were considered underbanked , meaning they had used afs in the previous 12 months .

on the other side of the debate over postal financial services are those who believe the expanded services would not generate revenue or would unfairly encroach on the private market for financial services .

specifically , some have critiqued the revenue forecasts developed by the usps oig and the assumption that the underserved populations trust the usps more than other institutions .

some have questioned whether there is a conflict between the two primary benefits that are currently suggested by postal banking advocates .

writing in the washington post , charles lane stated , at bottom , though , the problem with postal banking is a certain inherent tension between its policy objectives: is the primary purpose to help low - income people , or is it to help the postal service make more money to offset the irreversible decline of its bread - and - butter business , first - class mail ? .

without a more detailed estimate of the costs at which the usps could profitably provide these services , the validity of this particular critique cannot be determined .

in evaluating the merits of expanding usps financial products and services , many have looked to the usps's own experience with postal banking in the first half of the 20 th century .

from 1911 until 1967 , the usps operated the u.s .

postal savings system ( pss ) throughout the united states .

at its peak in the late 1940s , this system had more than 4 million depositors and $3.4 billion in accounts .

the purpose of this system at the time of its creation was to "get money out of hiding , to attract savings of a large number of immigrants who were accustomed to savings at post offices in their native countries , and to provide safe depositories for people who had lost confidence in private banks. .

this emphasis on reaching new underserved populations , providing an alternative beyond private institutions , and looking to international examples mirrors many of the arguments being made on behalf of postal financial services today .

in the 113 th congress , representative cummings introduced h.r .

2690 , innovate to deliver act of 2013 , which if enacted , would have expanded usps's authority to offer nonpostal products and services , including "check - cashing services. .

as discussed in the 2015 usps oig report , a more comprehensive approach is for the postal service to become a chartered and licensed bank .

as a bank , the usps would have authority to provide a range of financial services , such as savings accounts , personal loans , check cashing services , and insurance products .

in the 114 th congress , representative richmond introduced h.r .

4422 which , if enacted , would provide the postal service with authority to "provide basic financial services" including small - dollar loans , checking and savings accounts , and other services in the public interest .

under the bill , the usps would have authority to provide some of these services "alone , or in partnership with depository institutions. .

the bill , however , stopped short of establishing a new postal banking system with a chartered and licensed usps bank .

while the specific proposals in the usps oig white paper , in articles , and in legislation differ in the financial products they cover , each of the proposals appears to share certain characteristics and goals .

each leverages the nationwide service network and accessibility of the usps .

further , each seeks to achieve one or both of two goals: reach populations that are underserved by current financial institutions or provide additional revenue opportunities to the usps .

appendix a. usps revenue and volume by mail category and class appendix b .

postal reform legislation introduced in the 113 th and 114 th congresse .

