figure 1 .

russia and northeast asiasource: crs graphics .

since the end of the cold war , russia has played a mostly quiet role in east asia , only intermittently focusing its attention on the pacific while primarily orienting its foreign policy toward europe and former soviet states .

in the past few years , and particularly in the wake of russian aggression in ukraine in 2014 , russia's relations with the west have soured .

in part as a consequence , moscow appears to be stepping up efforts to develop closer ties with countries in east asia , consistent with vladimir putin's 2012 presidential campaign promise to "turn to the east. .

as one european analyst put it , "originally , russia was simply attracted by the dynamic developments in asia and china ; however , since the ukraine crisis and the deterioration of the zapadny vektor ( 'western vector' ) in 2014 , its interest has turned into a necessity. .

in 2014 , putin signed legislation to offer a range of tax benefits and subsidies to businesses that establish operations in the russian far east , with an eye to expanding russia's trade with asia .

china , japan , and south korea , all in need of energy supplies , offer commercial opportunities as the west imposes economic sanctions on russia and russia develops its oil and gas reserves .

although most see a geostrategic alignment between moscow and tokyo as improbable , such an arrangement could offer a regional counterweight to beijing's rising stature .

at the same time , russia's flirting with a partnership with china provides a retort to the u.s. "rebalance" to asia strategy .

already tense , u.s. relations with moscow have frayed further since russia's intervention in ukraine in february - march 2014 and its initiation of military activities in syria in 2015 .

the united states led an effort to impose multilateral sanctions on russia and isolate moscow diplomatically , encouraging its asian allies to do the same .

 ( see appendix . ) .

although its economic power is declining as energy prices fall , russia still has strength in terms of military capability , diplomatic capital by virtue of its permanent seat on the united nations security council , status as a nuclear state , and sheer geographic size .

analysts believe leaders in moscow increasingly view the world through an anti - u.s. lens and hold many grievances against the west .

from this mindset , russia may see asia as an area in which it is able to challenge u.s. interests .

under president putin , russia's outreach to asia has been inconsistent , and at times contradictory .

in 2015 , putin failed to attend the two largest east asia international meetings: the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum and the east asia summit ( eas ) , although russia is a member of both groupings .

while pursuing warmer relations with tokyo , russia has accelerated a military buildup on one of the disputed northern islands that japan also claims .

after russia appeared to engage north korea , leader kim jong - un declined to attend a 2015 world war ii commemorative ceremony in moscow , and the relationship apparently faltered .

with china , moscow alternates between summits with beijing and shows of military might to counter china's moves , particularly in contested areas like the artic region .

on the whole , the russian economy remains poorly integrated with asian countries , despite some apparent natural outlets for more trade .

this report will examine how russia has sought to engage northeast asian states , and vice versa , since 2012 .

it will also evaluate the durability of developing relationships and the relative value of these ties to the individual states .

it will explore whether russia might become a bigger geopolitical player in the region , and how this might affect u.s. interests in the asia - pacific .

for members of congress , russia's relations with countries in northeast asia are important to consider .

in addition to their impact on regional dynamics , they have implications for general foreign policy oversight , as well as for more specific issues such as the efficacy of sanctions policy , the developing security competition in the arctic region , and alternative blocs of influence in international fora like the united nations security council .

congress could express concern or interest in this area through additional hearings , an expansion of reporting requirements for the departments of defense and state , and other legislation that focuses on russia's engagement in northeast asia .

moscow and beijing have many reasons to cooperate .

both countries have a desire to counter what they claim to be u.s. hegemony , both regionally and worldwide .

both are wary of the u.s. military presence in asia and often criticize u.s. efforts to upgrade the united states' defense capabilities with its treaty allies , japan and south korea .

both hold vetoes on the unsc and often work together to adjust or oppose unsc resolutions that are supported by western countries .

both were unnerved by a series of "color revolutions" worldwide in which citizen demonstrations brought down or starkly challenged authoritarian governments , and both are suspicious of u.s. involvement in these movements .

when chinese president xi jinping held a military parade in september 2015 to commemorate the 70 th anniversary of the victory over japan in world war ii , putin appeared prominently beside xi in tiananmen square , just as xi did for putin in commemorating the victory over nazi germany in moscow earlier that year .

scholars point to putin's personal interest in cultivating a friendship with xi to strengthen the bilateral relationship .

experts have also advanced arguments that both capitals , driven in part by national identity factors , have supported each other in international disputes and intentionally minimized differences in their approach to foreign policy .

relations have been particularly robust since xi took power in 2012 .

in 2013 , xi made russia his first overseas trip as president .

since then , the two presidents have conducted a series of high - profile visits and announced similarly high - profile agreements , often apparently calibrated to make a statement to the united states and other western countries .

in 2014 , as western powers adopted sanctions on russia in retaliation for the ukraine intervention , china and russia held a summit and announced a $400 billion natural gas deal , along with over 40 other economic cooperation agreements .

shortly after the summit , both leaders attended the opening of bilateral naval exercises in the east china sea near the disputed islands that both china and japan claim .

russia's intervention in ukraine shaped relations with china today .

on the one hand , it drove closer cooperation and a strong show of solidarity as western nations imposed sanctions and attempted to isolate putin diplomatically .

however , it also created an imbalance in the relationship , as moscow was suddenly frozen out of european foreign policy and in need of beijing's support .

with china enjoying a boost in its leverage , it was able to derive more concessions from russia , including in negotiations on energy deals .

thus , while the ukraine crisis intensified an already warming relationship , it also may have introduced an asymmetry in relations .

russia , still smarting from losing its superpower status , may not be comfortable playing the role of junior partner to its former rival china .

as russia's economic and diplomatic strength have withered , china has not remained singularly driven by what one journalist calls "political sympathy" as it pursues its own national interests .

while russia is driven closer to china by economic necessity , china has more options .

further , beijing has appeared to be uneasy with russia's invasion of ukraine , as it is at odds with china's official statements concerning respect for the sovereignty , independence , and territorial integrity of other nations .

china has maintained a policy that many analysts call "benevolent neutrality" toward the ukraine crisis , carefully treading the line by stating its respect for ukraine's sovereignty but noting that it "takes into consideration the complicated historical background and realistic factors of the crimea issue. .

however , any future russian military adventurism could prompt beijing to consider distancing itself from moscow .

this would be particularly true if china begins to assess that russian actions are destabilizing regions to the detriment of chinese interests .

russia's overtures to the east appear to have gained the most traction in japan .

despite joining japan's g7 partners in imposing sanctions on russia , prime minister shinzo abe has aggressively pursued better relations with moscow .

in may 2016 , abe visited putin in sochi , russia , to discuss the two countries' lingering territorial dispute ( see " japan - russia territorial dispute " section ) and pledge increased economic engagement .

the two leaders made plans to meet again at the eastern economic summit in vladivostok in september 2016 , with a possible visit by putin to japan later in the year .

in mid - 2016 , the moscow - tokyo relationship appeared vibrant to many observers .

when abe returned to the premiership in 2012 , after an earlier one - year term as prime minister in 2006-2007 , he moved to reinvigorate japan's diplomacy .

among his targets was russia , with which japan has never signed a peace treaty formalizing the end of world war ii .

abe met putin five times in his first year in office , explicitly aiming to resolve the territorial dispute over four islands in the kuril chain , known in japan as the northern territories , which are now under russian administrative control .

overall relations were on the upswing: bilateral trade in 2013 rose to a record $34.8 billion , the ministers of defense and foreign affairs held "2+2" talks , and the two governments announced new plans on energy cooperation .

as many western powers distanced themselves from russia in part because of putin's anti - gay comments and policies , abe was among the most high - profile leaders at the 2014 winter olympics opening ceremony in sochi , russia .

on its face , a russia - japan partnership makes sense .

japan , particularly under abe , faces skepticism from neighbors who distrust japan and see any japanese move to advance its security role in the region as a reversion to militarism .

after shutting down its nuclear power generation capacity following the march 2011 meltdown of the fukushima daiichi nuclear power plant , japan is also in need of more energy imports ; the russian far east offers an abundance of fossil fuels practically next door .

shared values with the west and a commitment to democracy aside , japanese leaders appear to take the position that russian military moves in eastern europe do not present a direct security threat to japan .

russia wants customers for its natural resources and has for years promised to become a more engaged pacific power .

putin , too , needs friends: now somewhat of an international pariah for his aggression in the crimea , crackdown on civil liberties at home , and jingoistic rhetoric , his power is challenged by plummeting energy prices and economic sanctions .

at the center of both countries' strategic concerns is china's massive economic and geopolitical presence .

for japan , lessening its northern territorial vulnerabilities would allow it to focus on the more acute problem of china's intrusions and claims in the disputed senkaku islands ( known as diaoyu in china and diaoyutai in taiwan ) as well as free up military and coast guard assets currently stationed in the north .

russian bombers and patrol planes routinely fly through japan's northern air space , prompting japan to scramble fighter jets in response .

in 2015 , such scrambles increased sharply to levels not seen since the cold war .

both russia and japan may be eager to exploit each other in relation to concerns about china's increasing maritime presence in the pacific .

if an agreement on the kuriles is accompanied by a consensus between japan and russia to cooperate at the strategic level , the reasoning goes , abe and putin could tilt the balance of regional relations in their favor , at the expense of china .

russia's interest in the divided korean peninsula is less easily defined and has not occupied as central a role in its foreign policy as have its relations with china .

as russia has refocused its attention on east asia , moscow's relations with the koreas have developed more fully and , in particular , russian views on a potential reunification of korea have come into sharper relief .

russia's desire to develop its natural resources and sell them to the asian market could be strengthened by land access through the koreas , leading one russian analyst to call russian involvement in the peninsula as "the key to asia. .

russia has a pragmatic interest in stability and peace between the two koreas , not least because of its land border with north korea .

on the other hand , the division between north and south offers moscow an opportunity to pressure south korea using russia's ties to the north .

russian leaders have exploited both of these positions to maximize its leverage in the region .

in the past , some analysts have posited that reunification may not threaten russia's interests compared to the potentially seismic geopolitical implications for the united states , japan , and china .

but since it has begun to execute its "look east" strategy , moscow appears to have prioritized the maintenance of the status quo situation based on the fear that any change could lead to a reduction in russian influence .

russian analysts generally emphasize economic and infrastructure projects as a first step in inter - korean cooperation , and some analysts suggest that eventually russia may favor peaceful unification under a possible federation system .

russian officials have stated that they opposed joint defensive exercises between the united states and south korea and share concerns with china about u.s. troop presence on its borders under a u.s. - allied unified korea .

for many years russia played a small , occasionally productive role in the now - dormant six - party talks .

moscow now appears to be amplifying its role as a regional actor in dealing with north korean provocations .

apparently following china's lead , russia has insisted that north korea commit to denuclearization and has joined the unsc resolutions that condemn pyongyang's repeated nuclear weapon and missile tests .

china and russia have often both watered down some of the toughest sanctions proposed by the unsc , but have not blocked them and have approved increasingly critical language to describe north korea's actions .

the arctic region is emerging as new arena of strategic competition .

due to climate change and the development of ice breakers , the northern sea route has become passable year - round .

this passage is the shortest route between the atlantic and pacific and can decrease the travel time by sea between europe and asia by 12 days .

for japan , use of this route , particularly for energy imports , would provide an alternative to the more risky and crowded southern route .

in 2015 , the russian government announced a plan to increase the capacity of the northern sea route 20-fold in the next 15 years by developing the necessary infrastructure , including emergency services and escort vessels .

analysts caution , however , that increased traffic on the northern passage could also encourage the militarization of the area as countries move to protect their commercial interests .

the past five years have revealed undercurrents of military competition .

as russia has re - opened shuttered soviet - era military bases and moved to build up its infrastructure in the arctic , china has also made its first forays into the region .

after sending its first icebreaker into the arctic in 2012 , china is now building another .

 ( the united states also has 2 operational icebreakers ; russia has 41. ) .

after china sent its first icebreaker on its maiden voyage , russia launched military exercises as the chinese vessel neared sakhalin .

in 2013 , chinese naval warships appeared in the sea of okhotsk , setting off massive land and sea military exercises by russia in response , personally supervised by putin .

in march 2015 , russia held large - scale military exercises involving 45,000 troops and submarines in its strategic nuclear arsenal .

russia also plans to develop a new army brigade around its energy projects on the yamal peninsula .

as president obama visited alaska in september 2015 , five chinese navy ships were spotted in international waters in the bering sea .

the arctic council is an international forum devoted to monitoring and discussing issues in the region .

the united states , russia , canada , and several scandinavian countries are permanent members , while japan , china , and south korea are among the 12 observer nations .

russia was vocal in support of japan's application for observer status in 2009 , but not supportive of china's application .

japan's interest in russia's $27 billion yamal liquefied natural gas ( lng ) development project may increase its attention to the arctic region .

although this suggests that japan and russia could view the arctic as a cooperative arena for energy trade , the proximity of the disputed northern territories to the arctic northern route , particularly given russia's continued military buildup on the islands , points to an area of potential tension in the relationship .

russia's massive but underdeveloped energy reserves constitute a large part of the appeal of russia for energy - hungry asian nations , and lend economic ballast to the push to develop closer diplomatic relations .

although russia already exports oil and gas to japan , china , and south korea , russian oil and gas make up a small percentage of the energy supply for these three states that depend heavily on fossil fuel imports .

all three nations depend heavily on energy imports from the middle east , a region where political turmoil often threatens access and creates volatility in prices , although china has worked to diversify its energy suppliers and has growing energy ties with central asia and other regions , too .

for seoul , tokyo , and beijing , access to oil and gas supplies from russia could offer an additional , stable source of energy imports .

russia , too , has increased its focus on developing these markets .

in february 2014 , the russian ministry of energy released an updated energy strategy that sharply raised its targets for exports to the asia - pacific region as a percentage of total energy trade , from 27% in its 2009 strategy , to 34% , with a particular jump in natural gas exports .

however , the drive to develop robust energy partnerships with russia has diminished in the past few years due to several factors .

some asian customers see the potential for availability of large quantities of natural gas imports from the united states , and the dramatic decline in energy prices has reduced the appetite for costly new development projects in russia's far east .

moreover , private firms are reluctant to invest in russia's market because of the kremlin's assertion of control over energy companies in russia and a history of failed deals .

more recently , the imposition of sanctions by western countries has limited access to capital markets and technology for major infrastructure development , such as lng terminals .

asian companies also complain that moscow has a tendency to play different countries off one another in bidding for upstream projects , creating another layer of political risk .

the competition becomes even more fraught when dealing with pipeline projects because the supply is directed to only one destination .

this creates a stable source for the buyer but also provides more leverage to the supplier .

russia may consider the inflexibility of pipelines to be a risk factor when evaluating long - term commitments .

for members of congress , russia's effort to develop stronger economic and security ties with the countries of northeast asia may be important because of the potentially significant impact on global geopolitics .

in conducting oversight of foreign policy , congress may request that the executive branch keep relevant committees closely informed of how tokyo , beijing , seoul , and pyongyang are responding to moscow's overtures .

in considering issues such as the north korean nuclear problem , maritime challenges in the pacific , global energy policy and politics , or the u.s. rebalance to asia , congress may give additional weight to how russian involvement affects u.s. interests .

russia's "turn to the east" could impact several other areas that are of interest to congress .

one is the efficacy of u.s. sanctions policy on russia given the lighter sanctions imposed on russia by japan and south korea and china's attempt to broaden its economic cooperation with russia .

another area that has been the subject of increased congressional interest is the development of the policy in the arctic ; chinese and russian competition in that region could affect whether additional u.s. military assets are necessary or desirable .

congress may also reconsider how enhanced russian and chinese cooperation at the united nations could impact u.s. global interests .

measures that congress could consider include: additional hearings by the senate foreign relations committee , house foreign affairs committee , senate armed services committee , or house armed services committee to assess how russia's efforts to upgrade relations with china , particularly its increase in military - to - military contacts , affect the u.s. security position in the asia - pacific .

formal requirements that the departments of defense and state include in their reporting to congress assessments of how russia is developing its relations with china , japan , and the korean peninsula .

references in the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) to russian activities that may alter the geopolitical environment in the asia pacific .

assessment of how existing sanctions on russia are affected by u.s. allies' compliance with g - 7 sanctions associated with the ukraine crisis .

specifically , congress may examine whether japan and south korea should strengthen restrictions on trade with russia and how the u.s. state department prioritizes this issue in relations with seoul and tokyo .

hearings , reporting requirements , and possible legislation on the u.s. position in the arctic region and how changing security relations among northeast asia countries affect the u.s. presence and resources in the arctic .

after russia annexed crimea in march 2014 , international condemnation was swift and widespread .

at the united nations , 100 countries voted for a resolution that supported ukraine's territorial integrity and labeled the referendum invalid .

russia was suspended from the g8 , and in april 2014 the remaining g7 members imposed sanctions on russia .

among the asian powers , only japan and south korea joined the western countries in voting for the u.n. resolution , with only japan imposing sanctions .

tokyo has imposed a number of sanctions on moscow , but they have been relatively weak compared to the ones implemented by other western nations .

notably , japan has not imposed any energy - sector - related sanctions .

tokyo has stated that it will not hold talks on the northern territories until the situation in ukraine is more fully resolved .

abe also attempted to use russia's annexation of crimea to draw the international community's attention to china by arguing that beijing might make similar moves with regard to the diaoyu / senkaku islands .

south korea's response was likely tied to seoul's desire to obtain moscow's cooperation on north korea .

south korea refused to recognize russia's annexation and voted "yes" for the u.n. resolution on ukraine's territorial integrity , but chose not to impose any sanctions on moscow .

china abstained from the u.n. vote and did not impose sanctions .

china's response is motivated by beijing's discomfort with the notion of states asserting independence through referendums as in the case of crimea , and its stated ideological opposition to sanctions .

china expressed discomfort with regard to russia's annexation of crimea , stating that "china always respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states .

the crimean crisis should be resolved politically under the frameworks of law and order. .

at the same time , china has noted crimea's particular importance to russia .

while stating its clear opposition against independence through referendums , beijing has decided to treat the crimea case as an exception , perhaps seeing some parallels to china's own claims over taiwan .

likely in a bid to seek more international partners and escape isolation , north korea has unequivocally supported russia's position .

north korea was one of only 11 countries to vote "no" on the u.n. resolution affirming ukraine's territorial integrity .

the kim regime also stated that russia's annexation of crimea was "fully justified. .

northeast asian responses to russia's annexation of crimea are summarized as follows .

