on march 28 , 2017 , president trump issued executive order 13783 , which aims to promote the development or use of domestically produced energy resources .

among its specific provisions , the order rescinded the obama administration's "climate action plan" ( cap ) .

the cap aimed to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) and other greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) , as well as to encourage adaptation to a changing climate .

one of the interagency initiatives within the cap , the "strategy to reduce methane emissions" ( methane strategy ) , focused on the control of methane emissions , a short - lived climate pollutant with a global warming potential of more than 25 times co 2 .

president trump's order also requires agencies to review their existing regulations and "appropriately suspend , revise , or rescind those that unduly burden" domestic energy production and use .

the order specifically requires the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to review the revised volatile organic compounds ( vocs ) and ghg ( namely methane ) emission standards for new , modified , and reconstructed equipment , processes , and activities of the oil and natural gas sector issued by the obama administration in june 2016 .

epa issued these emission standards pursuant to section 111 of the clean air act ( caa ) and the methane strategy .

upon review of the standards and several administrative petitions for reconsideration , epa has now decided to reconsider certain requirements in the emissions standards for the oil and natural gas sector .

although the methane emission standards and guidelines for new and existing municipal solid waste ( msw ) landfills are not specifically mentioned in executive order 13783 , epa has also reviewed and is currently reconsidering several requirements of the msw landfill emission standards and guidelines that the obama administration updated in august 2016 .

epa's review of the oil and natural gas sector and landfill methane rules has influenced several judicial challenges to the obama - era rules .

the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c .

circuit ) granted epa's requests to pause the judicial challenges to allow epa to complete its review of the regulations .

in addition , epa has attempted to stay the requirements that are being reconsidered by the agency , but courts have restricted the agency's ability to stay such requirements .

this report examines the statutory authority for issuing the various methane regulations , legal challenges to the standards , and legal issues related to the reconsideration and stay of these regulations .

the report begins by providing a general legal background of caa section 111 and section 307 requirements for reconsidering rules , before addressing the oil and natural gas sector rules and the msw landfill methane rules .

landfills emit gas that contains methane , carbon dioxide , and more than 100 different nonmethane organic compounds ( nmocs ) , such as vinyl chloride , toluene , and benzene .

in 1996 , epa listed municipal solid waste ( msw ) landfills as a caa section 111 category of stationary sources that causes or contributes significantly to air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

in addition to listing msw landfills as a source category , epa , at that same time , issued nspss for new , modified , and reconstructed msw landfills pursuant to section 111 ( b ) and emission guidelines for existing landfills pursuant to section 111 ( d ) to address nmocs and methane emissions .

in response to a consent decree resolving a lawsuit and the obama administration's methane strategy , in 2014 epa proposed updates to the 1996 msw landfill nspss and sought public comments on whether epa should update the companion emission guidelines for existing landfills .

over 20 years after the original nspss and emission guidelines were issued , epa published on august 29 , 2016 , its updated nspss to reduce landfill gas emissions from msw landfills built , modified , or reconstructed after july 17 , 2014 .

the agency also revised the 1996 emission guidelines for existing landfills operating prior to that date .

the updated nspss aimed to further decrease methane emissions from msw landfills .

the revised nspss maintained the current design capacity applicability threshold for new or modified landfills at 2.5 million metric tons ( mmt ) of design capacity ( or 2.5 million cubic meters of waste ) .

the updated nspss lowered the emission threshold that triggers requirements to capture landfill gas emissions ( including methane ) from the current 50 metric tons of nmocs per year to 34 metric tons .

under the rule , epa would have required that a gas collection control system be installed and operational within 30 months after landfill gas emissions reach 34 metric tons of nmocs or more per year .

the rule also updated monitoring requirements ; expanded approved uses for treated landfill gas ; and included other clarifications and updated definitions .

according to an agency fact sheet , 115 new , modified , or reconstructed landfills would be subject to the emission control requirements of the revised standards by 2025 .

similar to the revised nspss , the revised emission guidelines for  existing  landfills built prior to july 17 , 2014 , would have required active landfills that emit more than 34 metric tons of nmocs annually to install landfill gas collection and control systems .

closed landfills would remain subject to the 1996 threshold of 50 metric tons per year when determining when controls must be installed or can be removed .

as a result of the lower threshold for active landfills , epa estimated that the emission control requirements will apply to 731 existing open and closed landfills , as compared to 638 facilities currently subject to the 1996 emission control requirements .

both rules became effective on october 28 , 2016 and remain in effect unless epa finalizes a stay or revises the rules .

in may 2017 , epa granted administrative petitions for reconsideration of several requirements in the revised and updated msw landfill nspss and emission guidelines based on the criteria under caa section 307 ( d ) ( 7 ) ( b ) .

under the trump administration , epa found that the petitioners "demonstrated that it was impractical to raise the objection during the period for public comment" on a number of issues , including tier 4 surface emissions monitoring .

the 2016 msw landfill nspss and emission guidelines added tier 4 surface emissions monitoring procedures that would allow certain landfills that would have exceeded the applicability threshold for emission control requirements using other approved modeling procedures ( i.e. , tiers 1 and 2 ) to use , as an alternative , surface monitoring to determine applicability .

a landfill that demonstrates that surface emissions are below 500 parts per million for four consecutive quarters using tier 4 monitoring procedures would not be required to install emissions control technology even if tiers 1 or 2 modeling calculations indicated that the landfill exceeded the applicability threshold .

epa highlighted the petitioners' objection to the tier 4 surface emission monitoring as meeting the section 307 ( d ) ( 7 ) ( b ) criteria for reconsideration .

epa explained that the final rule imposed restrictions on the use of the optional tier 4 surface emissions monitoring method that were not included in the proposed rule and were "added without the benefit of public comment. .

epa also determined that the objection to the tier 4 monitoring limitations were of central relevance to the rule because they reduced "flexibility" to use the optional monitoring method .

based on these determinations , epa has convened an administrative reconsideration proceeding to address the issues and objections raised by the petitioners .

as part of the reconsideration proceeding , epa plans to prepare a notice of proposed rulemaking that will provide the petitioners and the public an opportunity to comment on the rule requirements and associated issues identified above .

in addition to granting reconsideration of the issues discussed above , epa stayed for three months the effectiveness of both msw landfills nspss and emission guidelines , in their entirety , starting from may 31 until august 29 , 2017 , pursuant to its authority under section 307 ( d ) ( 7 ) ( b ) .

epa reasoned that staying all requirements of the rules was necessary because the tier 4 monitoring provisions in the two rules are "integral to how the rules function as a whole. .

because this three - month stay expired on august 29 , 2017 , the 2016 rules are currently in effect during the reconsideration process .

at this time , epa has not formally proposed a longer stay of the rules or initiated the public comment period for issues under reconsideration .

similar to their challenge to the 2016 oil and gas nspss stay , environmental groups filed a petition to review and a motion to vacate the three - month stay of the msw landfills nspss and emission guidelines in the d.c .

circuit .

although the court denied the petitioners' motion to vacate the stay , the court is moving forward with briefing of the case and has asked the parties to address standing and mootness now that the three - month stay has expired .

the final briefs in the case are due on february 26 , 2018 .

the petitioners' litigation issues mirror those raised in the challenge to the 2016 oil and gas nspss stay , arguing that epa exceeded its authority under section 307 ( d ) ( 7 ) ( b ) because the agency failed to meet preconditions for mandatory reconsideration .

the petitioners also claim that the stay is arbitrary and capricious because the stay of both regulations in their entirety is "overbroad" relative to the "narrow" issues under reconsiderations .

although epa is reconsidering the 2016 msw landfills emission guidelines , the guidelines themselves are being challenged in court .

prior to the start of the trump administration , industry trade associations and waste management and recycling companies challenged epa's 2016 revised emission guidelines for existing msw landfills in the d.c .

circuit .

on june 14 , 2017 , the court granted epa's request to hold the case in abeyance while the agency reviews and reconsiders the rule .

although the litigation is on hold , the petitioners have submitted preliminary statements of issues that challenge epa's authority to revise emission guidelines .

among the various legal arguments raised , petitioners make a unique and potentially far - reaching challenge to epa's authority to revise emission guidelines issued under section 111 ( d ) of the caa .

petitioners challenging the landfill emission guidelines question whether epa has the authority to revise the 1996 emission guidelines for existing msw landfills under caa section 111 ( d ) .

the core of the legal argument is whether section 111 ( d ) implicitly allows epa to revise and update emission standards .

pursuant to caa section 111 ( b ) , epa is required to "at least every 8 years review and , if appropriate , revise" nspss for new , modified , and reconstructed sources .

however , section 111 ( d ) does not include a similar mandated review period for emission guidelines for existing sources .

epa's implementing regulations for section 111 ( d ) emission guidelines only address revisions to the agency's determination regarding adverse public health effects that may alter compliance times under the guidelines and require states to make corresponding revisions to their state plans .

under the obama administration , epa asserted in the 2016 landfill emission guidelines' preamble that the agency "is not statutorily obligated to conduct a review of the emission guidelines , but has the discretionary authority to do so when circumstances indicate that it is appropriate. .

epa reasoned that this is a permissible interpretation of the caa , and "is consistent with the gap filling nature of section 111 ( d ) " to regulate air pollutants and sources not addressed in other sections of the caa .

epa argued that it would be "illogical" for the agency to be precluded from requiring existing sources to update air pollution controls when the bser will change over time as these sources continue to operate for decades .

in support of this position , epa highlighted jurisprudence that has recognized the power of regulatory agencies to reassess and revise promulgated rules even without an express statutory mandate to make such a revision .

the supreme court , for example , has stated that "[r]egulatory agencies do not establish rules of conduct to last forever ; they are supposed , within the limits of the law and of fair and prudent administration , to adapt their rules and practices to the nation's needs in a volatile , changing economy. .

epa , under the trump administration , is making a similar argument to support delaying and extending the compliance timelines for the 2016 oil and gas nspss .

the agency contends that it has the "inherent authority to reconsider past decisions and to revise , replace , or repeal a decision to the extent permitted by law and supported by a reasoned explanation. .

epa's authority to revise section 111 ( d ) emission guidelines has not been questioned previously because this was the agency's first attempt to do so .

some argue in comments on the proposed emission guidelines that congress's explicit mandate authorizing epa to review and potentially revise section 111 ( b ) nspss for new , modified , and reconstructed every eight years demonstrates that congress knew how to provide for such review and revision and intentionally did not provide a similar provision with respect to section 111 ( d ) emission guidelines .

one commentator has pointed out that the supreme court has held that "where congress includes particular language in one section of a statute but omits it in another section of the same act , it is generally presumed that congress acts intentionally and purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion. .

in contrast , epa argued in the revised emission guidelines that "[h]ad congress intended to preclude the epa from updating the emission guidelines to reflect changes , it would surely have specifically said so , something it did not do. .

the legislative history of caa section 111 does not discuss the eight - year review for nspss under section 111 ( b ) or review of emission guidelines under section 111 ( d ) .

the history does provide some discussion regarding the need for epa to look to currently available and evolving techniques in determining what constitutes the bser that has been adequately demonstrated for standards of performance and emission guidelines .

for example , when amending the caa in 1970 , the senate public works committee stated that "[t]he performance standards should be met through application of the latest available emission control technology or through other means of preventing or controlling air pollution. .

the committee also stated that "standards of performance are not static," and that they "should provide an incentive for industries to work toward constant improvement in techniques for preventing and controlling emissions from stationary sources. .

in a report regarding the 1977 caa amendments , the senate environment and public works committee reiterated that "[i]n passing the clean air amendments of 1970 , the congress for the first time imposed a requirement for specified levels of control technology... .

this requirement sought to assure the use of available technology and to stimulate the development of new technology. .

this history appears to suggest that epa can broadly review and revise the "standards of performance," a term of art that applies to both section 111 ( b ) nspss and section 111 ( d ) emission guidelines , to ensure that the standards reflect the improvement of systems of emission reduction .

in addition , a reference to section 110 procedures in section 111 ( d ) raises questions as to whether congress intended for epa to revise emission guidelines and state plans in a similar manner as section 110 .

specifically , section 111 ( d ) requires epa to "prescribe regulations which shall establish a procedure similar to that provided by section 110 under which each state shall submit to the [epa] administrator a plan which ... establishes standards of performance for any existing source for any air pollutant. .

in turn , caa section 110 requires states to adopt and submit to epa for approval state implementation plans ( sips ) that provide for the "implementation , maintenance , and enforcement" of naaqs promulgated by epa under caa section 109 .

epa is required to review the naaqs every five years .

if epa decides to revise the naaqs , states are required to revise their sips to implement and enforce the revised naaqs .

it could be argued that this regulatory scheme is similar to section 111 ( d ) because emission guidelines are implemented through state plans .

once epa sets guidelines for standards of performance for existing sources under section 111 ( d ) , states are required to submit to epa for approval a plan to implement and enforce the standards of performance for existing sources .

therefore , it could be argued that in referencing section 110 in section 111 ( d ) , congress may have intended to allow epa to revise section 111 ( d ) guidelines and state plans in the same manner that naaqs and sips are allowed to be revised in section 109 and section 110 , respectively .

however , section 110 and 111 ( d ) are not completely analogous .

in both cases , state plan revisions are necessary when the standards are revised because the state is the primary implementation and enforcement authority ; but unlike section 111 ( d ) , section 110 revisions are triggered through a statutorily mandated five - year review under section 109 .

in contrast , congress did not mandate a review and revision cycle for section 111 ( d ) emission guidelines for existing sources .

if the case moves forward , a ruling upholding epa's implicit authority to review and revise section 111 ( d ) guidelines could support future epa review and revision of other section 111 ( d ) emission guidelines to require additional emission reductions for existing sources based on a new analysis of the bser .

the litigation challenging the substantive requirements of the msw landfill emission guidelines is currently on hold pending epa's review and reconsideration .

see table 2 below for the current status of the landfill methane rules .

