o ne of the more controversial tax laws enacted in recent years is the foreign account tax compliance act ( fatca ) .

fatca is intended to curb u.s. tax evasion occurring through the use of offshore accounts .

while the law was enacted in 2010 with a 2013 effective date , the irs delayed fatca's implementation for several years in order to give entities time to comply .

the law is now fully in effect .

key among fatca's provisions is the requirement that foreign financial institutions ( ffis ) report information on their u.s. account holders to the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

in order to implement this requirement , the united states has entered into bilateral agreements with numerous countries .

under some of these agreements , ffis report the information to their home country , which then provides the information to the irs .

for those ffis that are not covered by such an agreement , fatca generally requires they report the information directly to the irs .

this report provides an overview of the ffi reporting requirements and examines the role of the intergovernmental agreements ( igas ) in implementing them .

the report then discusses the confidentiality protections provided to the information reported by ffis and litigation in which plaintiffs have raised concerns about privacy and the use of igas .

it ends with a summary of fatca legislation introduced in the 114 th congress .

for further discussion of fatca , as well as the related requirements known as foreign bank account reporting ( fbar ) , see crs report r43444 , reporting foreign financial assets under titles 26 and 31: fatca and fbar .

fatca generally requires that ffis enter into agreements with the irs under which the ffis agree to report information about their u.s. account holders and comply with other requirements .

the financial institutions subject to these requirements include foreign banks , investment funds , hedge funds , private equity funds , broker - dealers , and certain types of insurance companies .

the requirements apply to the depository and custodial accounts maintained by the ffi , as well as equity and debt interests in the ffi ( except publicly traded interests ) .

ffis that fail to comply will have tax withheld at a rate of 30% on many payments made to them from u.s. sources , including interest and dividends .

the withholding provision's relatively high rate and broad reach is significant because , as one commentator has explained , "[f]rom a practical perspective and due to the importance of u.s. banks to the global financial community , most foreign banks must comply or they may be effectively prevented from conducting business in many circumstances. .

the reporting and withholding requirements are summarized in table 1 .

the united states has entered into bilateral intergovernmental agreements ( igas ) with numerous countries in order to implement the above ffi reporting requirements .

in general , an ffi that is resident in , or organized under the laws of , a country that has entered into an iga will be deemed to comply with fatca's requirements so long as the terms of the agreement are met .

this section examines the igas .

some have expressed concerns about the privacy of the information that ffis are required to collect and report under fatca .

this section discusses the confidentiality protections contained in fatca and the igas .

while some argue that the use of igas may have positive outcomes , including reduced compliance costs for foreign entities and avoidance of international conflict of law issues , others have taken issue with them .

concerns about igas are illustrated in two lawsuits — one in the united states and one in canada .

these are discussed below .

several bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress that would amend or otherwise address fatca .

first , s. 663 , whose stated purpose is "[t]o repeal the violation of sovereign nations' laws and privacy matters," would repeal many of fatca's provisions , including the ffi reporting and withholding requirements .

the stop tax haven abuse act ( h.r .

297 and s. 174 ) includes a provision with the stated purpose of "strengthening" fatca .

among other things , the bill provision would expand the reporting requirement for passive foreign investment companies ; expand the definition of "financial account" to include transaction accounts ; expressly include entities engaged in investing in derivatives and swaps in the definition of "financial institution" ; and include beneficial owners within the definition of "substantial u.s .

owner. .

the provision would also make it easier for information to be disclosed in certain circumstances .

finally , the commission on americans living abroad act ( h.r .

3078 ) would establish a commission to study how federal laws and policies , including fatca , affect u.s. citizens living in foreign countries .

the countries that have igas in effect — either because the iga is actually in force or because the country is treated as such — are listed in table a - 1 .

as discussed above , treasury and the irs treat certain countries as having an iga in effect even though the country has not taken all the steps necessary to actually bring the agreement into force under two circumstances: ( 1 ) it has signed an iga and is taking steps to bring it into force within a reasonable time ; or ( 2 ) it has reached an agreement in substance with the united states on the terms of an iga prior to november 30 , 2014 , and it continues to demonstrate intent to sign the iga as soon as possible .

in addition to providing such status information for each country , table a - 1 also notes whether each country uses a model 1 or model 2 iga and provides relevant dates .

