t he family and medical leave act of 1993 ( fmla ; p.l .

103-3 , as amended ) entitles eligible employ ees to unpaid , job - protected leave for certain family and medical needs , with continuation of group health plan benefits .

the 114 th congress considered several bills to amend the fmla .

these proposals sought to create new entitlements ( i.e. , provide additional leave time ) ; expand categories of permissible leave by creating new fmla - qualifying uses of leave and by expanding the circumstances under which existing leave categories may be used ; and modify employee eligibility requirements , generally and for specific worker groups .

the fmla requires that covered employers grant up to 12 workweeks of leave in a 12-month period to eligible employees for one or more of the following reasons: the birth and care of the employee's newborn child , provided that leave is taken within 12 months of the child's birth ; the placement of an adopted or fostered child with the employee , provided that leave is taken within 12 months of the child's placement ; to care for a spouse , child ( generally a minor child ) , or parent with a serious health condition ; the employee's own serious health condition that renders the employee unable to perform the essential functions of his or her job ; and qualified military exigencies if the employee's spouse , child , or parent is a covered military member on covered active duty .

in addition , the act provides up to 26 workweeks of leave in a single 12-month period to eligible employees for the care of a covered military servicemember ( including certain veterans ) with a serious injury or illness that was sustained or aggravated in the line of duty while on active duty .

in general , to be eligible for fmla leave , an employee must work for a covered employer ; have 1,250 hours of service in the 12 months prior to the start of leave ; work at a location where the employer has 50 or more employees within 75 miles of the worksite ; and have worked for the employer for 12 months .

private - sector employers are covered by the act if they engaged in commerce and had 50 or more employees for 20 weeks in the current or last calendar year .

the fmla also applies to public agencies ( i.e. , federal , state , and local governments ) , which are covered employers regardless of their staffing levels in the previous or current calendar year .

however , public - sector employees must still meet the worksite coverage requirement ( i.e. , 50 employees within 75 miles of the worksite ) to be eligible for fmla leave .

since its passage in 1993 , the fmla has been amended four times to cover certain legislative branch employees ( p.l .

104-1 ) ; create and then modify a new entitlement for military family leave ( p.l .

110-181 and p.l .

111-84 , respectively ) ; and modify the hours - of - service eligibility requirement for airline flight crew ( p.l .

111-119 ) .

table 1 summarizes the act's legislative history .

several bills were introduced in the 114 th congress to amend the fmla .

these proposals sought to create new entitlements ( i.e. , provide additional leave time ) , expand categories of permissible leave by creating new fmla - qualifying uses of leave or expanding the circumstances under which existing leave categories may be used , and modify employee eligibility requirements .

some proposals would have amended the act in multiple areas ; bill - by - bill summaries are in table a - 1 .

currently , eligible employees are entitled to 12 workweeks of fmla leave in a 12-month period to address certain family and medical needs and 26 workweeks in a single 12-month period to provide care to a seriously ill or injured servicemember .

two bills would have created an additional entitlement to leave for similar purposes , with some differences: parental involvement and family wellness leave .

h.r .

5518 would , among other things , have entitled eligible employees to up to four hours of leave during any 30-day period , with a maximum of 24 hours during any 12-month period to ( 1 ) participate in or attend a school conference or an activity that is sponsored by a school or community organization attended by the employee's child or grandchild , or ( 2 ) to attend to the employee's own routine medical care needs ( including appointments ) or those of a spouse , minor child , or grandchild , or the general care needs of an "elderly relative. .

parental involvement leave .

h.r .

5535 would have entitled eligible employees to up to eight hours of leave during any 30-day period , with a maximum of 48 hours during any 12-month period , to participate in or attend a school conference or an activity that is sponsored by a school or community organization attended by the employee's child or grandchild .

in both cases , employees would be required to notify employers of their intention to use such leave at least seven days in advance of the leave , where possible .

this 7-day notice requirement is shorter than the 30-day notice required , where possible , for a foreseeable need to use fmla leave for the arrival of a new child , a serious health condition , or the serious injury or illness of a servicemember .

under current law , eligible employees may use fmla leave to care for and bond with a new child , for a serious health condition that renders the employee unable to perform at least one essential function of his or her job , to provide care to a close family member with a serious health condition , and for certain military family needs .

the 114 th congress considered several proposals to expand this set of qualifying uses of fmla leave by ( 1 ) creating new leave categories , and ( 2 ) broadening the circumstances under which employees may use existing leave categories .

bills introduced in the 114 th congress would have allowed employees to use the existing fmla leave entitlement for bereavement , needs related to domestic violence experienced by the employee or a close family member , family involvement , and medical needs related to certain service - connected disabilities for veterans .

the following proposals would have permitted eligible employees to use the existing fmla leave entitlement for the death of a close family member ( or members ) : s. 1302 / h.r .

2260 would have allowed employees to use their 12-week entitlements for the death of a son or daughter .

s. 473 would have allowed employees to use their 12-week entitlements for the death of a son or daughter ( of any age ) , parent , or sibling .

the bill would not have allowed employees to use fmla for the death of a spouse .

s. 473 would have further allowed employees to use the existing 12-workweek entitlement to address medical , legal , and other needs related to domestic violence experienced by the employee or the employee's child ( including an adult child ) or parent .

s. 473 would have granted employees limited use of the existing 12-workweek leave entitlement for family involvement , which the bill defined as leave to ( 1 ) participate in school - related activities or school - sponsored extracurricular activities for a son or daughter , where school refers to an elementary or secondary school , head start program , or a licensed child care facility ; or ( 2 ) provide transportation to or attend a medical or dental appointment for a spouse , child of any age , or a parent .

employees would be able to use family involvement leave for up to 24 hours in a 12-month period .

the bills discussed in the " proposals to create new fmla leave entitlements " section of this report would have created an additional entitlement to leave for similar family involvement purposes .

h.r .

5165 would have permitted employees to use the current 12 - workweek entitlement for " hospital care or medical services as a veteran for a service - connected disability" that is currently rated at 30% or for which the veteran retired from the armed forces by reason of service - connected disability and which was rated at 30% or higher at the time of retirement .

several proposals sought to expand employees' options for using the current set of fmla - qualifying uses of leave by either ( 1 ) expanding the set of relationships for which an employee may use family leave or ( 2 ) amending definitions related to the current entitlement .

under current law , an employee may use fmla leave to assist or provide care to the following sets of family members: leave for the arrival of a new son or daughter by birth or placement .

a son or daughter , as defined by the act , is a "biological , adopted , or foster child , a stepchild , a legal ward , or a child of a person standing in loco parentis , who is ( a ) under 18 years of age ; or ( b ) 18 years of age or older and incapable of self - care because of a mental or physical disability. .

leave related to a family member's serious health condition may be taken for the employee's spouse , son or daughter , or parent .

military exigency leave ( i.e. , related to the deployment of certain military members to a foreign country ) may be used in relation to a covered military member who is the employee's spouse , son or daughter , or parent .

military caregiver leave ( i.e. , care of a servicemember with a serious illness or injury ) may be used for a servicemember who is the employee's spouse , son or daughter , or parent , or for whom the employee is next of kin .

the following legislative proposals would have expanded the groups of family members for whom fmla leave may be used for caregiving purposes .

for the arrival of a new son or daughter by birth or placement ( within 12 months of arrival ) : s. 473 and h.r .

5519 would have amended the definition of son or daughter to include the child of a domestic partner ( as well as adult children ) and would therefore allow the employee to use leave for the arrival by birth or placement of a domestic partner's new child , and the placement of an adult child .

h.r .

5701 would have allowed an employee to use leave for the arrival by birth or placement of a grandchild , including the placement of an adult grandchild .

because the bill would have amended the fmla definition of son or daughter to include adult children , leave would also be permitted for the placement of an adult child .

for needs related to a family member's serious health condition: s. 473 proposed to add a domestic partner , adult child , child of a domestic partner , parent - in - law , grandparent , and sibling .

h.r .

5519 proposed to add domestic partner , adult child , child of a domestic partner , parent - in - law , grandparent , grandchild , sibling , and "any other individual related by blood or affinity whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship. .

h.r .

5701 proposed to add adult child , grandchild , and grandparent .

for military exigency leave: s. 473 proposed to add a domestic partner , adult child , child of a domestic partner , parent - in - law , grandchild , and sibling .

h.r .

5519 proposed to add domestic partner , adult child , child of a domestic partner , parent - in - law , grandchild , sibling , and "any other individual related by blood or affinity whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship. .

h.r .

5701 proposed to add adult child , grandchild , and grandparent .

for military caregiver leave: s. 473 proposed to add a domestic partner , adult child , child of a domestic partner , son - in - law , daughter - in - law , grandparent , and sibling .

h.r .

5519 proposed to add domestic partner , adult child , child of a domestic partner , son - in - law , daughter - in - law , parent - in - law , grandparent , sibling , and any covered servicemember for whom the employee is in a relationship that is "the equivalent of a family relationship. .

h.r .

5701 proposed to add adult child , grandchild , and grandparent .

the 114 th congress considered legislation that would have broadened or clarified current fmla - qualifying uses of leave by amending fmla definitions of son or daughter and serious health condition .

under current law , fmla defines son or daughter as a "biological , adopted , or foster child , a stepchild , a legal ward , or a child of a person standing in loco parentis , who is ( a ) under 18 years of age ; or ( b ) 18 years of age or older and incapable of self - care because of a mental or physical disability. .

as noted elsewhere in this report , s. 473 , h.r .

5519 , and h.r .

5701 would have amended the fmla definition of son or daughter to include children of "any age," effectively expanding current fmla - qualifying uses of leave to include adult children .

s. 473 and h.r .

5519 would also have amended the definition to include a child of a domestic partner ; likewise broadening the applicability of this leave .

the act defines serious health condition as "an illness , injury , impairment , or physical or mental condition that involves ( a ) inpatient care in a hospital , hospice , or residential medical care facility ; or ( b ) continuing treatment by a health care provider. .

neither the act nor its accompanying regulations provide an exhaustive list of conditions that meet this definition ; consequently , the determination of a serious health condition is typically treated on a case - by - case basis .

s. 2584 and h.r .

4616 would have , among other things , amend ed the act to specify that a " physical or mental condition" as referenced in the statutory definition of a serious health condition includes recovery from surgery related to organ donation .

s. 2584 and h.r .

4616 would not have provided that such recovery , on its own , constitutes a serious health condition ; statutory tests concerning inpatient care or continuing treatment by a health care provider would still need to be met .

the 114 th congress considered two proposals to amend general eligibility requirements for employees seeking to use fmla leave and two proposals to amend eligibility requirements for specific worker groups .

in general , to be eligible for fmla leave , an employee must work for a covered employer ; have at least 1,250 hours of service in the 12 months prior to the start of leave ; have worked for the employer for 12 months ; and work at a location where the employer has 50 or more employees within 75 miles of the worksite .

the 114 th congress considered two proposals to amend these general eligibility requirements for employees seeking to use fmla leave .

they are 1 .

h.r .

5518 , which would have reduce d the minimum number of employees ( of the same employer ) within 75 miles of an employee's worksite from 50 employees to 15 employees ; and 2 .

h.r .

5496 , which proposed to amend the general hours - of - service requirement to remove reference to " 1,250 hours of service ... during the previous 12-month period" , and include part - time and full - time employees as "eligible employees . .

the bill did not propose changes to hours - of - service requirements for airline flight crew .

two bills proposed new eligibility requirements for certain veterans with service - connected disabilities and for education support professionals .

as described earlier , h.r .

5165 proposed to provide a new fmla - qualifying use of leave for veterans with a service - connected disability rated at 30% or higher .

the bill further provided separate eligibility requirements that would have allowed certain veterans to access this new fmla - protected leave without meeting the standard 12 months and 1,250 hours ( over the last 12 months ) of employment requirement .

the bill proposed that for employees who are veterans with a service - connected disability rated at 30% or higher by the secretary of veterans affairs: a veteran with a service - connected disability rated at 30% - 50% would be eligible to use leave for medical care related to his or her service - connected disability if employed for 8 months ( with the current employer ) and for least 833 hours in the previous 8 month period .

a veteran with a service - connected disability rated at 60% or higher would be eligible to use leave for medical care related to his or her service - connected disability if employed for 6 months ( with the current employer ) and for least 625 hours in the previous 6-month period .

employees using leave for medical needs related to a service - connected disability rated at 30% or higher would be required to provide certification from a va medical provider or from a non - department of veterans affairs ( va ) medical facility "through which the secretary of veterans affairs has furnished hospital care or medical services" .

for employees who are veterans with a service - connected disability that is not currently rated at 30% or higher by the secretary of veterans affairs , but retired from the armed forces by reason of service - connected disability that was rated at 30% or higher using the schedule in use by the va at the time of retirement , the bill proposed that: a veteran whose service - connected disability was rated at 30% - 50% at the time of retirement would be eligible to use leave for medical care related to his or her service - connected disability if employed for 8 months ( with the current employer ) and for least 833 hours in the previous 8-month period .

a veteran whose service - connected disability was rated at 60% or higher at the time of retirement would be eligible to use leave for medical care related to his or her service - connected disability if employed for 6 months ( with the current employer ) and for least 625 hours in the previous 6-month period .

employees using leave for medical needs related to a service - connected disability rated at 30% or higher at the time of retirement would be required to provide certification from the department of defense that describes the terms of the veteran's retirement from the armed forces .

the effect of the separate eligibility requirement is twofold .

first , it would have permitted veterans ( eg , who are new employees ) to access fmla leave for service - connected - disability medical needs sooner than the standard 12-month requirement .

second , because the hours - of - service requirement is also adjusted , it might have facilitated some veterans' year - to - year use of this leave .

s. 3444 would have created a separate hours - of - service requirement for educational support professionals ( esp ) .

the bill defined an esp as an employee of "a public elementary or secondary school or public institution of higher education , that may include ( aa ) a para educator that provides instructional or non - instructional support ; and ( bb ) a member of the secretarial , clerical , or administrative support staff. .

pursuant to s. 3444 , an esp would meet the hours - of - service requirement for eligibility if during the previous 12 months , the employee worked ( for the current employer ) , at least ( 1 ) an average of 60 hours per month or ( 2 ) 60% of the "applicable total monthly hours expected for the employee's job description and duties ( as assigned for the school year preceding the school year during which the hours of service are calculated ) " on average .

the proposal would also have allowed the secretary of labor to create separate rules for calculating the leave entitlement of esps , but would not change the size of the entitlement available to them .

