the ready availability and rapid adoption of encryption technologies has ignited a discussion on the applicability of the technology and the conditions under which those technologies should be used and made accessible .

information and communications technology ( ict ) manufacturers have implemented strong cryptosystems into their products , which make their users and the devices themselves safer and more trustworthy .

but while that happened , law enforcement officers have been increasingly stymied in their efforts to investigate crimes and enforce the rule of law .

there are multiple sides to the encryption debate , but the sides generally reduce to two main parties: those who favor cryptosystems built as strongly as possible , and those who favor cryptosystems built with the opportunity for access if necessary and approved by a judicial authority .

many technology companies , trade associations , security experts , and organizations dedicated to protecting civil liberties and human rights support the first argument .

this group argues that our modern economy relies on the trustworthiness of users and devices .

they further argue that threats compromise that trustworthiness and put devices and their users under constant attack .

they also argue that deliberately weak cryptosystems will place their users and products at an international disadvantage and ultimately make everyone less safe .

many government agencies , including federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies , fall into the second group .

they argue that absolute privacy has never existed because judges could authorize the disclosure of information within their jurisdiction .

the recent adoption of encryption technologies hinders the orders of judges to authorize disclosure of information and law enforcement's ability to conduct investigations .

to provide context for this debate , this report will ( 1 ) provide a primer on the technology that enables encryption ; ( 2 ) discuss the uses of encryption ; and ( 3 ) discuss policy options for future actions on encryption .

simply , "going dark" is a term of art that represents the government's inability to obtain electronic evidence .

while encryption has dominated the going dark debate , it is only one element of that debate .

the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) describes going dark with the following scenario: "law enforcement at all levels has the legal authority to intercept and access communications and information pursuant to court orders , but it often lacks the technical ability to carry out those orders because of a fundamental shift in communications services and technologies. .

as technology has evolved , some companies have implemented automatic end - to - end encryption on certain communications and data .

as a result , law enforcement has reported instances of being stymied from obtaining certain communications as well as stored data that have been encrypted .

for instance , of the 4,148 wiretap orders authorized by judges in 2015 , there were 13 reported instances in which encrypted communications were encountered , and 11 of these 13 instances involved encryption hindering law enforcement officials .

information security , or the security of information in computer systems , is based on a model with three elements .

confidentiality means "preserving authorized restrictions on access and disclosure , including means for protecting personal privacy and proprietary information. .

stated otherwise , confidentiality ensures that when a user sends another user a message , they are certain that only those two users are able to read that message .

integrity means "guarding against improper information modification or destruction , and includes ensuring information nonrepudiation and authenticity. .

stated otherwise , integrity ensures that when a user sends a message to another user , the message arrives as the sender intends , without alteration .

availability means "ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information. .

stated otherwise , availability ensures that when a user sends a message to another user , that message is available for the recipient to access when they so choose .

cybersecurity professionals have tools available to them to help ensure integrity and availability .

hash values allow users to try to ensure the integrity of information , and dynamic routing tries to ensure the availability of information when a user requests it .

ensuring the confidentiality of information had been challenging , until encryption became ubiquitous .

encryption is a tool that users and cybersecurity professionals can employ to try to ensure that their data and communications remain confidential .

as jay healey said , "the attackers are beating us in every area .

and always have been .

the one place that aids the defenders , the one place the mathematics is on our side , is on encryption .

in that one area , we are stronger than they are. .

also , by employing strong cryptosystems , users can achieve a level of integrity in their data and communications .

although encryption itself would not stop an adversary from intercepting and manipulating data , the altered data would not be readable by the user since the alteration would change one of the inputs ( the ciphertext ) in the cryptosystem .

as a result , they would be made aware of illegitimate alterations to their data .

this extra layer of security also helps to mitigate the onslaught of attacks users face every day .

in the physical world , an attacker would need to be physically near its target to carry out an attack .

but online , attackers can automate a coordinated attack against many targets regardless of physical location because of the interconnected nature of the public internet .

encrypting data mitigates the potential attacks users may face when they connect online .

the spread of ubiquitous encryption occurred faster than many other technologies were adopted .

the speed at which encryption was promulgated left many end - users without the time to consider the implications of employing strong encryption for their data .

if a user were to forget or otherwise lose the key , the data would remain in a ciphertext state and stay unreadable to that otherwise legitimate user .

with full - disk encryption by default , users have the opportunity to encrypt data without judging the sensitivity of that data first .

a user's data may be sensitive , but not require strong security .

in the physical world , a user may keep a diary in a locked desk drawer , but in the digital world , that same diary may be encrypted preventing access by anyone other than that user .

the implications for that level of protection are generally not considered by users when they employ encryption .

strong encryption may deny otherwise - authorized users from accessing shared information , such as family photos and tax records , in the event that the user who maintains the key is not available to decrypt information .

this level of security is also a contributing factor to the encryption element of the going dark debate .

generally , impositions on the fourth amendment right to security of papers and effects against unreasonable searches and seizure is considered satisfied upon an independent judge issuing a warrant or other court order to access that information .

fifth amendment concerns are more nuanced .

the fifth amendment protects an individual's right not to be compelled to give incriminating evidence against oneself .

depending on the facts of the case , this might include providing one's passcode to a locked device .

in the pre - digital era , the supreme court employed a distinction between requiring an individual to disclose a safe combination , which impermissibly required the target to reveal the contents of his mind , and handing over a safe key , which did not .

however , the court has yet to state whether this same dichotomy should apply to passcodes and passwords employed in more modern technology , and the lower courts are only in the early stages of developing case law on this subject .

the encryption debate today is a debate of values .

on one hand , there is the core value of individual security , and privacy from each other and from the state .

on the other hand , there is the core value of national security , that security of the state is necessary to ensure the security of the individual .

evaluation of the individual ( or information ) security versus national security values is hampered by lack of information .

both sides of the debate have presented general arguments and scenarios about the risks they hope to mitigate .

the public debate on encryption has lacked information on the specific threats that strong , end - to - end encryption mitigates and why another form of encryption would put the public at risk .

conversely , the public debate has also lacked specific information on how strong , end - to - end encryption has stymied security activities and put the public at risk .

without this specific information , the public is generally unable to accurately determine the risk presented by encryption , or the lack of it .

instead , the debate is informed by extreme cases which present dire scenarios from which to form a position , but which may not accurately reflect the risk involved .

as discussed above , individual users are under constant attack online from adversaries near and far .

the ease with which attacks can be carried out , regardless of geographic location , further exasperates information security professionals .

encryption is a tool information security professionals and end - users can employ to ensure the data under their care remains confidential and its integrity remains intact .

the systems users rely upon are under similar attack .

some of these systems govern life - sustaining and life - saving applications , such as wireless medical devices .

pervasive encryption within these systems helps ensure the trustworthiness of those systems .

additionally , any system that stores a key would also be vulnerable to an insider threat .

an insider , or authorized user or employee , is a threat to such a system because they have legitimate access to the system .

insiders can violate security policies and compromise the security of a system unintentionally or intentionally .

however , information security costs users in both time and computing power .

users also lose opportunities for their information to become available to loved ones or investigators if they are a victim and unable to provide the information .

additionally , users may have a false sense of security through misconfigured cryptosystems which are vulnerable to a variety of attacks .

some have argued that the advances in technology have surpassed the government's ability to keep pace .

without a balance between the advances in technology and government capabilities , some argue that law enforcement agencies at all levels are unable to enforce the rule of law through effective investigations .

with this perceived imbalance , crimes online ( such as child pornography and financial thefts ) and crimes against online infrastructure ( such as ransomware and denial of service attacks ) will arguably go un - or under - investigated .

additionally , encryption technologies help enable criminal associations to persist , such as the indoctrination of a lone wolf terrorist by foreign actors , and limit the ability for law enforcement to intervene for the safety of our communities .

the proposal from those championing national security is based on the premise that law enforcement must investigate criminal activity to maintain rule of law .

the discussion has generally not addressed the level of criminal activity that may go un - or under - investigated ( through evidence being encrypted or otherwise ) for the government to still maintain the rule of law .

this is an element of the debate which some hope to entertain in 2017 .

in the second session of the 114 th congress , members have introduced a variety of legislative proposals to address elements of the encryption issue .

table 1 , below , highlights bills that address elements of the encryption debate .

additionally , senators burr and feinstein have made a discussion draft of their proposal publicly available , but it has not yet been introduced .

the burr - feinstein draft , otherwise titled the "compliance with court orders act of 2016," would require a provider of computing services to either decrypt a communication or assist the government in decrypting the message in compliance with a court order .

under this proposal , a judge could issue a court order invoking this act in one or more of the following cases: ( a ) the crime resulted in or threatened death or serious bodily harm ; ( b ) foreign intelligence , espionage and terrorism ; ( c ) crimes against minors ; ( d ) violent felonies ; ( e ) serious federal drug crimes ; or ( f ) the state equivalents of any of the above .

 continue to allow the courts to develop case law on encryption .

this status quo option would continue to allow cases such as the one concerning the san bernardino iphone to come up in courts .

but after a few years of this strategy both the government and the technology community are coalescing around a view that congress legislate on the matter of the availability of encryption and law enforcement's access to encrypted communications , in order to provide uniformity and certainty .

additionally , some have suggested that barring congressional action , market forces and other stakeholders ( such as other governments ) would be in a position to drive policy .

force platforms to maintain a way to access the plaintext of data .

rather than focus on the users , this proposal would focus on the platform itself .

in this reference , a platform is the suite of hardware , software , or databases that support the service being used ( eg , the messages application for apple , inc. devices ) .

this would allow a solution to arrive at scale , that is , for many users at once , since the providers of the encryption service would build in a mechanism to read plaintexts of data using their platform rather than rely on the individual compliance from users .

however , this proposal would , by its nature , introduce a weakness in the security of that platform , one which would likely become the target for adversaries .

although the solution would apply across all users for legitimate access , it would be equivalent to providing adversaries with the opportunity to access the data for all users .

one example of this proposal is for platforms to act as administrators of devices or services they provide , and use their administrator access to provide data to law enforcement .

improve the government's ability to investigate and extract digital evidence .

this proposal was offered by susan landau , a professor in cybersecurity policy at worcester polytechnic institute , in testimony to the house judiciary committee .

in this proposal , the u.s. government would invest in research , capabilities , and capacity to continue to carry out investigations despite any technology employed which may act as a hindrance to the investigation .

the cost of such an investment is unknown .

create "compelled disclosure" laws .

otherwise known as "key disclosure laws," this proposal would make it a criminal penalty to fail to produce plaintext versions of documents requested by law enforcement when asked for data held by someone with access .

australia implemented such a law .

however , such a law would likely face constitutional challenges .

