congress appropriates foreign affairs funding primarily through annual department of state , foreign operations , and related programs ( sfops ) appropriations .

prior to fy2008 , however , congress provided funds for the department of state and international broadcasting within the commerce , justice , and state , the judiciary , and related agencies appropriations ( cjs ) and separately provided foreign aid funds within foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations .

the transition between the different alignments occurred in the 109 th congress , with a change in appropriations subcommittee jurisdiction .

for that congress , the house of representatives appropriated state department funds separately from foreign aid , as in earlier congresses , but the senate differed by appropriating state and foreign aid funds within one bill — the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations .

both the house and senate began jointly funding department of state and foreign aid appropriations within the department of state , foreign operations and related programs appropriations in the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) .

sfops appropriations currently include state department operations ( including accounts for embassy security , construction , and maintenance , and education and cultural affairs , among others ) ; foreign operations ( including usaid administration expenses , bilateral economic assistance , international security assistance , multilateral assistance , and export assistance ) ; various international commissions ; and international broadcasting ( including voa , rfe / rl , cuba broadcasting , radio free asia , and middle east broadcasting networks ) .

while the distribution varies slightly from year to year , foreign operations funding is typically about twice as much as state operations funding .

in addition to regular , enduring sfops appropriations , congress has approved emergency supplemental funding requested by administrations to address emergency or otherwise off - cycle budget needs .

since fy2012 , congress has also appropriated overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funding requested within the regular budget process for department of state and usaid war - related expenses .

this report lists the legislative and funding history of sfops appropriations and includes funding trends .

nearly all foreign affairs appropriations within the past 25 years were passed within omnibus , consolidated , or full - year continuing resolutions , rather than in stand - alone bills , and usually after the start of the new fiscal year .

many foreign policy experts contend that stand - alone appropriations legislation would allow for a more rigorous debate on specific foreign policy activities and improve the ability to introduce or fund new programs , or cancel and defund existing programs .

such experts assert that the frequent practice of passing continuing resolutions and delaying passage of appropriations well into the next fiscal year has hindered program planning ( not just in foreign affairs ) and has reduced the ability to fund programs that did not exist in the previous cycle .

in addition to annual appropriations , several laws require congress to authorize state and foreign operations funding prior to expenditure .

before 2003 , congress typically provided authorization in a biannual foreign relations authorization bill .

this practice not only authorized funding for obligation and expenditure , but also provided a forum for more rigorous debate on specific foreign affairs and foreign aid policies and a legislative vehicle for congressional direction .

in recent years , the house and senate have separately introduced or considered foreign relations and foreign aid authorization bills , but none have been enacted .

table 1 below provides a 25-year history of enacted foreign affairs appropriations laws ( excluding short - term continuing resolutions and supplemental appropriations ) , including the dates they were sent to the president and signed into law .

some observations follow: since fy1995 , congress appropriated foreign affairs funding in on - time , freestanding bills once — in 1994 for the fy1995 appropriations year .

the last time congress passed foreign affairs funding on time , but not in freestanding legislation , was for fy1997 .

congress included foreign affairs funding within an omnibus , consolidated , or full - year continuing resolution 21 of the past 25 years .

fy2006 was the last time congress enacted freestanding state department and foreign operations appropriations bills .

six times over the past 25 years , congress sent the state and foreign operations appropriations to the president in march , april , or may — six to eight months into the fiscal year .

since realignment of the foreign affairs appropriations legislation in fy2008 , sfops appropriations measures have included state department operations , foreign operations , various international commissions , and international broadcasting .

for a full list of the accounts included in the fy2019 sfops , see table 2 .

 table 3 and figure 1 provide the funding levels for enduring funds and supplemental / oco funds in the department of state , foreign operations and related programs for fy2001-2020 request ( in current dollars ) .

although current funding for state - foreign operations generally has grown since fy2001 , there was a spike in funding in fy2004 that can , in large part , be attributed to supplemental funding for the iraq relief and reconstruction fund , which provided additional funds in that year .

the creation of the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) and the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) added to growing funding levels from fy2004-fy2009 .

oco became a regular part of foreign affairs funding as of fy2012 .

supplemental funding for ebola in fy2015 , zika in fy2016 , and oco in fy2017 contributed to the rise in funding levels during those years ( see figure 2 ) .

the constant dollar trend line generally continues to increase , although at a slower pace than current dollars .

fy2004 remains the peak year in constant dollars .

the introduction of oco funding in fy2012 briefly elevated sfops funding , but in the following years , funding levels off at nearly the same amount as the fy2012 level .

after removing inflation , funding for fy2013 through the fy2020 request declines below that level , suggesting that the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) has kept foreign affairs funding below the rate of inflation .

the administration distinguishes between enduring ( also called base , regular , or ongoing ) , emergency supplemental , and overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funds .

funds designated as emergency or oco are not subject to procedural limits on discretionary spending in congressional budget resolutions , or the statutory discretionary spending limits provided through the budget control act of 2011 for fy2011-fy2021 ( bca , p.l .

112-25 ) .

prior to fy2012 , the president typically submitted to congress additional funding requests ( after the initial annual budget request ) , referred to as emergency supplementals .

supplemental funding packages have historically been approved to address emergency , war - related , or otherwise off - cycle budget needs .

the obama administration requested emergency supplemental appropriations for urgent unexpected expenses , such as the u.s. international responses to ebola , the zika virus , and famine relief to syria , yemen , somalia , and northeast nigeria .

the trump administration has not requested supplemental funding for unexpected international crises .

in contrast to emergency supplemental appropriations , the obama administration included within the regular budget request in fy2012 what it described as short - term , temporary , war - related funding for the frontline states of iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan — designated as overseas contingency operations funds , or oco .

congress had used the oco designation in earlier years for department of defense appropriations to distinguish between ongoing versus war - related expenditures .

in response to the fy2012 sfops oco request , congress appropriated oco funds for the department of state and usaid activities beyond the requested level and for more than just activities in iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan .

in fy2012 , congress included oco funds for the three frontline states as well as for yemen , somalia , kenya , and the philippines .

the obama administration first requested oco funds for a country other than the three frontline states in fy2015 , when it requested oco funds for syria .

in fy2018 , the trump administration requested oco funds for the department of state and usaid activities in iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan , as well as "high threat / high risk" areas .

these included syria , yemen , nigeria , somalia , and south sudan , among others .

the administration's initial fy2019 request included oco funds for the department of state and usaid , but after passage of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 , p.l .

115-123 ) , the administration requested that all previously requested sfops oco funds be moved to enduring funds .

for fy2020 , the trump administration again requested no oco funds for foreign affairs agencies .

since fy2012 , oco has ranged from a low of 14% of the total budget request in fy2014 to a high of 36% in fy2017 , when the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( bba 2015 , p.l .

114-74 ) set nonbinding oco minimums for fy2016 and fy2017 .

the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 , p.l .

115-123 ) raised discretionary spending limits for fy2018 and fy2019 and extended direct spending reductions through fy2027 .

with the raised spending limits , the trump administration's fy2019 budget request did not include the oco designation for any foreign assistance funds .

however , congress has continued to appropriate oco funds , including $8.0 billion in fy2019 .

the administration's fy2020 budget request also does not request oco funds for state - foreign operations appropriations .

the bca and bbas have had an effect on foreign affairs funding levels and may have future implications .

the budget control act of 2011 sets limits on discretionary spending through fy2021 for defense and nondefense funding categories .

because oco funds are not counted against the discretionary spending limits , the bca has put downward pressure on sfops enduring / base funds , while oco has increasingly funded other foreign affairs activities .

in addition , the 2015 bba significantly increased fy2016 and fy2017 oco funding for foreign affairs over the requested funding levels in fy2015 and fy2016 , further encouraging a migration of funds for ongoing activities into oco - designated accounts .

however , the 2018 bba has had the opposite effect on foreign affairs oco , allowing lawmakers to shift oco funding back into enduring / base accounts .

