d uring the final months and weeks leading up to the november 8 , 2016 , presidential election , courts across the country have ruled in numerous challenges to state election laws .

as a result of some of these rulings , several laws have been recently invalidated , enjoined , or altered .

leading up to the issuance of such rulings , there had been uncertainty in some states as to whether , or how , to administer certain state election laws during this election cycle .

in some cases , litigation is still ongoing .

for example , in michigan , north carolina , ohio , and texas there have been recent court rulings affecting the laws regulating early voting , voter photo identification ( id ) requirements , registration procedures , straight - party voting , and voter rolls .

these decisions are notable because of their impact on state election laws shortly before a presidential election , and in some cases , because they invalidated laws that were recently enacted .

furthermore , the rulings in north carolina and texas have drawn attention because the challenged state laws were held , in part , to violate section 2 of the voting rights act , which generally prohibits discriminatory voting laws based on race , color , or membership in a language minority and has typically been applied in the context of challenges to redistricting maps .

this report begins by setting forth key constitutional provisions relevant to recent state election law challenges .

next , it discusses federal statutory provisions contained in the voting rights act and the national voter registration act , which have been invoked in recent cases , and briefly examines pertinent supreme court precedent .

then , based on that legal framework , it provides an overview of several recent challenges to state election laws in michigan , north carolina , ohio , and texas that resulted in major decisions by the various federal courts of appeals as illustrative examples of the types of challenges that have been playing out in the courts .

finally , the report discusses some potential implications of these challenges .

although presidential and congressional elections have national impact , they are primarily administered by state laws .

the elections clause of the u.s. constitution provides to the states the initial and principal authority to administer elections within their jurisdictions .

as a result of this decentralized authority , there is significant variation among the states as to how the voting process and elections are administered .

for example , states have enacted differing laws addressing whether and to what degree voters can cast ballots prior to the day of an election , known as early voting ; the types of identification required to cast a ballot , including voter photo id requirements ; and voter registration procedures , such as whether to permit registration on the same day as an election .

in addition , congress has enacted specific overriding federal laws , including the voting rights act and the national voter registration act , with which states must comply in administering the election process .

as the november 8 , 2016 , presidential election draws near , various court rulings have invalidated , enjoined , or required modification to several state election laws .

litigation in some states continues .

recent rulings in michigan , north carolina , ohio , and texas are illustrative examples .

although the 2016 presidential election is drawing near , state election laws have been subject to recent changes by the courts .

decisions such as those evaluating laws in north carolina and texas , while still in the nascent stages , signal a willingness by the courts to hold that state election laws violate section 2 of the vra .

as section 2 has generally been invoked in the context of redistricting , this is a relatively new application of the law .

therefore , the attendant case law is just beginning to develop .

likewise , questions of whether specific voter photo id laws comply with the fourteenth amendment equal protection clause and the vra continue to be answered .

although the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of an indiana voter photo id law in 2008 against a facial challenge , some courts have concluded that other state laws are distinguishable from the indiana law or have evaluated such laws under section 2 of the vra .

it is possible that the supreme court may ultimately decide to revisit this issue .

