the social security administration ( ssa ) oversees programs that touch the lives of millions of american families and are key components of the nation's economic safety net .

the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance ( oasdi ) program , commonly known as social security , is the most well - known of these programs .

ssa is also responsible for carrying out two cash assistance programs for certain groups of low - income individuals: ( 1 ) supplemental security income ( ssi ) for the aged , blind , and disabled and ( 2 ) special benefits for certain world war ii veterans .

in addition to its own programs , the agency supports the administration of a number of non - ssa programs , such as medicare , and provides and verifies data for a variety of federal and state program purposes .

benefit payments for ssa's programs are considered mandatory spending , which means that such outlays are controlled by each program's authorizing statute — not by appropriations acts .

however , the resources needed to carry out ssa's programs , as well as to support the administration of other priorities , are considered discretionary spending and thus are controlled by the annual appropriations process .

this report provides background on mandatory spending for ssa's programs but its focus is on annual discretionary appropriations for ssa's administrative activities .

it begins with a brief description of ssa's programs and then examines the agency's projected spending on benefit payments and operating costs in fy2017 .

next , it provides an overview of the fy2017 president's budget request for all of ssa's accounts , the fy2017 commissioner's budget request for the agency's administrative accounts , and major congressional actions on ssa's appropriations for fy2017 .

lastly , the report examines trends in the budget request and the appropriation for the limitation on administrative expenses ( lae ) as well as how changes in the composition of the lae appropriation have affected agency workloads .

most of the data presented in this report can be found in ssa's fy2017 budget justification to congress , which is available at https: / / www.ssa.gov / budget / .

ssa is charged with administering several federal income support programs established under the social security act , namely social security ( oasdi ; title ii of the act ) ; supplemental security income ( ssi ; title xvi of the act ) ; and special benefits for certain world war ii veterans ( title viii of the act ) .

social security is a social insurance program that replaces a portion of an insured worker's earnings based on the individual's career - average earnings in covered employment .

in contrast , ssi and special benefits for certain world war ii veterans are public assistance programs that provide a guaranteed minimum income to certain groups of individuals who have little or no social security or other income .

all three programs are entitlements , meaning that the federal government is obligated to pay benefits to individuals who meet the eligibility requirements specified in each program's authorizing statute .

to conform to the presentation of data in ssa's fy2017 budget justification to congress , this report describes old - age and survivors insurance and disability insurance as separate programs .

although benefit payments for ssa's programs are considered mandatory spending and thus are not controlled by the annual appropriations process , the agency requires annual discretionary appropriations to carry out its programs and to support the administration of non - ssa programs , such as medicare , and other priorities .

this section of the report provides an overview of ssa's accounts by examining the obama administration's fy2017 budget request for the agency .

it also discusses the fy2017 commissioner's budget request for the agency's administrative accounts and highlights major congressional actions on ssa's fy2017 appropriations .

ssa's accounts are traditionally funded through the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( lhhs ) appropriations bill .

since ssa became an independent agency , the commissioner's budget request for the lae account has exceeded the president's budget request in nominal ( i.e. , unadjusted ) dollars for all but two fiscal years: fy1997 and fy1998 ( figure 3 ) .

after taking into account all rescissions , except rescissions of no - year information technology systems funds , the enacted appropriation for the lae account exceeded the commissioner's budget request only for fy1997 , fy1998 , and fy2009 .

the enacted appropriation exceeded the president's budget request only for fy1997 , fy2008 , fy2009 , and fy2014 .

please note that the fy2014 president's budget request included a legislative proposal for a dedicated source of mandatory funding for program integrity work instead of a request for discretionary base and cap adjustment funding .

if the funding associated with this legislative proposal had been included in the lae , then the enacted appropriation for fy2014 would have been less than the president's budget request .

figure 4 shows historical trends in the annual appropriation for ssa's lae account using three measures: ( 1 ) nominal dollars , ( 2 ) price - indexed dollars , and ( 3 ) wage - indexed dollars .

the lower line labeled "nominal dollars" shows a steady increase in the appropriation for the lae account over the past 20 years , although the rate of this increase has slowed since fy2010 .

the middle line in figure 4 labeled "price indexed to 2017 dollars" shows the trend in ssa's lae appropriation adjusted for changes in prices , as measured by the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) .

although the price - indexed line is flatter than the nominal line , there is a noticeable rise in the appropriation for ssa's lae account during the fy2000s .

between fy2010 and fy2013 , however , the value of appropriation declines in real terms , only to increase through fy2017 .

another method for examining historical trends in ssa's lae account is to adjust the annual appropriation for wage growth .

the majority of ssa's administrative budget is obligated for payroll expenses , which include pay raises due to step increases , promotions , and cost - of - living adjustments .

because wages tend to grow faster than prices , annual increases in payroll expenses , which are largely fixed costs , can increase an agency's administrative expenses faster than the rate of inflation .

according to ssa , the agency's fixed costs typically grow at a rate of $300-$350 million per year .

the top line in figure 4 labeled "wage indexed to 2017 dollars" shows the trend in the appropriation for ssa's lae account adjusted for changes in wages , as measured by ssa's average wage index ( awi ) .

the wage - indexed line shows a steady decline in the value of the lae appropriation in real terms from fy2010 to fy2015 , followed by a slight increase in fy2016 and then a small decrease in fy2017 .

the recent nominal growth in the annual appropriation for ssa's lae account stems from increases in funding authorized specifically for program integrity work .

between fy2010 and fy2017 , the amount of the lae appropriation dedicated to program integrity work increased by 140% , from $758 million to $1.819 billion ( figure 5 ) .

program integrity funding includes base funding provided to meet section 251 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( b ) of the bbedca and cap adjustment funding pursuant to annual limits specified in the act .

when adjusted for price and wage growth over this period , ssa's program integrity funding grew by 115% and 94% , respectively .

the increases in dedicated program integrity funding have allowed ssa to hire more federal and dds employees to conduct additional full medical cdrs .

between fy2010 and fy2016 , the number of cdrs processed by ssa increased by 162% , from 324,500 to 850,000 ( figure 6 ) .

during this period , the cdr backlog declined by 79% , from 1.361 million pending reviews in fy2010 to about 280,000 in fy2016 .

however , as shown in figure 7 , the amount of the lae appropriation available for other core workloads has essentially remained flat , increasing by 0.2% in nominal terms , from $10.642 billion in fy2010 to $10.663 billion in fy2017 .

general lae funding refers to lae funding not dedicated to program integrity work , that is , the base lae appropriation and funding from user fees paid to ssa for certain administrative activities .

when adjusted for price and wage growth over this period , general lae funding fell by 10% and 19% , respectively .

according to ssa and others , the declining real value of the general lae appropriation has contributed to agency delays in processing other workloads .

one of the most publicized issues for ssa over the past several years has been the growing number of pending disability cases at the hearing level of the administrative appeals process .

from the end of fy2010 to the end of the second quarter of fy2017 , the number of pending hearings grew by 58% , from 705,400 to 1.12 million ( figure 8 ; left axis ) .

during that same period , the average wait time for a hearing decision increased by 37% , from 426 days to 583 days ( figure 8 ; right axis ) .

at a hearing before the senate special committee on aging , a ssa official stated that the house appropriations bill , if enacted , would cut the agency's base administrative funding below the fy 2016 enacted level and result in serious degradation of service .

for example , at such low funding levels , we could face up to two weeks of employee furloughs , when our field offices could be closed to the public .

the senate appropriation bill , while higher than the house bill , would still fall short of providing us the funding to serve record numbers of claimants and beneficiaries .

the reports accompanying the house and senate bills do not provide an explicit rationale for each committee's fy2017 funding level .

however , in enacting the fy2017 omnibus , it would seem that congress believes that the senate's fy2017 funding level is sufficient for ssa to perform its non - program integrity responsibilities .

the fy2016 lhhs appropriations bill was passed as division h of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) on december 18 , 2015 .

the total fy2016 appropriation for ssa's lae account was $12.162 billion , which was $352 million ( or 2.8% ) less than the amount requested in the president's budget for that year but was $356 million ( or 3.0% ) more than the amount enacted for fy2015 ( table a - 1 ) .

the enacted appropriation for the lae account provided $13 million less in cap adjustment funding for program integrity work than was permitted under the bbedca for fy2016 ( see table 5 ) .

the fy2016 appropriation for the oig account was $4.3 million ( or 3.9% ) less than the fy2016 president's budget request but was $2.2 million ( or 2.1% ) more than the amount enacted for fy2015 ( table a - 1 ) .

