on a daily basis , the restaurants , cafeterias , and carryout facilities operated by the house of representatives and the senate serve members of congress , congressional employees , constituents , and other visitors to the capitol , house office buildings , and senate office buildings .

the house and senate restaurant systems have existed since the early 1800s and have grown and modernized over time .

although many of their services may seem similar , food operations are separately administered and managed for the house , for the senate , and for the capitol visitor center ( cvc ) .

by meeting congressional dining needs during workdays that frequently can be unpredictable , the restaurant systems help facilitate the legislative and representational work of congress .

because many members and staff visit these restaurants every day , they remain a subject of ongoing congressional interest .

some of the issues affecting the restaurant systems are unique to the house and others are unique to the senate , resulting from the fact that each chamber administers its own restaurant services .

other issues affect the restaurants in both chambers or are typical challenges in any food service operation .

this section focuses on current issues related to the congressional restaurants , but many of the challenges the house and senate restaurants face today are similar to issues they have faced in the past .

for more background on these topics , see crs report r44600 , history of house and senate restaurants: context for current operations and issues , by sarah j. eckman .

in many regards , the house and senate food services operate like many large , institutional cafeterias do .

similar to many office cafeterias , house and senate food services primarily serve breakfast , lunch , and snacks during regular workday business hours , and provide vending options for patrons who may be on - site during other times .

recognizing the availability of other dining options , the house and senate food service providers attempt to provide convenient service , keep their prices competitive , and offer the types of menu items that customers enjoy .

some aspects of house and senate dining operations , however , are necessarily unique , given the congressional environment in which they exist .

the members' dining rooms , for example , provide an ambiance not typically found in workplace eateries .

in addition to their historic and architectural value , these dining rooms also provide members of congress and staff members a more formal and private setting in which to meet with guests or one another .

another feature house and senate dining operations must account for is that the schedule of congress can be less predictable than that of other institutions , which can have a variety of effects on food services .

an unscheduled recess , for example , can significantly reduce the number of customers the house and senate dining services can expect .

this often results in higher costs to the restaurants , which have to account for lost food and sometimes pay employees ; as a result , recesses can also lead to temporary worker layoffs or reduced hours .

conversely , when congress is in session , house and senate food services must be able to handle high volumes of customers with a variety of needs .

because events like hearings or briefings can be added to , or moved around , the congressional schedule , food service providers , and catering in particular , must to be able to accommodate last - minute requests and changes .

the house and senate restaurants are operated by private food service contractors who handle most of the day - to - day concerns .

despite this delegation , the house and senate remain responsible for food service oversight .

this shared administration resulted from how the congressional restaurant systems developed and grew over time .

as a result , many of the issues faced by the restaurants today are addressed by the contractors themselves .

other issues are addressed by the house administration committee , senate rules and administration committee , or other congressional support offices .

together , these entities strive to meet the needs of the members and staff who rely upon congressional dining services to help them carry out their daily legislative and representational work .

