the 114 th congress debated several gun control proposals following two high - fatality mass shootings in december 2015 and june 2016 .

in both cases , the offenders attempted to justify their murderous rampages with , and were quite possibly influenced by , radical islamic views .

according to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , one of the offenders had been watch - listed as a suspected terrorist , but had been removed from the watchlist before he purchased his firearm from a federally licensed gun dealer .

after both shootings , congressional gun control debate coalesced around the following issues: should the attorney general be given the authority to deny firearms ( and explosives ) transfers to persons she determines to be "dangerous terrorists" ? .

should federal background check requirements be expanded to include intrastate firearms transfers among private , unlicensed persons ? .

should grants be provided or withheld to encourage state , local , municipal , tribal , and territorial authorities to increase computer access to records on persons prohibited from possessing firearms for the purposes of background checks ? .

should definitions related to mental incompetency in federal gun control regulations be codified or revised ? .

debate on the latter three issues mirrored congressional debate in the senate that followed the december 2012 , newtown , ct , mass shooting .

while congress did not pass any of these proposals , congress included a provision in the 21 st century cures act ( p.l .

114-255 ) that codified certain department of veterans' affairs ( va ) procedures that address benefit claims , mental incompetency determinations , and firearms transfer and possession eligibility .

for context , this report provides background on the two major federal gun control statutory frameworks: the national firearms act of 1934 ( nfa ) , as amended , and the gun control act of 1968 ( gca ) , as amended .

it also provides analysis of several senate - considered amendments in the 114 th congress that would have addressed the above listed issues .

the ongoing struggle between gun control and gun rights advocates has resulted in what has been described as a divisive fault line in the american body politic .

gun control advocates generally view the prevalence of firearms in the united states as causing more harm than good .

in their view , guns intensify violence by escalating the chances that a crime victim will die in a robbery , aggravated assault , or domestic dispute .

they observe that most american gun violence involves "attacks on intimate partners," "gang and drug beefs in disadvantaged neighborhoods," and "suicides," not necessarily in that order .

they observe further that there is considerable overlap between mental illness and suicide , and the use of a gun in a suicide attempt nearly always proves fatal .

they contend that level of gun violence in the united states is out of line with other industrialized nations and that those nations' experience shows that progressive gun control laws have successfully reduced crime and other forms of gun violence .

gun control supporters , moreover , often view the use of firearms for self - defense or to resist a tyrannical government as impractical and unnecessary , especially in countries with well - developed democratic institutions and rule of law like in the united states .

gun rights supporters , conversely , view firearms as a viable and necessary means of self - defense against predatory criminals and during times of civil unrest and a consequent breakdown in the rule of law .

many gun rights supporters maintain that some gun control laws do not significantly reduce crime , and firearms possession by law - abiding americans could serve to deter crime in some circumstances .

indeed , many gun rights supporters view armed self - defense with a firearm as a "natural right" that precedes but is enshrined in the u.s. constitution .

in short , they view the prevalence of firearms in the united states as a guarantor of freedom and security for individuals , as well as the wider civic body , and as a means to deter oppressive or tyrannical governments .

in addition , gun rights supporters often pursue and enjoy hunting , marksmanship , and other shooting sports .

gun rights views have been bolstered to a degree by the supreme court's heller and mcdonald decisions , which interpreted the second amendment to the u.s. constitution as guaranteeing law - abiding citizens an individual right to possess an operable handgun in their home for the purpose of self - defense .

on december 3 , 2015 , and june 16 , 2016 , the senate debated gun control - related amendments that would have ( 1 ) authorized the attorney general to deny the transfer of firearms or the issuance of firearms and explosives licenses to known or suspected dangerous terrorists ; ( 2 ) expanded federal firearms - related background check requirements ; ( 3 ) increased background check system access to records on persons prohibited from receiving and possessing firearms ; and ( 4 ) revised and / or codified definitions related to mental incompetency and guns .

table 2 shows the senate amendments and their sponsors to two bills , the restoring americans' healthcare freedom reconciliation act ( h.r .

3762 ) and the fy2017 departments of commerce and justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) appropriations bill ( h.r .

2578 , the expected vehicle for s. 2837 ) .

in addition , there is discussion of proposals to study "mass violence" and legislative action related to funding atf and other gun safety initiatives .

"no fly , no buy" or "terror gap" proposal on december 2 , 2015 , the day of the san bernardino mass public shooting , president barack obama called on congress to pass legislation that would prevent known or suspected terrorists on a "no fly" terrorist watchlist from acquiring a gun .

while such legislation had not been offered for several congresses , the president was likely referring rhetorically to the "terror gap" proposal .

in the 114 th congress , representative king reintroduced the "terror gap" proposal ( h.r .

1076 ) , and senator dianne feinstein introduced a similar proposal ( s. 551 ) , formally entitled as the denying firearms and explosives to dangerous terrorists act of 2015 .

the june 12 , 2016 , orlando , fl nightclub mass shooting sparked similar calls for legislative action .

following the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , the u.s. government reevaluated its terrorist screening procedures .

in february 2004 , the doj and fbi modified the nics background check procedures and recalibrated nics to query an additional file in the national crime information center ( ncic ) that included terrorist watchlist records .

prior to that , the fbi did not conduct terrorist watchlist queries as part of firearms background checks because being a known or suspected terrorist was not a disqualifying factor for firearms transfer and possession eligibility ; nor is it today under current law .

under the new procedures , information related to the subjects of nics - generated terrorist watchlist matches have been passed on to the fbi counterterrorism division and special agents in the field , who are usually members of joint terrorism task forces ( jttfs ) .

these fbi agents , in turn , verify the match between the individual and the watchlist record , and they check for information that would prohibit that individual — the prospective transferee , licensee , or permittee — from possessing firearms or explosives ( eg , illegal immigration or fugitive status ) .

while the modified nics procedures initially generated little public opposition , those procedures called three possible issues into question .

one , should terrorist watchlist checks be incorporated statutorily into the firearms - and explosives - related background check processes ? .

two , given certain statutory prohibitions related to prohibiting a firearms registry , should approved firearm transfer records be maintained on a temporary basis to determine whether persons of interest in counterterrorism investigations have obtained firearms ? .

three , should the attorney general be granted authority to deny a firearms transfer based solely on a terrorist watchlist match ? .

since the 109 th congress , several related legislative proposals have been introduced .

several of those bills would have addressed the retention of firearms - related transfer records .

another proposal would have prohibited persons watch - listed as terrorists for aviation security purposes on the "no fly" list from firearms transfer or possession eligibility .

following the president obama's call to pass the "no fly , no buy" act , on december 3 , 2015 , senator feinstein offered the language of the terror gap bill ( s. 551 ) as an amendment ( s.amdt .

2910 ) to the restoring americans' healthcare freedom reconciliation act ( h.r .

3762 ) .

the senate rejected a motion to waive a point of order made against the amendment by roll call vote ( 45-54 ) .

senator john cornyn offered an alternative amendment ( s.amdt .

2912 ) to h.r .

3762 that would require the attorney general to file an emergency petition with a "competent court of jurisdiction" prior to prohibiting a firearms transfer to an otherwise eligible person , who had been determined to be a "dangerous terrorist. .

a point of order was also raised against the cornyn amendment , and it too was ruled out of order .

on december 6 , 2015 , however , president barack obama again called on congress "to act to make sure no one on the no - fly list is able to buy a gun" in a nationally broadcasted oval office address .

on the next day , representative mike thompson filed a discharge petition on h.r .

1076 .

as of december 18 , the petition had 173 signatures .

on december 9 , 2015 , representative thompson moved to recommit a bill , the red river private property protection act ( h.r .

2130 ) , back to committee with instructions to report the bill back to the house amended with the language of h.r .

1076 .

the chair ruled this motion out of order because the amendment was not germane to the bill , and the chair's ruling was sustained by a vote of 246-182 , preventing further consideration of this amendment .

on june 15 , 2016 , senator christopher murphy and other senators advocated for 15 hours on the senate floor for votes on the "no fly , no buy" and "universal" background check proposals .

during consideration of the fy2017 commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations bill ( h.r .

2578 , the expected vehicle for s. 2837 ) , the senate considered several amendments related to firearms - and explosives - related background checks and terrorist watchlist screening .

among those amendments were the no guns for terrorists act ( s.amdt .

4720 ) offered by senator dianne feinstein ; stop terrorists from buying guns while protecting constitutional rights for law - abiding americans act ( s.amdt .

4749 ) offered by senator john cornyn ; terrorist firearms prevention act of 2016 ( s.amdt .

4858 ) offered by senator susan collins ; and s.amdt .

4859 , offered by senator ron johnson .

the senate did not pass any of these amendments and h.r .

2578 was set aside by the senate leadership .

in the house of representatives , representative john lewis led democrats in a 26-hour "sit - in" in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to convince the house leadership to bring gun control bills to the house floor for debate and votes .

instead , the house speaker , representative paul ryan , brought several counterterrorism bills to the floor .

the majority leader , representative kevin mccarthy , introduced the homeland safety and security act ( h.r .

5611 ) , which includes provisions that would address gun background checks and terrorist watchlists , as well as several other provisions related to counterterrorism .

the bill did not receive floor action .

in short , these senate and house amendments would have authorized the attorney general to deny a firearms transfer to any person she deemed to be a "dangerous terrorist. .

all these amendments would have provided some level of redress or remedy to persons improperly watch - listed or mistakenly identified as a known or suspected terrorist and , as a consequence , denied a firearms transfer .

however , most of these proposals generally provided such redress and remedy in federal circuit or district court after the denial with no provision for notification as to the reason for the denial , the cornyn amendment , in contrast , would have required some level of judicial review prior to the denial and the mccarthy bill would have required notification of the reason for the denial with some form of judicial oversight or hearing at or near the time of denial .

during consideration of a health care reconciliation bill ( h.r .

3762 ) and fy2017 department of justice appropriations bill ( h.r .

2578 ) , the senate considered two amendments ( s.amdt .

2908 and s.amdt .

4750 ) that would have expanded federal background check requirements to cover private , intrastate firearms transfers on december 3 , 2015 , and on june 16 , 2016 , respectively .

these and other amendments ( s.amdt .

2914 and s.amdt .

4751 ) also included provisions to increase information sharing on persons who are ineligible to receive or possess firearms for background check purposes .

among those amendments were the public safety and second amendment rights protection act of 2015 ( s.amdt .

2908 ) offered by senators joe manchin and pat toomey ; protecting communities and preserving the second amendment act of 2015 ( s.amdt .

2914 ) offered by senator charles grassley ; fix gun checks act of 2016 ( s.amdt .

4750 ) , offered by senator christopher murphy ; and protection communities and preserving the second amendment act of 2016 ( s.amdt .

4751 ) offered by senator grassley .

similar amendments were considered previously by the senate in the 113 th congress , following the december 2012 , newtown , ct , mass shooting .

the administration supported expanding background checks , as was called for in president obama's post - newtown plan to reduce gun violence .

as discussed above , under current law , intrastate transfers between unlicensed persons , who are not "engaged in the business" of dealing in firearms "as a regular course of ... business with the principal objective of livelihood and profit," are not covered by the recordkeeping or the background check provisions of the gca .

nevertheless , such private transactions and other matters such as possession , registration , and the issuance of licenses to firearms owners may be covered by state laws or local ordinances .

proponents of greater gun control view the fact that unlicensed persons engaging in intrastate firearms transfers are not subject to the recordkeeping and brady act background check requirements of the gca as a "loophole" in the law , particularly within the context of gun shows .

this circumstance arguably flowed from two developments .

first , in 1986 , congress amended the gca to allow ffls to transfer firearms to unlicensed persons at gun shows located within the state of their business ; however , prohibitions on interstate transfers still applied .

second , in 1994 , congress passed the "brady act" and amended the gca to require background checks be completed for all unlicensed persons seeking to obtain firearms from ffls ; however , it does not require background checks for intrastate ( in - state ) firearms transfers between unlicensed persons .

on december 3 , 2015 , during senate consideration of the restoring americans' healthcare freedom reconciliation act ( h.r .

3762 ) , senators joe manchin and patrick toomey offered an amendment ( s.amdt .

2908 ) that would have required intrastate ( same state ) firearms transfers between unlicensed persons ( private transfers ) be processed through ffls and , thus , it would have required a background check on the recipient ( transferee / buyer ) .

supporters have dubbed the manchin - toomey amendment as the "comprehensive" background check proposal , because the background check requirements described above would have been expanded to transfers between unlicensed persons arranged at a "gun show" or "pursuant to advertisement , posting , display or other listing on the internet or other publication by the transferor of his intent to transfer , or the transferee of his intent to acquire , a firearm. .

in the house , representatives peter king and mike thompson introduced a nearly identical measure , the public safety and second amendment rights protection act of 2015 ( h.r .

1217 ) .

in addition , the manchin - toomey amendment ( s.amdt .

2908 ) would have amended the brady act ( p.l .

103-159 ) to authorize appropriations for nchip at $100 million annually for fy2016-fy2019 .

both proposals would also amend the nics improvement amendments act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-180 ) to require states to implement plans to provide records on all prohibited persons to the fbi , or face reductions in their jag funding .

such plans would have addressed nics accessibility to all prohibiting records , establishing qualitative and quantitative benchmarks for evaluative purposes , and potential jag reductions for not meeting those benchmarks .

for example , under both proposals , states that did not meet certain benchmarks would face a 10% reduction in jag funding in year one , an 11% reduction in year two , a 13% reduction in year three , and a 15% reduction in year four .

moreover , if a state failed to submit such a plan to the attorney general , it would have faced those reductions immediately , whereas if the states submitted such plans , the attorney general would have been given discretion whether to make those reductions , even when the states had not met established benchmarks .

s.amdt .

2908 would have also amended p.l .

110-180 to reshape the narip program and authorize appropriations of $100 million annually for fy2016-fy2019 for this program .

under the amendment , grant funding could have been used to carry out assessments of the needs of states and state court systems ; implement policies , systems , and procedures for the automation and submission of records on prohibited persons ; create electronic systems to allow for the submission of such records ; allow states to perform their own background checks ; and develop and maintain disability relief programs .

s.amdt .

2908 would have also required that states match any $1 in grant funding with $3 in state funding for assessments .

it would have mandated further that all grant funding be used to improve records accessibility for nics .

it would have continued to reserve up to 5% of total available funding for indian tribal governments .

on june 16 , 2016 , during senate consideration of the fy2017 cjs appropriations bill ( h.r .

2578 , the expected vehicle for s. 2837 ) , senator christopher murphy offered an amendment ( s.amdt .

4750 ) to expand federal background check requirements that would have captured private , intrastate firearms transfers under a wider set of circumstances than under the manchin - toomey amendment .

indeed , title ii of the amendment is entitled , "requiring a background check for every firearm sale. .

hence , supporters have dubbed the murphy amendment as the "universal" background check proposal , although it too includes exceptions , albeit under narrower set of circumstances than under the manchin - toomey amendment .

the murphy amendment reflects the language of a bill previously introduced by senator chuck schumer and representative jackie speier , the fix gun checks act ( s. 2934 and h.r .

3411 ) .

the murphy amendment ( s.amdt .

4750 ) also included provisions to increase availability to nics of prohibiting records related to firearms transfer and possession eligibility that were nearly identical those included in the manchin - toomey amendment ( s.amdt .

2908 ) described above .

by comparison , senator grassley offered amendments ( s.amdt .

2914 and s.amdt .

4751 ) , during consideration of h.r .

3762 and h.r .

2578 , respectively , that would have also amended p.l .

110-180 to reshape the narip program .

s.amdt .

2914 would have authorized appropriations of $20 million annually for fy2013-fy2017 for this program , whereas s.amdt .

4751 would have authorized appropriations or $125 million annually for fy2016-fy2020 .

both amendments would have refocused the grant program on mental health records exclusively .

beginning 180 days after enactment , both amendments would have required the attorney general to reduce jag grant funding by 5% annually for states that have not provided prohibiting records to the fbi on at least 90% of persons "adjudicated mentally incompetent" or "committed to a psychiatric hospital," and by 10% annually following five years from enactment for the same reasons .

it would have also amended the brady act ( p.l .

103-159 ) and required federal courts to provide records on persons prohibited from possessing firearms for reasons related to mental incompetency and commitment to the fbi for inclusion in nics .

it would also have required federal agencies to report annually to congress on the number of records they submit to nics .

the manchin - toomey , grassley , and murphy amendments included provisions that would have addressed the issue of mental incompetency and firearms eligibility .

while the senate blocked all these amendments on procedural grounds , congress included a provision in an enacted bill that addresses va mental incompetency determination procedures that hinge on the atf definition of "adjudicated as a mental defective. .

in addition , the obama administration published several related regulations .

when congress considered the nics improvement amendments act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-180 ) , some opposition to the underlying bill coalesced around an assertion that , under those amendments , any veteran who was or had been diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) and was found to be a "danger to himself or others would have his gun rights taken away .. .

forever. .

however , a diagnosis of ptsd in and of itself is not a disqualifying factor for the purposes of gun control under the nics improvement amendments , previous law , or current law .

the veterans' medical administration has rarely submitted any disqualifying records on va medical care recipients to the fbi for inclusion in nics for any medical / psychiatric reason ( like ptsd ) .

while veterans with ptsd or any other condition , who have been involuntarily committed under a state court order to a va medical facility because they posed a danger to themselves or others , are ineligible to ship , transport , receive , or possess a firearm or ammunition under federal law , the veterans' medical administration would not always make a related referral about that ineligibility to the fbi .

instead , the state in which the court resides would submit the disqualifying record to the fbi , if such a submission would be appropriate and permissible under state law .

also , under the gca , there is a provision that allows the attorney general ( previously , the secretary of the treasury ) to consider petitions from a prohibited person for "relief from disabilities" and have his firearms transfer and possession eligibility restored .

since fy1993 , however , a rider on the atf annual appropriations for salaries and expenses has prohibited the expenditure of any funding provided under that account on processing such petitions .

as a result , except for as provided under p.l .

110-180 , the only way a person can reacquire his lost firearms eligibility is to have his civil rights restored or disqualifying criminal record ( s ) expunged or set aside , or to be pardoned for his crime .

consequently , prior to p.l .

110-180 , a mental defective - related nics referral by the va to the fbi related to ptsd or any other condition could have been considered a life - long prohibiting factor with regard to firearms eligibility .

under p.l .

110-180 , congress included provisions that require the va to inform veterans and other beneficiaries ( surviving spouses and dependents ) beforehand that by having a fiduciary appointed on their behalf they will be considered "mentally incompetent" and , as a consequence , will lose their firearms eligibility under federal law .

in addition , the act requires the va to establish a process under which veterans or other beneficiaries who have been deemed mentally incompetent may file for administrative relief and possibly have their gun rights restored if they are able to demonstrate that they are no longer afflicted by a disqualifying condition .

the act makes the same requirement of any other federal agency that makes such a referral to the fbi .

as a condition of federal assistance , the same requirement is made of states as well .

according to the bjs , as of june 1 , 2012 , there were 153,298 files in the nics mental defective file , which had been referred to the fbi by the va. those va files accounted for 99.3% of mental defective files ( 154,458 ) referred to the fbi by a federal department or agency .

according to the fbi , as of december 31 , 2015 , there were 263,492 files , a 71.9% increase over the early count , or 98.8% of the mental defective files ( 260,381 ) referred to the fbi by a federal department or agency .

in the view of some members of congress , it is questionable that other federal agencies , such as the social security administration , that provide similar disability and income maintenance benefits to persons who are mentally incapacitated , refer relatively few , if any , firearms - related disqualifying records about beneficiaries whom they serve to the fbi .

moreover , there are other individuals in the u.s. population who are similarly incapacitated due to their age - related infirmities or mental disabilities , but in many cases there are no mechanisms for state or local authorities to make similar referrals to the fbi .

as a consequence , even with the changes put in place by p.l .

110-180 , those members of congress may view the va's continued referral of firearms - related disqualifying records on veterans who have had a fiduciary appointed on their behalf , but who had not behaved in a threatening or dangerous manner , to be an unwarranted indignity placed on individuals who had served their country honorably in the armed forces .

other members of congress would maintain that the va has dutifully complied with the law and that public safety is enhanced by making those referrals to the fbi .

they might also argue that opposition to the va policy waned between november 1998 and the 2007 congressional debate , demonstrating that veterans who were "adjudicated mental defective" rarely , if ever , sought to acquire and were subsequently denied firearms in a manner that could be described as an injustice .

those members would likely underscore that , in their view , the va's current policy does not diminish national recognition of those veterans' honorable service .

rather , the va's policy has been implemented to protect those veterans and others from the harm that might result if they acquired a firearm and used it improperly due to reasons possibly related to their mental incompetency .

the manchin - toomey ( s.amdt .

2908 ) to h.r .

3762 would have amended veterans law to prohibit the va from turning records on veterans or other beneficiaries who had been determined mentally incompetent over to the fbi for inclusion in nics index unless certain notification and review conditions were met .

under these amendments , the secretary of veterans affairs first would have been required to provide to a beneficiary , who has been deemed mentally incompetent for va purposes , notification that includes ( a ) the determination made by the secretary ; ( b ) a description of the implications of such a determination upon one's firearms eligibility under federal law ; and ( c ) the right to request review by the board that would be established by the va or a court of competent jurisdiction .

within 180 days of enactment , the manchin - toomey amendment would have required the secretary of veterans affairs to establish a board that would have reviewed , upon request by a va beneficiary , whether the individual's status as mentally incompetent for the purpose of receiving benefits prevented him from possessing firearms under the gca .

as mentioned above , a va beneficiary would have had the option to request such a review from this board or from a court of competent jurisdiction .

under the manchin - toomey provision , the board would have been able to consider the individual's honorable discharge or decoration in determining whether he or she "cannot safely use , carry , possess , or store firearms due to mental incompetency. .

a beneficiary who receives a determination from the board also would have been permitted to seek judicial review in federal court of the board's decision .

it appears that until this review process is complete , a person would not have been considered "adjudicated as a mental defective" for purposes of firearms eligibility .

as such , it appears that the secretary , by implication , would not have been permitted to make a nics referral during this period of time .

if a beneficiary did not request review by a board or court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days after receiving the initial notification from the secretary , then the beneficiary who was to be determined mentally incompetent would have been considered "adjudicated as a mental defective" for purposes of the gca .

this suggests that the secretary would not have been able to make a nics referral until the 30-day period has passed .

for va beneficiaries who had already been considered "adjudicated as a mental defective" after being determined mentally incompetent by the va , the manchin - toomey amendment would have required the secretary to provide , within 90 days of enactment , written notice to these individuals of the opportunity for administrative review and appeal , as would have been established by the amendment .

furthermore , the amendment would have also required the secretary to review and revise all policies and procedures whereby beneficiaries are determined to be mentally incompetent , so that any individual "who is competent to manage his own financial affairs , including receipt of federal benefits , but who voluntarily turns over the management thereof to a fiduciary is not" considered "adjudicated mentally defective" for purposes of the gca .

within 30 days of conducting this review , the secretary would have been required to submit to congress a report detailing the results of the review and any resulting policy and procedural changes .

on june 15 , 2016 , senator manchin submitted a nearly identical amendment ( s.amdt .

4716 ) during consideration of the fy2017 departments of commerce and justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) appropriations bill ( h.r .

2578 , the expected vehicle for s. 2837 ) ; however , the amendment was not brought to a vote .

the grassley amendments ( s.amdt .

2914 and s.amdt .

4751 ) to h.r .

3762 and h.r .

2578 would have amended veterans law to prohibit the department of veterans' affairs ( va ) from turning records on veterans or other beneficiaries who had been deemed mentally incompetent to the fbi for inclusion in nics without "the order or finding of a judge , magistrate , or other judicial authority of competent jurisdiction that such person is a danger to himself or herself , or others. .

in addition , both grassley amendments ( s.amdt .

2914 and s.amdt .

4751 ) to h.r .

3762 and h.r .

2578 would have replaced the term "adjudicated as a mental defective" with the term "mentally incompetent" in both 18 u.s.c .

section 922 ( d ) and ( g ) , and would have amended the gca to define the terms , "has been adjudicated mentally incompetent or has been committed to a psychiatric hospital," "order or finding," and "psychiatric hospital. .

these definitions and other language would have narrowed the scope of whose records , and under what circumstances , a federal or state agency could refer to the fbi for inclusion in the nics mental defective file .

by comparison , the murphy amendment ( s.amdt .

4750 ) would have codified the atf current law regulatory definition of "adjudicated as a mental defective," which as described below is much wider in scope than the proposed definition in the grassley amendment .

in addition , on december 3 , 2015 , speaker of the house paul ryan indicated that he favored further consideration of mental health reform proposals in lieu of gun control legislation .

he asserted that part of the discussion surrounding mental health legislation is who should not have access to guns due to their mental incapacities .

a possible legislative vehicle in the house was the helping families in mental health crisis act of 2015 ( h.r .

2646 ) , sponsored by representative tim murphy .

however , h.r .

2646 did not include any provisions that directly addressed mental incompetency and gun control .

on the senate side , by comparison , a potential legislative vehicle was the mental health reform act of 2015 ( s. 1945 ) , sponsored by senator bill cassidy .

senator cornyn indicated that a bill he had introduced , the mental health and safe communities act of 2015 ( s. 2002 ) , would have likely also been considered , if and when the senate debated mental health care reform .

like the grassley amendments , s. 2002 included a provision ( in title iii ) that would have amended the gun control act of 1968 with a statutory definition of "adjudicated mentally incompetent" that is arguably narrower than the current law regulatory definition of "adjudicated mental defective. .

congress included the helping families in mental health crisis act in the 21 st century cures act ( division b of p.l .

114-255 ) .

although this act did not include any of the provisions included in the amendments described above , it did include a provision that addressed veterans' benefits , mental incompetency , and gun control .

in december 2016 , congress included a provision in the 21 st century cures act ( p.l .

114-255 ) that codified elements of the va's implementation of niaa .

section 14017 of this act amended 38 u.s.c .

with a new section 5501a to prohibit the va secretary from making certain determinations of mental competency about va benefits claimants , unless the claimant is: notified of the proposed adverse determination and the supporting evidence ; provided an opportunity to request a hearing to address such a proposed adverse determination ; given the opportunity to present evidence , including an opinion from a medical professional or other person , on his or her capacity to manage his or her own monetary benefits paid to or for him or her by the secretary under this title ; and given the opportunity to be represented by counsel at a hearing and to bring a medical professional or other person to provide relevant testimony at any such hearing at no expense to the government .

in short , this provision gives benefit claimants the ability to present evidence from their own health care providers and have counsel present during an administrative hearing to contest a determination of mental incompetency by the va .

as part of president obama's post - newtown plan to reduce gun violence , the attorney general undertook a comprehensive review of federal law to identify "potentially dangerous individuals" who ought not be trusted with firearms .

both the atf and social security administration ( ssa ) published draft rules that addressed mental incompetency and firearms transfer and possession eligibility .

neither rule has been made permanent , however .

under current law , any person who has been "adjudicated as a mental defective" or who has been committed to a mental institution is ineligible to possess or receive firearms or ammunition .

under 27 c.f.r .

§478.11 , the term "adjudicated as a mental defective" is defined to include a determination by a court , board , commission , or other lawful authority that a person , as a result of marked subnormal intelligence or a mental illness , incompetency , condition , or disease , ( 1 ) is a danger to himself or others , or ( 2 ) lacks the mental capacity to manage his own affairs .

the term also includes ( 1 ) a finding of insanity by a court in a criminal case and ( 2 ) those persons found incompetent to stand trial or found not guilty by reason of lack of mental responsibility pursuant to articles 50a and 72b of the uniform code of military justice , 10 u.s.c .

sections 850a , 876 ( b ) .

under the same section , the term "committed to a mental institution" is defined to include a formal commitment of a person to a mental institution by a court , board , commission , or other lawful authority .

the term includes a commitment to a mental institution involuntarily .

the term includes commitment for mental defectiveness or mental illness , it also includes commitments for other reasons , such as for drug use .

the term does not include a person in a mental institution for observation or a voluntary admission to a mental institution .

under the same section , the term "mental institution" is defined to include mental health facilities , mental hospitals , sanitariums , psychiatric facilities , and other facilities that provide diagnoses by licensed professionals of mental retardation or mental illness , including a psychiatric ward in a general hospital .

as part of the president's gun violence reduction plan , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) published a proposed rule that addressed the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) privacy rule , a provision that had been interpreted possibly to be a legal barrier that prevented some states from sharing records with the fbi about persons who had been "adjudicated mental defective. .

on january 7 , 2014 , atf published a notice of proposed rulemaking to amend the definition of "adjudicated as a mental defective .

the draft rule seeks to clarify that that the term includes 1. any person found not guilty by reason of mental disease or defect ; 2. any federal , state , local , and military courts that can find persons incompetent to stand trial or not guilty by reason of insanity , mental disease or defect , lack of mental responsibility , or insanity , by removing the reference to "articles 50a and 72b of the ucmj" and adding "by a court in a criminal case" ; and 3. any person found guilty but mentally ill by a court in a criminal case in a jurisdiction that provides such a finding .

in addition , the draft rule seeks to clarify that the term "committed to a mental institution" includes 1 .

1.involuntary commitment for either inpatient or outpatient treatment .

as part of this rulemaking , atf considered whether commitments that occur when persons are under the age of 18 years ought to be included .

in addition , the draft rule underscored that voluntary admission to a mental institution or a temporary admission for observation would not fall under the term "committed to a mental institution. .

however , in the latter case , it would be included if such an admission turns into a qualifying commitment as a result of a formal commitment by a court , board , commission , or other lawful authority .

on may 5 , 2016 , the social security administration ( ssa ) published a proposed rulemaking to identify on a prospective basis individuals receiving disability insurance benefits , who meet the definition given above of "adjudicated mental defective. .

as described below , the va has been making similar determinations since the inception of the nics program in 1998 .

such determinations would be based on has filed a claim for social security or ssi benefits based on a disability ; has been determined to have an impairment ( or combination of impairments ) that meets or medically equals the criteria of one of the mental disorders specified in ssa's listing of impairments ; a primary diagnosis code based on mental impairment , which is basis for the disability ; has a primary diagnosis code based on a mental impairment ; has attained age 18 but not yet attained social security's full retirement age ( currently 66 ) ; and has had a representative payee appointed because he or she has been determined by ssa to be mentally incapable of managing benefit payments .

on december 19 , 2016 , the ssa published a final version of this rule , with an effective date of january 18 , 2017 ; and ssa nics referrals to begin on december 19 , 2017 .

the manchin - toomey amendment ( s.amdt .

2908 ) and the grassley amendments ( s.amdt .

2914 and s.amdt .

4751 ) included provisions that would require studies of mass violence and mass shootings .

the manchin - toomey amendment would have provided for the establishment of a national commission on mass violence .

the commission would have been tasked with studying the availability and nature of firearms , including the means of acquiring firearms ; issues related to mental health ; and all positive and negative impacts of the availability and nature of firearms on incidents of mass violence or in preventing mass violence .

under this provision , the senate majority leader and the speaker of the house would have appointed six members each to serve on the commission within 30 days of enactment .

the provision would have stipulated further that not more than six commission members could have been from the same party .

the commission members would have been charged with empaneling a field of non - elected experts in four categories: firearms , mental health , school safety , and mass media .

it would have required an interim report within three months of the commission's first meeting and a final report within six months of that date .

the grassley amendments would have required the attorney general to instruct the director of the national institutes of justice ( nij ) to conduct a study of the "various sources and causes of mass shootings including psychological factors , the impact of violent video games , and other factors. .

in this endeavor , the nij director would have been instructed to contact with the national academy of sciences to conduct this study jointly with a panel of five experts .

the administration's fy2017 budget request included $1.306 billion for atf .

this amount was $66.1 million above the fy2016 appropriation .

this proposed increase included $11.8 million in technical and base adjustments to anticipate inflation and other variable costs and $54.3 million in budget enhancements .

as part of president barack obama's gun safety initiative , these budget enhancements included $35.6 million for atf to hire 80 additional special agents and 120 industry operations investigators ; $4 million ( including eight positions ) to upgrade the national integrated ballistics information network ( nibin ) and ballistic imaging hardware and software ; $5.7 million and 22 positions to help process federal firearms and explosives licenses and national firearms act ( nfa ) applications , and expand the use of firearms trace data by atf and other federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies ; and $9 million to integrate atf's disparate case management systems into a next generation case management system .

the fy2017 budget request also called for the repeal of two appropriations limitations that prevent atf from ( 1 ) requiring federal firearms licensees ( ffls ) to inventory their gun stocks prior to annual inspections and ( 2 ) changing an administrative definition of "curios and relics. .

in addition , the president's gun safety initiative included $35 million for the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) to address an increase in firearms background checks through the national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) ; $55 million for grants to state , local , tribal , and territorial authorities under the national criminal history improvement program ( nchip ) and nics amendments record improvement program ( narip , p.l .

110-180 ) ; and $10 million for gun violence research .

as discussed above , nics was established by the fbi in november 1998 to facilitate firearms background checks .

through both nchip and narip , the doj office of justice programs provides grants to states and territories to improve nics accessibility to state records on persons prohibited from acquiring firearms under federal or state law .

the senate committee on appropriations rs .

3040 reported a bill ( s. 2837 ) that would have provided atf with $1.259 billion for fy2017 .

on june 7 , 2016 , the house committee on appropriations reported a bill ( h.r .

5393 ) that would have provided atf with $1.258 billion for fy2017 .

both bills included atf funding limitations with regard to ffl inventory taking and curios and relics , which the administration had requested to be removed .

with regards to nics , report language accompanying both bills indicates that within the amounts that would be appropriated for the fbi funding was provided to fully support nics .

for nchip and narip , the senate bill would have provided $75 million and the house bill , $73 million .

under both bills , not less than $25 million of the amounts given above would have been designated for purposes under p.l .

110-180 .

neither committee included funding for gun research in the house - and senate - reported departments of labor , health and human services ( hhs ) , and education appropriations bills ( and h.r .

5926 ) .

both committees included a limitation in these bills that has prohibited the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) since fy1997 and hhs since fy2012 from using appropriated funding to advocate or promote gun control .

another provision was also included in these bills that has prohibited any department or agency since fy2012 from engaging in "publicity or propaganda" related to restricting any legal consumer product , including the advocacy or promotion of gun control .

at issue , in 1996 , was cdc - sponsored research by dr. arthur l. kellermann , who had his findings published in 1993 in the new england journal of medicine .

it is significant to note that , in 1996 , the house committee on appropriations heard testimony from several witnesses who either provided "scathing attacks" or "passionate defenses" of kellermann's work .

at issue , in 2011 , were three national institutes of health ( nih ) - sponsored research initiatives that examined links between alcohol availability and gun violence , as well as parental gun ownership as a hazard to children .

in the aftermath of the december 2012 , newtown , ct , mass shooting , president obama released a plan , now is t he time , to reduce gun violence , in which he asserted that "research on gun violence is not advocacy. .

president obama issued a memorandum directing cdc and other agencies within hhs to "conduct or sponsor research into the causes of gun violence and the ways to prevent it. .

on september 29 , 2016 , president obama signed into law a continuing appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

114-203 ) , which funded most of the federal government through december 9 , 2016 , at nearly the same levels as appropriated for fy2016 .

for those activities and projects funded under p.l .

114-203 , the act provided an across - the - board decrease of 0.496% for the period october 1 , 2016 , through december 9 , 2016 .

on december 10 , 2016 , the president signed into law a further continuing and security assistance appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

114-254 ) , which funds most of the federal government through april 28 , 2017 , at nearly the same levels as appropriated for fy2017 .

for those activities and projects funded under p.l .

114-154 , the act provides an across - the - board decrease of 0.1901% for the period , december 10 , 2016 , through april 28 , 2017 .

like the previous fy2017 continuing resolution , p.l .

114-254 also extends the long - standing gun control limitations on atf , cdc , hhs , and the departments of labor and education discussed above through that date .

