u.s. relations with zimbabwe , a mineral - rich southern african country , remain strained .

tensions in bilateral relations emerged in the late 1990s , when increasing indications of human rights violations , undemocratic governance , and economic decline , accompanied by radical government economic policies and land seizures , spurred concern among members of congress and other u.s. policymakers .

bilateral relations since that time have been — and remain — dominated by u.s. policy , diplomatic , and targeted assistance efforts intended to prevent and counter such outcomes , mitigate their effects , and push for policy and governance reforms in zimbabwe , as well as alleviate socioeconomic hardships among the country's people .

legislation enacted by congress is a key component of these policy efforts .

zimbabwe attained independence in 1980 under a negotiated political settlement that ended white minority rule , following a long armed struggle .

its politics have since been dominated by the zimbabwe national union - patriotic front ( zanu - pf ) political party , which has its origins in the struggle for majority rule , and president robert mugabe ( moo - g ah - beh ) , zimbabwe's sole post - independence president .

opposition parties have pushed for governance reforms and greater pluralism , notably during a period of often uneasy power sharing between zanu - pf and the opposition under a government of national unity ( gnu ) between 2009 and 2013 .

the gnu had been formed under a regionally mediated accord intended to overcome a political impasse between zanu - pf and the opposition following violent , procedurally disputed elections in 2008 .

elections were last held in july 2013 , but their legitimacy was disputed by the opposition and criticized by the obama administration , among others .

the elections gave zanu - pf a strong majority in parliament , extended mugabe's presidential tenure , and ended power - sharing under the gnu .

since then , economic conditions have steadily deteriorated .

public dissatisfaction with the economy and with the mugabe administration and its intolerance of opposition activity have recently sparked a growing number of large public demonstrations and repressive responses by the government .

protest organizers have included political parties , aggrieved workers , and new citizen - led movements , notably a social media - organized movement known as #thisflag .

such demonstrations have added to ongoing political turmoil and maneuvering by parties over governance and economic policy , prospects in the upcoming 2018 elections , and rivalry over the prospective succession of mugabe , who turned 92 years old in early 2016 .

the succession question has led to internal zanu - pf factionalization , notably including an emergent split between mugabe and veterans of the pre - independence armed struggle , who have long been one of zanu - pf's most vocal core constituencies .

the government has responded to growing domestic criticism and protests by seeking to restrict public gatherings and harshly lashing out at its critics , both in public statements and through law enforcement actions .

such patterns of conduct — and a host of more serious reported human rights abuses — have long concerned domestic and international human rights advocacy groups and western policymakers .

for over two decades , successive u.s. administrations have sought to counter abusive and undemocratic actions by the zanu - pf government by imposing targeted economic and travel sanctions on individuals and firms identified as having committed or abetted abuses .

the targeted sanctions regime is authorized under a series of executive orders .

executive branch officials have periodically stated a willingness to consider changes to the u.s. sanctions regime in response to demonstrable improvements in governance , but to date they have deemed progress to have been insufficient to warrant major changes in u.s. policy .

for many years , u.s. sanctions were complemented by similarly extensive sanctions by other western governments .

surrounding the 2013 elections , however , most of these other foreign actors , most notably the european union , removed or relaxed their sanctions regimes , in contrast to the united states .

sanctions were originally called for by congress in a "sense of congress" provision of the zimbabwe democracy and economic recovery act of 2001 ( zdera , p.l .

107-99 ) .

expressing congressional concern over negative governance , human rights , and rule of law trends in zimbabwe , zdera also prohibits u.s. support for international financial institution ( ifi ) loans or grants to zimbabwe's central government , unless and until the zimbabwean government fulfills a range of governance reform conditions .

in the years since zdera's passage , congress has reiterated the ban on u.s. support for ifi credit assistance to zimbabwe in annual appropriations legislation .

such legislation has also restricted bilateral aid for zimbabwe , with exceptions for aid programs designed to foster the kinds of humanitarian , education , health , poverty reduction , human rights , and good governance outcomes sought by u.s. policymakers .

zimbabwe is also ineligible for ifi loans under u.s. laws other than zdera due to its failure to make payments on its debt to these institutions .

recently , the possibility that zimbabwe might again become eligible for ifi loans has emerged as an issue for policymakers .

in october 2015 , the zimbabwean government issued a plan to repay its ifi arrears as a prerequisite to applying for new ifi credit ( see " zimbabwe's arrears clearance effort " ) .

if it does so , members of congress may reexamine the conditions imposed by zdera and other legislation , and may seek to influence whether , and under what circumstances , the mugabe government might be able to receive financial support .

such conditions may be likely to include concrete , demonstrable efforts to pursue market - led economic growth , improved economic management and fiscal transparency , more transparent and accountable governance , and free and fair elections .

the question of who may succeed president mugabe arguably presents the most immediate and pressing challenge for zimbabwe's political system , and for foreign governments engaged with the country .

the stakes are high .

succession outcomes are likely to shape future developments in all major policy arenas , and the succession process could generate political and economic instability , possibly violent , in the wider southern africa region .

succession is subject to the interplay of diverse , primarily domestic factors , however , making it an unpredictable and fluid process , and one not readily influenced by u.s. or other foreign policy interventions .

enduring support and admiration for mugabe in southern african political circles — including within south africa — may also limit the impact of u.s. actions .

human rights advocates have for years raised concern with documented government violations of the rule of law and respect for human rights , particularly during election periods and with regard to its treatment of political opponents and human rights and democracy advocacy groups .

frequent reported perpetrators of political violence in recent years have included the state security forces , zanu - pf youth militants , members of znlwva , and , to a lesser extent , mdc militants .

in july 2016 , amnesty international ( ai ) reported that "recently , human rights defenders and activists in zimbabwe have been receiving threats and [are] subjected to arbitrary arrests , ill – treatment and attempted abductions. .

zanu - pf supporters were implicated in harassment and intimidation in the lead - up to the by - elections in mid - 2015 , in addition to prior violence linked to the purge of mujuru supporters , while opposition activists engaged in violent skirmishes in connection with intra - mdc competition .

there have also been reports of state - and party - mediated allocations of food , fertilizer , and other commodities , as well as coercion , to secure votes or political support for zanu - pf .

the reported march 2015 daytime abduction of a zimbabwean journalist and human rights activist , itai dzamara , allegedly by state security officials , has also drawn widespread local and international attention .

dzamara has not been found , and u.s. officials have called for a full and open investigation of his case .

similar allegations of state involvement in other abduction cases have periodically been reported since the early 2000s .

police regularly halt public political and economic demonstrations and arrest political and labor union protesters .

in its 2016 world report , human rights watch ( hrw ) asserted that in 2015 , "those who criticized mugabe or his government , including human rights defenders , civil society activists , political opponents , and outspoken street vendors , were harassed , threatened , or arbitrarily arrested by police and state security agents. .

zimbabwe lawyers for human rights ( zlhr ) , a nongovernment advocacy group , has contended that authorities intentionally "misinterpret and selectively misapply laws. .

annual state department human rights reports have reflected similar findings .

recently , however , and against the government's wishes , some judges have allowed bond for detainees facing protest - related charges , reduced or tossed out such charges , and permitted several protests for which the police have denied permits .

hrw , zlhr , and others also assert that the government has not pursued many of the legal reforms that they contend are needed to bring the national legal code and system into compliance with the 2013 constitution , including the repeal or reform of laws constraining freedoms of expression , association , and movement .

these groups also call for progress toward an impartial state media and apolitical security services .

collectively , these laws have often been used to harass political and civil society activists .

zlhr , among other human rights groups , views several of them as contrary to the 2013 constitution , and in the absence of their full repeal or replacement sees an urgent need to bring them into line with the constitution .

the government is also seeking passage of the computer crime and cyber crime bill , which would reportedly give authorities additional authorities to intercept electronic communications and seize digital devices in a wide variety of circumstances .

the new measure may reportedly be used by police to restrict expression via social media , which critics have often used to organize protests .

zlhr also urges that a range of constitutionally required commissions ( eg , on national peace and reconciliation , gender , and land ) be given adequate resources to pursue their mandates , and that legal reforms be enacted to devolve authority and resources to the provinces .

zlhr and hrw contend , in particular , that the official zimbabwe human rights commission lacks adequate resources , and hrw has noted that its mandate — limited to acts committed since early 2009 , when the gnu was established — leaves it unable to investigate or help secure justice for victims of prior human rights abuses and political violence .

police harassment and criminal prosecutions of journalists and social media writers , often based on allegations of slander against mugabe and other state officials , have been common , although in early 2016 , the supreme constitutional court found zimbabwe's criminal defamation laws to be unconstitutional .

law enforcement officials also regularly crack down on micro - businesses such as street vendors in the widespread informal sector .

the state and zanu - pf also have a history of sponsoring various "operations," a term drawn from military and law enforcement parlance , which refers to party or security agency campaigns that generally seek to support zanu - pf - backed policies , aid the party's support base or , conversely , targeting putative zanu - pf opponents , real and perceived .

the targets of these campaigns have varied ; examples include irregular housing settlements , illegal artisanal mining , and unregistered satellite tv receivers , as well as extra - governmental efforts to control inflation , meet housing demands , boost agricultural production , or undertake land reform .

others have involved systematic campaigns of political violence .

the zimbabwean state also has a history of forcibly displacing selective groups of citizens and seizing their property , often for political ends .

in 2014 , hrw documented the eviction and resettlement without adequate compensation of 20,000 flood - displaced persons , who suffered security force abuses when they protested .

the government has reportedly since acknowledged some fault in the case and pledged to address the victims' situation .

periodic uncompensated seizures of farmland , often orchestrated by top zanu - pf or security service figures and targeting the few remaining white commercial farmers and others not favored by the government , have also continued .

zanu - pf - linked beneficiaries of land grabs continue seek to gain legal ownership of such properties .

"indigenization," the mandatory partial nationalization of foreign firms , is another current form of state property expropriation .

another key human rights challenge is trafficking in persons ( tip ) .

under the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( tvpa , p.l .

106-386 , as amended ) , the state department has classified zimbabwe as a tier 3 country since 2009 , meaning that its government does not fully comply with minimum u.s. tvpa standards and is not making significant efforts to do so .

zimbabwe's ranking has made it ineligible for "non - trade related , nonhumanitarian assistance to the government except for certain economic assistance for various specific purposes with specific limitations. .

in every year since 2010 , the obama administration has issued a partial waiver of these restrictions to allow certain types of assistance deemed to be "in the national interest. .

one positive development praised by human rights campaigners was an early 2016 decision by zimbabwe's constitutional court to outlaw the marriage of anyone under 18 years of age .

child advocates see it as a key step in reducing zimbabwe's reportedly high rate of child marriage , which particularly affects minor brides .

after the 2013 elections , many observers viewed economic policy as a make - or - break challenge facing the newly elected zanu - pf government given the severe crisis , hyperinflation , and massive economic contraction ( - 66.8% ) that occurred from 2000 to 2009 under zanu - pf stewardship .

since the advent of the zanu - pf majority government in august 2013 and the departure of gnu finance minister tendai biti , economic growth has slowed considerably , and many zimbabweans face increasingly dire economic prospects .

the imf estimates that gdp growth has declined from 4.5% in 2013 to 3.3% in 2014 and 1.4% in 2015 .

weak economic growth is attributable to a drop in exports , a lack of credit for the private sector , in part due to high government borrowing , low demand linked to poverty and illiquidity , poor financial sector performance , and low foreign investment levels .

other contributing factors , according to some analysts , have been problematic economic policy decisions and regulatory actions , notably relating to indigenization and , more recently , currency and trade controls .

a severe regional el niño - related drought in 2015-2016 , meanwhile , has buffeted the agricultural economy , decreasing export crop production and creating widespread food insecurity .

low world prices for several key zimbabwean minerals , together with new mining royalty payment requirements , have dampened mineral production and exports .

imports have also fallen significantly , in part due to shortages of hard currency necessary for foreign transactions , but remain about double the value of exports .

low import demand is also driven by low formal sector domestic production .

import demand has been driven by low formal sector domestic production , which has also been hampered by low demand , generating a 2.5% deflation rate and lack of access to credit and hard currency .

many businesses have reportedly closed or downsized in recent years , and 65% of manufacturing capacity was reportedly idle in 2015 .

regular , lengthy electricity cuts have exacerbated this situation .

formal sector unemployment is widely reported to be extremely high , although accurate employment data is lacking , and much of the labor force works in the informal sector .

all of these factors have both helped spur and been affected by widespread poverty and contributed to weak market demand .

zimbabwe's reliance on the u.s. dollar — the main local transactional currency since 2009 — has also inhibited growth , due to a worsening dollar shortage and associated economic uncertainty .

rising local demand for the u.s. dollar has been driven by the international strength of the dollar ; high import demand , including for food , production of which has dropped due to the drought ; and a preference for hard currency in zimbabwe's cash - dominated economy .

the rbz , which has few monetary policy options because it does not control its own currency , is attempting to address the shortage by limiting hard currency withdrawals ( eg , at atms ) and import transactions .

the bank , through which foreign exchange import transactions must flow by law , is distributing export earnings in multiple foreign currencies , rather than the dollar alone , to reduce reliance on the dollar and increase cash flows .

it is also prioritizing certain imports over others , interfering in market mediation of demand and supply for goods , requiring multi - currency pricing of goods and the use of point of sale machines that can handle multiple currencies and payment types , and limiting external financial transfers .

the rbz has also announced very controversial plans to issue $200 million worth of local bond notes intended to serve as proxies for and be valued at par with u.s. dollars .

the bank's intention is to bring cash liquidity to the domestic economy and increase the volume of money circulating .

the bond plan , however , has spurred fears of a return to the hyperinflation associated with the defunct zimbabwean dollar and predictions that bonds will trade at a depreciated value relative to the dollar , depriving bond holders of the full value of their holdings .

in august 2016 , police used tear gas and water cannons to disperse a reportedly peaceful protest against the bonds .

rbz external transfer controls have also reportedly drawn the ire of politically connected elites and businesses .

while hunting is a significant source of conservation income nationally , generating $45 million in 2014 according to the zimbabwe parks and wildlife management authority , it is controversial .

in july 2015 , a protected , rare black - maned lion dubbed cecil , which was reportedly lured out of zimbabwe's hwange game reserve , was killed by a u.s. trophy hunter .

the hunt was reportedly licensed but the killing allegedly occurred under the negligent supervision of a paid professional guide , faced criminal charges in zimbabwe .

the u.s. hunter was investigated by u.s. authorities but not charged .

the killing drew global attention , condemnation , and calls for an end to lion hunting in africa , and prompted several airlines to stop transport of animal trophies .

the killing of zimbabwe's elephants for their ivory tusks has also drawn global attention , as has a spate of poaching - related , cyanide - based poisonings that reportedly primarily targeted elephant and rhinoceros and affected multiple species .

an estimated 400 or more elephants have reportedly been killed in this manner since 2008 , including about 70 in 2015 in hwange and other parks in zimbabwe , as have several hundred rhinos in recent years .

rhino horns are valued by asian traditional medicine buyers , and are a key target of traffickers .

in separate cases , in 2015 , authorities arrested a group of game wardens and a group of villagers near hwange in relation to cyanide poisonings , and recently killed an elephant poacher and arrested his alleged accomplices .

to counter such activities , in late 2015 , the environment , water and climate minister announced that the government would deploy the national army to supplement game warden and police poaching patrol and interdiction activities in several large game parks using helicopters , drones , and other methods .

other government efforts to manage wildlife populations have proven controversial .

in july 2015 , some conservationists criticized zimbabwe after wildlife officials corralled a number of allegedly juvenile elephants and exported about 20 of them to china — reportedly as part of a cull in hwange to reduce an elephant population that is ecologically unsustainable , as well as to earn foreign currency .

critics allege that such captures disrupt herd life and that the animals have been mistreated in china .

zimbabwe had previously come under criticism for similar actions involving exports to countries including china , the united arab emirates , and france , but is continuing such exports .

in june 2016 , the government drew criticism after requesting sale offers from private game reserves to buy wildlife residing in public game reserves .

the stated objective was to reduce populations , thereby easing pressure on natural food stocks , and to raise funds to provide food and water to distressed animals .

u.s. efforts to combat poaching and illicit trade in wildlife are pursued under the obama administration's national strategy for combating wildlife trafficking , in which the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) plays a leading role .

in an effort to foster elephant conservation in zimbabwe , the fws issued a temporary ban — imposed under the authority of the endangered species act ( esa ) , which lists the african elephant as threatened — on the import of sport - hunted elephant trophies from zimbabwe for most of 2014 .

in 2015 , fws extended the ban indefinitely , pending possible creation of a demonstrably robust elephant conservation system , a goal that u.s .

interior department officials are working with the government to achieve .

the ban was initially justified by a fws finding that zimbabwean conservation plans did not adequately specify goals and progress towards conserving elephant populations , and that the government had insufficient data with which to assess the status of its elephant populations and lacked adequate capacities to effectively implement and enforce elephant - related laws .

fws therefore asserted that it could not determine if limited elephant hunting there would enhance the survival of the species .

in late 2015 , after a review of scientific and commercial information , fws also listed a subspecies of lion found in eastern and southern africa , panthera leo melanochaita [ p. l. melanochaita ] , as threatened under esa .

fws also issued a concurrent rule , which took effect in early 2016 , that creates a comprehensive permitting process for all u.s. p. l. melanochaita imports ( eg , live animals , scientific specimens , and sport - hunted trophies ) .

it is intended to ensure that such imports are legally sourced , esa - compliant , and originate only from countries with well - managed , scientifically based lion species conservation programs .

in press accounts , zimbabwean officials have portrayed the lion and elephant bans as devastating to the country's hunting industry .

hunting bans may have unpredictable effects .

reducing hunting could protect some animals , but properly regulated hunting theoretically targets relatively few animals , and the imposition of bans could change conservation - related economic incentives .

given high fees generated by commercial hunts , bans could potentially reduce community conservation funding and make poaching more economically attractive , potentially placing many species at greater risk .

critics of trophy hunting , however , assert that hunting is often not sufficiently regulated and that the link between conservation and income from hunting is not as strong as proponents may claim .

executive branch - issued sanctions on individuals whom the united states has identified as having undermined democratic institutions and processes in zimbabwe have reinforced u.s. condemnation of zanu - pf - led human rights violations , breaches of the rule of law , and undemocratic practices since 2000 .

such persons are also subject to u.s. visa restrictions .

congress had called for the imposition of such sanctions when it passed zdera ( p.l .

107-99 ) in 2001 .

as earlier noted , zdera also set out a range of restrictions requiring u.s. representatives on the boards of ifis to vote against loans or debt cancellations benefitting the zimbabwean government , pending fulfillment of a range of conditions .

these relate to the effective rule of law ( eg , guarantees of property rights , freedom of speech and association , and an end to the state - backed violence and intimidation ) ; a freely held presidential election or the fulfilment of other conditions conducive to free and fair elections ; an equitable , legal , and transparent process of land reform ; and subordination of the security services to elected civilian leaders .

at the time of zdera's passage , zimbabwe was already ineligible for most multilateral loans as it was in arrears on past loans .

recent annual foreign aid appropriations laws have also prohibited u.s. support for international financial institution loans or grants to the zimbabwean government , with some exceptions , pending fulfillment of a range of conditions .

in an early 2016 letter to treasury secretary jacob lew , sfrc chairman bob corker voiced support for such conditions , as well as others , writing that any new lending to zimbabwe's government , including lending related to help zimbabwe clear its ifi arrears , should "be preceded by meaningful progress toward" clear benchmarks for the restoration of the rule of law , including respect for private property , free press , freedom of speech , and freedom of assembly ; a credible process of accountability for missing revenues from diamonds and a monitored plan for capturing future revenues ; and official acknowledgement of past gross human rights abuses and a demonstration that the government of zimbabwe is prepared to make an earnest effort to remedy those abuses .

the outlook for zimbabwe is highly uncertain .

many zimbabwean political actors are increasingly focused on their own prospects in the upcoming 2018 elections and the forthcoming succession of mugabe .

this is particularly the case within zanu - pf , whose upper hierarchy appears to be divided by factional dynamics and rivalries .

meanwhile , weak economic performance has persisted , generating increasing popular resentment and protest .

while some top zimbabwean policymakers are focused on fostering economic reform — including reforms agreed with the imf — it is unclear how much cross - government support there is for such efforts , as opposed to simply meeting a set of criteria that might allow the country to eventually access ifi credit , while keeping in place the kinds of nationalist , state - centered economic policies long advocated by zanu - pf .

mugabe's prospective succession , which has been a focus of zimbabwean politics and debate for years , is likely to present a watershed moment for the country .

it could spur a transition toward a new governing regime with a new leadership ethos — potentially one more accepting of a pluralistic political system and market - led economy .

on the other hand , succession could generate significant political acrimony , instability , and violence , possibly with regional humanitarian and security implications .

it could also lead to a managed transition characterized by little political and policy change and continued zanu - pf domination under a new leader .

all of these outcomes have implications for u.s. policy toward , and future relations with , zimbabwe .

what influence the united states may have on these outcomes , however , is likely to be limited by the fact that developments in zimbabwe are dominated primarily by domestic factors — as well as conflicting policy goals among powerful states bordering zimbabwe , such as south africa and angola .

the scope and flexibility of actions available to u.s. policy implementers , and thus the potential for u.s. influence in zimbabwe , may also be limited by relatively static and inflexible u.s. sanctions and aid restriction policies .

while some u.s. policymakers may view any relaxation of u.s. aid restrictions and sanctions policy as an accommodation to what they see as a bad government , others may seek to examine changes in policy that might allow greater u.s. freedom of action to engage with reformers and other pragmatic zimbabwean leadership elements but simultaneously not reward the most problematic actors within the government .

