t he official unemployment rate has been in decline over the past several years , peaking at 10% shortly after the 2007-2009 recession before falling to 5% in january 2016 .

a falling unemployment rate is gene rally a cause for celebration as more individuals are able to find jobs ; however , the current low unemployment rate has been increasingly cited as a reason to begin rolling back expansionary monetary and fiscal policy .

after citing "considerable improvement in labor market conditions," in december 2015 for the first time in seven years , the federal reserve increased its federal funds target rate , reducing the expansionary power of its monetary policy .

labor market conditions have certainly improved since the depths of the financial crisis and 2007-2009 recession , but an unemployment rate of around 5% means that nearly 8 million people are still searching for jobs and are unable to find them .

so why is the federal reserve reducing the amount of stimulus entering the economy when so many people are still looking for work ? .

the answer involves the relationship between the two parts of the federal reserve's dual mandate — maximum employment and stable prices .

in general , economists have observed an inverse relationship between the unemployment rate and the inflation rate , i.e. , the rate at which prices rise .

this trade - off between unemployment and inflation become particularly pronounced ( i.e. , small changes in unemployment result in relatively large price swings ) when the unemployment rate drops below a certain level , referred to by economists as the "natural unemployment rate. .

alternatively , when the unemployment rate rises above the natural rate , inflation will tend to decelerate .

in response to the financial crisis and subsequent recession , the federal reserve began employing expansionary monetary policy to spur economic growth and improve labor market conditions .

recently , the unemployment rate has fallen to a level consistent with many estimates of the natural rate of unemployment , between 4.6% and 5.0% .

if the unemployment rate were to continue falling , it would likely fall below the natural rate of unemployment and cause accelerating inflation , violating the federal reserve's mandate of stable prices .

this report discusses the relationship between unemployment and inflation , the general economic theory surrounding this topic , the relationship since the financial crisis , and its use in policymaking .

a relationship between the unemployment rate and prices was first prominently established in the late 1950s .

this early research focused on the relationship between the unemployment rate and the rate of wage inflation .

economist a. w. phillips found that between 1861 and 1957 , there was a negative relationship between the unemployment rate and the rate of change in wages in the united kingdom , showing wages tended to grow faster when the unemployment rate was lower , and vice versa .

his work was then replicated using u.s. data between 1934 and 1958 , discovering a similar negative relationship between unemployment and wage growth .

economists reasoned that this relationship existed due to simple supply and demand within the labor market .

as the unemployment rate decreases , the supply of unemployed workers decreases , thus employers must offer higher wages to attract additional employees from other firms .

this body of research was expanded , shifting the focus from wage growth to changes in the price level more generally .

the negative relationship between unemployment and inflation was dubbed the phillips curve , due to phillips's seminal work on the issue .

many interpreted the early research around the phillips curve to mean that a stable relationship existed between unemployment and inflation .

this suggested that policymakers could choose among a schedule of unemployment and inflation rates ; in other words , policymakers could achieve and maintain a lower unemployment rate if they were willing to accept a higher inflation rate and vice versa .

this rationale was prominent in the 1960s , and both the kennedy and johnson administrations considered this framework when designing economic policy .

during the 1960s , economists began challenging the phillips curve concept , suggesting that the model was too simplistic and the relationship would break down in the presence of persistent positive inflation .

these critics claimed that the static relationship between the unemployment rate and inflation could only persist if individuals never adjusted their expectations around inflation , which would be at odds with the fundamental economic principle that individuals act rationally .

but , if individuals adjusted their expectations around inflation , any effort to maintain an unemployment rate below the natural rate of unemployment would result in continually rising inflation , rather than a one - time increase in the inflation rate .

this rebuttal to the original phillips curve model is now commonly known as the natural rate model .

the natural rate model suggests that there is a certain level of unemployment that is consistent with a stable inflation rate , known as the natural rate of unemployment .

the natural rate of unemployment is often referred to as the non - accelerating inflation rate of unemployment ( nairu ) .

when the unemployment rate falls below the natural rate of unemployment , referred to as a negative unemployment gap , the inflation rate is expected to accelerate .

when the unemployment rate exceeds the natural rate of unemployment , referred to as a positive unemployment gap , inflation is expected to decelerate .

the natural rate model gained support as 1970s' events showed that the stable tradeoff between unemployment and inflation as suggested by the phillips curve appeared to break down .

a series of negative oil supply shocks in the 1970s resulted in high unemployment and high inflation , known as stagflation , with core inflation and the unemployment rate both rising above 9% in 1975 .

the economy's ability to produce goods and services , or potential output , is dependent on three main factors in the long run: ( 1 ) the amount of capital ( machines , factories , etc .

 ) , ( 2 ) the number and quality of workers , and ( 3 ) the level of technology .

although these factors largely govern the economy's potential output , the economy's actual output is largely governed by demand for goods and services , which can rise above or below potential output .

the economy is most stable when actual output equals potential output ; the economy is said to be in equilibrium because the demand for goods and services is matched by the economy's ability to supply those goods and services .

in other words , certain characteristics and features of the economy ( capital , labor , and technology ) determine how much the economy can sustainably produce at a given time , but demand for goods and services is what actually determines how much is produced in the economy .

as actual output diverges from potential output , inflation will tend to become less stable .

all else equal , when actual output exceeds the economy's potential output , a positive output gap is created , and inflation will tend to accelerate .

when actual output is below potential output , a negative output gap is generated , and inflation will tend to decelerate .

within the natural rate model , the natural rate of unemployment is the level of unemployment consistent with actual output equaling potential output , and therefore stable inflation .

the natural rate of unemployment is not constant .

as discussed earlier , the natural rate of unemployment is the rate that is consistent with sustainable economic growth , or when actual output is equal to potential output .

it is therefore expected that changes within the economy can change the natural unemployment rate .

four main features of the economy affect the natural unemployment rate: 1 .

labor market composition , 2 .

labor market institutions and public policy , 3 .

productivity growth , and 4 .

long - term — that is , longer than 26 weeks — unemployment rates .

as the characteristics of the labor force change — for example , with respect to age , educational attainment , and work experience — and alter the productive capacity of the economy , the natural rate is also expected to shift .

individual worker's characteristics affect the likelihood that a worker will become unemployed and the speed ( or ease ) at which he or she can find work .

for example , younger workers tend to have less experience and therefore have higher levels of unemployment on average .

consequently , if young workers form a significant portion of the labor force , the natural rate of unemployment will be higher .

alternatively , individuals with higher levels of educational attainment generally find it easier to find work ; therefore , as the average level of educational attainment of workers rises , the natural rate of unemployment will tend to decrease .

labor market institutions and public policies in place within an economy can also impact the natural rate of unemployment by improving individuals' ability to find and obtain work .

for example , apprenticeship programs provide individuals additional work experience and help them find work faster , which can decrease the natural rate of unemployment .

alternatively , ample unemployment insurance benefits may increase the natural rate of unemployment , as unemployed individuals will spend longer periods looking for work .

the rate of productivity growth also impacts the natural unemployment rate .

according to economic theory , employee compensation can grow at the same speed as productivity without increasing inflation .

individuals become accustomed to compensation growth at this speed and come to expect similar increases in their compensation year over year based on the previous growth in productivity .

a decrease in the rate of productivity growth would eventually result in a decrease in the growth of compensation ; however , workers are likely to resist this decrease in the pace of wage growth and bargain for compensation growth above the growth rate of productivity .

this above average compensation growth will erode firms' profits and they will begin to lay off employees to cut down on costs , leading to a higher natural rate of unemployment .

the opposite occurs with an increase in productivity growth , businesses are able to increase their profits and hire additional workers simultaneously , resulting in a lower natural rate of unemployment .

lastly , the contemporaneous and previous level of long - term unemployment in an economy can shift the natural rate of unemployment .

individuals who are unemployed for longer periods of time tend to forget certain skills and become less productive , and are therefore less attractive to employers .

in addition , some employers may interpret long breaks from employment as a signal of low labor market commitment or worker quality , further reducing job offers to this group .

as the proportion of long - term unemployed individuals increases , the natural rate of unemployment will also increase .

events following the 2007-2009 recession have again called into question how well economists understand the relationship between the unemployment gap and inflation .

as a result of the global financial crisis and the u.s. 2007-2009 recession , the unemployment rate rose above 10% and remained significantly elevated compared with estimates of the natural rate of unemployment for multiple years , as shown in figure 1 .

the natural rate model suggests that this significant and prolonged unemployment gap should have resulted in decelerating inflation during that period .

actual inflation did decline modestly during that period , decreasing from an average rate of about 2% between 2003 and 2007 to about 1.4% on average between 2008 and mid - 2015 .

however , based on previous experience with unemployment gaps of this size and inflation forecasts based on the natural rate model , many economists anticipated a more drastic decrease in the inflation rate , with some predicting negative inflation ( or deflation ) rates reaching 4% during that period .

the movements of the unemployment rate and inflation rate after the financial crisis are displayed in figure 2 .

numerous competing hypotheses exist for why a significant decrease in the inflation rate failed to materialize .

the following sections describe the prominent hypotheses and discuss the available evidence for these hypotheses .

the natural rate model has implications for the design and implementation of economic policy , specifically limitations to fiscal and monetary policies and alternative policies to affect economic growth without potentially accelerating inflation .

the natural rate model suggests that government's ability to spur higher employment through fiscal and monetary policies is limited in important ways .

expansionary fiscal and monetary policies can be used to boost gross domestic product ( gdp ) growth and reduce unemployment , by increasing demand for goods and services , but doing so comes at a cost .

according to the natural rate model , if government attempts to maintain an unemployment rate below the natural rate of unemployment , inflation will increase and continuously rise until unemployment returns to its natural rate .

as a result , growth will be more volatile than if policymakers had attempted to maintain the unemployment rate at the natural rate of unemployment .

as higher levels of inflation tend to hurt economic growth , expansionary economic policy can actually end up limiting economic growth in the long run by causing accelerating inflation .

the impact of inflation on economic growth is discussed in the " inflation's impact on economic growth " section below .

as discussed earlier , the relationship of unemployment to the natural rate of unemployment is used as a benchmark to determine when there is either a positive or negative output gap ( i.e. , actual output differs from potential output ) .

alternative measures could be used to indicate an output gap , however , the literature surrounding this topic has largely found using the unemployment gap to be a reliable measure of the overall output gap .

in general , policymakers avoid pursuing an unemployment target below the natural rate of unemployment because accelerating inflation imposes costs on businesses , individuals , and the economy as a whole .

inflation tends to interfere with pricing mechanisms in the economy , resulting in individuals and businesses making less than optimal spending , saving , and investment decisions .

additionally , economic actors ( eg , workers , firms , and investors ) often take action to protect themselves from the negative impacts of inflation , but in doing so divert resources from other more productive activities .

for example , to guard against inflation firms will shy from long - term investments , favoring short - term investments even if they offer a lower rate of return .

inflation's impact on economic growth is especially pronounced at higher levels of inflation than the united states has experienced in recent decades .

ultimately these inefficient decisions reduce incomes , economic growth , and living standards .

for these reasons , it is generally accepted that inflation should be kept low to minimize these distortions in the economy .

some would argue that an inflation rate of zero is optimal ; however , a target of zero inflation makes a period of accidental deflation more likely , and deflation is thought to be even more costly than inflation .

deflation is thought to be especially damaging as decreasing prices provide a strong incentive for consumers to abstain from purchasing goods and services , as their dollars will be worth more in the future , decreasing aggregate demand .

in an effort to balance these two risks , policymakers , including the federal reserve , often target a positive , but low , inflation rate , generally around 2% , which reduces inefficiencies within the economy while protecting against deflation .

the unexpectedly mild decrease in the rate of inflation following the sustained unemployment gap after the 2007-2009 recession suggested a weakening of the relationship between the unemployment gap and inflation , and evidence of a weakened relationship persists several years into the current economic expansion .

expansionary monetary and fiscal policies have been in place for the better part of a decade .

the unemployment rate is approximating estimates of the natural rate of unemployment , and yet the inflation rate has yet to rise to the federal reserve's long - term target of 2% per year .

the current state of the economy suggests that either the subdued relationship seen between the unemployment gap and inflation during the depths of the economic downturn appears to be persisting even as economic conditions improve , or the unemployment gap may no longer act as an accurate measure of the output gap .

if the relationship between inflation and the unemployment rate has indeed weakened , it would have important implications for economic policy .

on the one hand , it may allow policymakers to employ fiscal and monetary policies more aggressively without accelerating inflation at the same rate as would have been previously expected .

on the other hand , however , a weakened relationship would also suggest that if inflation were to begin accelerating , a larger and more sustained period of elevated unemployment may be necessary to stabilize inflation than otherwise anticipated .

further research and time is necessary to determine if the weakened relationship seen after the recession is a temporary phenomenon specific to the financial crisis and subsequent events , or if it is a more enduring shift in the strength of the dynamic between unemployment and inflation .

alternatively , the federal reserve's inability to meet their inflation target despite the unemployment rate falling to levels consistent with the natural rate of unemployment , may suggest that the unemployment gap is no longer an accurate proxy for the output gap .

in the second quarter of 2016 , the unemployment rate was about 4.9% , consistent with estimates of the natural rate of unemployment ( 4.6% - 5.0% ) , but the cbo still estimated an output gap of about 2% during the same period .

the difference between the unemployment gap and output gap may be due to persistent slack in the labor market as a result of the 2007-2009 recession , which is not captured by the official unemployment rate .

alternative measures of labor market underutilization show that some of the weakness in labor markets that resulted from the recession still persists .

for example , following the recession , the labor force participation rate decreased from about 66% to less than 63% .

some of this decrease is due to an aging population but some is due to individuals giving up on finding work due to poor economic conditions .

the unemployment rate does not account for individuals who stopped looking for work , and therefore may understate the actual amount of slack left in the economy .

this could help explain why the cbo estimates a current output gap , while the unemployment gap seems to have disappeared .

following the significant damage to the labor market as a result of the 2007-2009 recession , it is likely beneficial to use multiple measures of labor market underutilization in addition to the official unemployment rate to judge the potential size of the unemployment and output gap .

in addition to fiscal and monetary policies , alternative economic policies could be used to target higher economic output without the risk of accelerating inflation by lowering the natural rate of unemployment .

as discussed in the " time varying natural rate of unemployment " section , four main factors determine the natural rate of unemployment , ( 1 ) the makeup of the labor force , ( 2 ) labor market institutions and public policy , ( 3 ) growth in productivity , and ( 4 ) contemporaneous and previous levels of long - term unemployment .

policies to improve the labor force , by either making employees more desirable to employers or improving the efficiency of the matching process between employees and employers , would drive down the natural rate of unemployment .

in addition , changes to labor market institutions and public policy that ease the process of finding and hiring qualified employees , such as increased job training or apprenticeship programs , could also help lower the natural unemployment rate .

a wide range of policies have been suggested that may increase the growth rate of productivity and therefore decrease the natural rate of unemployment , such as increasing government investment in infrastructure , reducing government regulation of industry , and increasing incentives for research and development .

in addition , more aggressive policy interventions to help individuals find work during economic downturns may help to prevent spikes in long - term unemployment and avoid increases in the natural rate of unemployment .

