although the extent of future sea - level rise remains uncertain , sea - level rise generally is anticipated to have a range of economic , social , and environmental effects on u.s. coasts .

global sea level is rising due to warming and expanding oceans , melting glaciers , and melting ice sheets in greenland and antarctica , among other reasons .

from 1901 to 2010 , global sea levels rose an estimated 187 millimeters ( mm ; 7.4 inches ) , averaging a 1.7 mm rise annually ; estimates are that from 1992 to 2010 , the rate increased to 3.2 mm annually .

the rates of relative sea - level rise at specific locations are likely more important to coastal communities and coastal ecosystems than the global sea - level average trends .

sea levels are rising between 9 mm and 12 mm per year ( 0.4 inches to 0.5 inches per year ) along the mississippi delta near new orleans and between 1 mm and 2 mm ( 0.04 inches and 0.08 inches , or less ) per year along some coastal shorelines in oregon and washington .

since the beginning of the 20 th century , coastal and tidal areas have seen significant population growth and associated development and infrastructure investments .

the consequences of sea - level rise are of interest to congress not only because of the local impacts on coastal communities and ecosystems but also because of the direct and indirect impacts and risks for the federal government .

following an introduction to sea - level rise issues for policymakers , the report is divided into three primary parts: part i describes the phenomenon of sea - level rise .

it introduces key terminology , measurements , trends , and causes .

 ( see " part i .

what is sea - level rise ? " ) .

part ii describes the types of effects that sea - level rise can have on u.s. coasts .

it addresses effects on shorelines and coastal ecosystems and on coastal development and society .

part ii describes federal actions to address sea - level rise and the tension between the federal role and actions taken by state , local , and private stakeholders .

 ( see " part ii .

sea - level rise and u.s .

coasts ." ) .

part iii provides a primer on policy considerations .

it raises considerations and questions associated with policies to address the causes and effects of sea - level rise .

it also discusses federalism issues and general considerations associated with sea - level rise policies and investments .

 ( see " part iii .

policy considerations and questions ." ) .

two descriptions of sea level are commonly used by scientists: global sea level ( gsl ) and relative sea level ( rsl ) .

gsl and rsl pose different policy challenges .

figure 5 illustrates the factors contributing to gsl and rsl rise .

the drivers for rising gsl since 1900 are predominantly thermal expansion of the oceans due to warming ocean water and melting glaciers and ice sheets ( table 2 ) .

the oceans have warmed due to a combination of natural variability and the influence of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions on atmospheric temperatures .

similarly , glaciers and polar ice sheets have melted since 1900 due to a combination of natural variability and ghg - induced climate change and deposition of pollutants .

the global factors driving rsl change include those that influence gsl , but in some cases regional or local factors are responsible for the largest changes in rsl along the coastlines .

these regional or local factors can be natural , such as the land rebounding upward after continental ice sheets melted at the end of the last ice age , or they can be due to human activities , such as groundwater pumping , oil and gas extraction , sediment compaction , land management practices , or other factors .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

understanding the relative contributions from these different drivers of rsl rise is important for crafting responses to help coastal communities predict , mitigate , and adapt to the changing risks that sea - level rise brings .

after a brief introduction to the effects of sea - level rise on u.s. coasts , part ii of the report is divided into the following three sections: effects on shorelines and ecosystems , which discusses how coastal processes and topography influence how u.s. shorelines and ecosystems may change with sea - level rise ; effects on development and society , which describes u.s. coastal development and its coastal storm and nuisance flooding risks ; and actions addressing the impacts of sea - level rise , which describes the activities of various federal agencies , existing federal coastal management statutes , and the role of public and private actions .

sea - level rise raises several questions: what does sea - level rise portend for future economic development of u.s. coasts ? .

how does sea - level rise affect the safety and quality of life of coastal residents ? .

how does sea - level rise alter the coastal ecosystems and potentially alter the benefits that society derives from those ecosystems , such as recreation and commercial fisheries ? .

near - term choices on managing and adapting to sea - level rise have the potential to significantly shape the responses to these questions and the future of u.s. coastal development .

general categories of policy options related to sea - level rise include the following: maintaining the status q uo .

current government programs , policies , and funding would continue .

reducing the g lobal r ise in sea l evel .

policies for addressing the human activities influencing sea - level rise could include pursuing domestic and international ghg - mitigation efforts .

reducing the r elative r ise in sea l evel .

policies to address the local or regional drivers of sea - level rise could focus on activities that contribute to land subsidence .

reducing v ulnerabilities to sea - level r ise .

policies could foster reducing vulnerability to the effects of sea - level rise ( eg , coastal flood risk reduction projects using dunes or storm - surge gates ) .

policies also could attempt to foster environmental and social resilience ; these policies could include protection of certain coastal habitats , including those that contribute to natural coastal flood defenses .

reducing c onsequences of sea - level r ise .

policies could promote actions that reduce the consequences of the effects of sea - level rise .

these actions could include various hazard - mitigation measures , such as development restrictions , building codes , flood - proofing of structures , buyouts of vulnerable properties , and improved evacuation routes .

for all of the policy options , there are the underlying questions of the policies' costs and benefits and of who will bear the costs of not pursuing or pursuing the policies .

future rates and levels of sea - level rise are uncertain and likely will be determined by a complex mix of phenomena and activities .

this uncertainty complicates public and private decisionmaking regarding policies and investments related to coastal development and protection .

considerations for congress related to the causes of sea - level rise include the following: how well understood is the current and projected rate of sea - level rise ? .

what factors contribute to changes in sea level , and which of these represent natural variability and which may be influenced by human activities ? .

how may factors that affect sea level change in the future ? .

what are the local , state , and federal responsibilities for managing and mitigating activities that may exacerbate the rate of relative sea - level rise ? .

policymakers may contend with a pattern of sea - level rise that could look very different in the 21 st century compared to the 20 th century .

global sea levels may rise at least 0.2 meters ( about 8 inches ) but could rise 10 times that amount , or even higher , depending on the behavior of the antarctic and greenland ice sheets , according to many scientists .

a better scientific understanding of how the two large ice sheets will contribute to sea - level rise may assist coastal communities with their approaches to planning for , mitigating , and responding to potential impacts .

further , recognizing the multiple factors that contribute to relative sea - level rise , such as the local and regional activities that exacerbate or mitigate land subsidence , may be of first - order importance .

a 2007 report of the national academy of sciences entitled mitigating shore erosion along sheltered coasts stated that "sea - level rise is chronic and progressive , requiring a response that is correspondingly progressive .

attempts to follow a 'hold the line' mitigation strategy against erosion and sea - level rise by coastal armoring will result in a steady escalation in both the costs of maintenance and the consequences of failure. .

the report's statement acknowledges that actions may be taken to manage the impacts of sea - level rise and that significant financial investments in protective and stabilization actions may be cost - effective for some developed areas .

however , these actions will have costs , and the consequences of failure may be significant .

some responses may work well for a few decades but may eventually lose their utility or efficacy in the face of steadily higher sea levels .

communities and nature , however , have been adjusting to shoreline dynamics and coastal hazards for centuries ; the current question is how to respond efficiently and effectively .

considerations for congress associated with the impacts of sea - level rise include the following: what is the risk of sea - level rise to the nation , its population , federal facilities , federal operations , critical infrastructure and systems , and the national economy ? .

what are the guiding principles for the federal role in coastal projects and activities given sea - level rise and other coastal hazards ( eg , what defines the boundaries and nature of the federal role in erosion control , shoreline stabilizations , and nuisance flooding ) ? .

what is the role for federal funding in adjusting to sea - level rise and its impacts given that coastal development is determined largely by local and state policies and private decisions ? .

to what extent do federal regulations , programs , and funding influence the adoption and approaches used for managing coastal sea - level rise impacts or decisions that unintentionally exacerbate the impacts ? .

what is the appropriate way to manage risks posed by sea - level rise to existing infrastructure , new infrastructure , and economic and social systems ( eg , multimodal transportation network ) ? .

although most decisions about coastal land development and protection are made by states , localities , and other stakeholders , the federal government has an interest in how coasts are developing and adjusting to sea - level rise .

a challenge for federal lawmakers and other policymakers is how to deal with the tension between federal efforts to manage national and federal government risks ( eg , federal disaster costs , coastal ecosystem shifts ) related to sea - level rise and the local , state , and private roles in shaping coastal development and ecosystem health .

states and local governments have significant discretion in coastal land use and development decisions .

at the same time , local adoption of minimum floodplain management standards as a requirement for nfip participation influences the locations and design of coastal structures .

past and future land - use , development , and building - code choices and the resulting public and private investments are factors shaping the future financial impacts of sea - level rise for the nation .

among the policy questions associated with sea - level rise facing federal policymakers are the following: in the u.s. federalist system of shared responsibilities , who is responsible for the costs associated with adjusting to sea - level rise ? .

is the federal role and responsibility related to coastal flood hazards clearly articulated and consistently applied across federal agencies , programs , projects , and disasters ? .

who is currently bearing the costs associated with sea - level rise and related coastal erosion , coastal storms , and habitat shifts ? .

are local , regional , and state land - use and development decisions and building requirements contributing to or eroding resilience to sea - level rise and coastal hazards , and what are the implications for the federal role in addressing sea - level rise ? .

to what extent do federal programs transfer the risk associated with coastal development to the federal taxpayer ? .

how does the suite of federal disaster assistance and coastal programs harm or bolster coastal resilience ? .

are federal investments in infrastructure and mitigation of flood damages in coastal areas coordinated ? .

various federal agencies are providing guidance and data to inform state , local , and private efforts to prepare for and respond to sea - level rise .

some stakeholders are concerned that insufficient attention is paid to the risk posed by sea - level rise , as well as to the existing risk associated with coastal hazards .

because of the value of coastal developments at risk from coastal flood hazards and how the risk may increase with sea - level rise , decisionmakers may invest in more coastal protections in many locations .

what types of protections ( hard , soft , hybrid ) and policy choices ( eg , restricting human activities that exacerbate subsidence ) are implemented may determine the future of u.s. coastal communities and coastal habitats .

other stakeholders are concerned that overestimating the risk of sea - level rise could result in overinvesting and overdesigning protections and mitigations to sea - level rise .

decisions about coastal land use and land protections , coastal development and infrastructure , and building codes and the resulting public and private investments can shape the future financial impacts of sea - level rise for the nation .

future growth in coastal areas may be shaped by the perceived risk from coastal hazards , such as sea - level rise and coastal storms , and by the efficacy of private and public responses to mitigate that risk .

