the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) provides federal funding for the education of children with disabilities and requires , as a condition for the receipt of such funds , the provision of a free appropriate public education ( fape ) for children with disabilities .

the idea's predecessor legislation , the education for all handicapped children act ( p.l .

94-142 , passed in 1975 ) , responded to increased awareness of the need to educate children with disabilities , and to judicial decisions requiring that states provide an education for children with disabilities if they provided an education for children without disabilities .

in its current form , the idea both authorizes federal funding for special education and related services and , for states that accept these funds , sets out principles under which special education and related services are to be provided .

over the past four decades , the idea has been the subject of numerous reauthorizations to extend services and rights to children with disabilities .

the most recent reauthorization was p.l .

108-446 in 2004 .

funding for idea part b , assistance for education of all children with disabilities , is permanently authorized .

funding for part c , infants and toddlers with disabilities , and part d , national activities , was authorized through fy2011 .

funding for the programs continues to be authorized through annual appropriations .

federal laws concerning children with disabilities date from the early 19 th century , but it was not until the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) was reauthorized for the first time in 1966 that the first general federal assistance was provided to states for the education of children with disabilities .

the original version of the esea , which congress enacted in 1965 as p.l .

89-10 , did not specify assistance for children with disabilities .

however , the senate committee on labor and public welfare report on the legislation included a provision stating that upon a u.s. office of education determination of disability , children with disabilities would be considered "educationally deprived" for purposes of eligibility for the esea title i compensatory education program for disadvantaged children .

p.l .

89-750 , the elementary and secondary education act amendments of 1966 , established a new title vi of the esea , separately authorizing an assistance program for projects in states to educate children with disabilities .

sponsors of this law argued that the u.s. office of education had not appropriately responded to the needs of children with disabilities under the esea title i program .

p.l .

89-750 authorized a two - year program of project grants to states for the education of children with disabilities at the preschool , elementary , and secondary school levels .

allotments of grant funds to states were based on the state's population of children with disabilities ages 3 through 21 in need of special education and related services .

p.l .

89-750 also authorized a national advisory committee on the education of the handicapped , and established a bureau within the office of education to administer programs for the education and training of children and youth with disabilities .

the amount required to provide the maximum amount for each state's grant is commonly referred to as "full funding" of the idea .

when congress enacted the predecessor legislation to the idea in 1975 , they strove to ensure that ( 1 ) states would provide every eligible child fape in the least restrictive environment , and ( 2 ) states would not take on an untenable financial burden by agreeing to provide special education and related services .

at the time , the available estimate of the cost of educating children with disabilities was , on average , twice the cost of educating other children .

a determination was made that the federal government would pay some of this additional or "excess" cost .

the metric for determining this excess cost was the national average per - pupil expenditure ( appe ) .

congress's final determination was that the federal government would pay up to 40% of the excess cost of providing special education and related services , and 40% of the national appe adjusted by the number of children with disabilities a state served came to be known as the "full funding" amount of idea part b grants to states .

idea funding has fallen short of the full funding amount each year from the formula's enactment through fy2018 .

for example , in fy2018 the amount appropriated for part b accounted for approximately 15% of the national appe , less than half of the 40% full funding level .

in fy2009 , part b appropriations approached closer to the full funding amount than they had before or have since , when , with the addition of federal stimulus dollars , idea funding rose to almost 35% of the appe .

prior to the enactment of p.l .

108-446 in 2004 , the maximum amount a state could receive under the part b grants - to - states program was based on 40% of the national appe multiplied by the number of children with disabilities the state serves .

p.l .

108-446 changed the method of calculating the maximum amount of states' grants .

a state's maximum grant amount for purposes of calculating "full funding" differs from the maximum grant level calculation performed in years when the idea part b appropriation has increased , as described earlier in this report .

the maximum grant level calculation described earlier is used in years when the most common funding scenario occurs — idea part b appropriations increase but remain below the full funding level .

in contrast , the maximum amount of each state's grant for the purposes of full funding would only be calculated in a year when idea part b was fully funded .

a state may never receive more than its full funding maximum grant amount , even if congress were to appropriate more than the amount necessary to fully fund all state grant awards .

p.l .

108-446 set a new calculation to determine the maximum amount of state grants under full funding .

beginning in fy2007 and used for all subsequent fiscal years , the maximum amount of state grants for the purposes of full funding has been calculated as 40% of appe multiplied by the number of children with disabilities the state served in school year 2004-2005 , and then adjusted by the annual rates of change in the state's population in the age range comparable to ages for which the state provides fape for children with disabilities ( 85% of the adjustment ) and in the state's population of children living in poverty in the same age range ( 15% of the adjustment ) .

that is , a state's maximum grant amount or full funding level under the part b grant - to - states program is 40% of appe multiplied by the number of children with disabilities served and adjusted for each state's annual changes in child population and poverty rate .

prior to the enactment of p.l .

108-446 , the idea authorized "such sums as may be necessary" for the part b grants - to - states program .

in response to debate over how and when to reach full funding for the idea , p.l .

108-446 ( §611 ( i ) ) amended the act to include several years of specific authorization levels , which culminated in an amount estimated to provide each state with its maximum grant amount in fy2011 .

the part b grants - to - states program was not appropriated the amounts authorized by p.l .

108-446 and did not obtain full funding in fy2011 .

the idea was intended to help states and leas increase overall educational spending , rather than substituting federal funds for education spending at the state and local levels .

the grants to states made under part b may only be used to pay for the excess costs of providing special education and related services to students with disabilities and may not replace state or local funding .

to these ends , the idea contains supplement , not supplant ( sns ) and maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirements .

idea's sns requirements prohibit a state or lea from using idea grants to provide services , purchase equipment , etc. , that state , local , or other federal funds currently provide or purchase or , in the absence of the idea funds , would have provided or purchased .

the idea moe provisions require that a state or an lea not reduce their support for special education and related services below the level of support provided the previous fiscal year .

in general , a state may not reduce the amount of state financial support for special education and related services for children with disabilities below the amount of that support for the preceding fiscal year .

in any fiscal year in which a state does not meet this moe requirement , the secretary of education is required to reduce the state's subsequent year grant by the same amount by which the state fails to meet the requirement .

states support special education in different ways and through a variety of agencies ; however , for each state to meet the moe provision of the idea , it must provide support for special education at no lower than the same aggregate level each year as it did in the preceding fiscal year .

as long as a state maintains its level of financial support for special education from one year to the next , the level of financial support for special education and related services in a state may be maintained by a combination of state agencies , including , but not necessarily limited to , the state educational agency ( sea ) .

the moe provision for leas is similar to the moe provision for states .

however , the lea may not "reduce the level of expenditures for the education of children with disabilities made by the local educational agency from local funds below the level of those expenditures for the preceding fiscal year. .

at the local level , the individual leas , and no other local agencies , are responsible for maintaining their levels of idea expenditures from one fiscal year to the next .

stated another way , states and leas are both responsible for maintaining effort , however , states may count contributions to seas and other state agencies to meet this requirement , while leas must maintain their level of expenditures on special education themselves — they may not consider funds provided to other agencies in order to maintain their level of effort .

the key difference between the state and lea moe requirements pertains to whether a single agency or multiple agencies bear the responsibility for maintaining financial effort .

as noted above , if a state or lea fails to meet the moe requirement in any fiscal year , its funding allocation will be reduced during the next fiscal year in the amount by which it failed to meet the requirement .

however , for both states and leas there are permissible reasons for reductions in moe requirements ; these reasons are discussed next .

in certain rare instances a state may be granted a one - year waiver of the moe requirement .

the secretary may grant a waiver , for one fiscal year at a time , in the case of "exceptional or uncontrollable circumstances" such as a natural disaster or a "precipitous and unforeseen decline in the financial resources of the state. .

in addition , waivers can be granted if the state can provide "clear and convincing evidence" that fape is available for all children with disabilities in the state .

proving that fape is available to every eligible child with a disability in the state is a high standard and , since the moe provisions were first included in the idea in 1997 , this type of waiver has never been granted .

if a state does not meet its moe requirement for any given year , including any year for which the state was granted a waiver , the state financial support required in future years is not reduced .

that is , the state must provide the amount that would have been required in the absence of failing to meet moe in the previous year .

a waiver will reduce a state's financial support requirement for the year it is granted but not for subsequent years .

a penalty may be imposed on a state for any fiscal year after the fiscal year the state reduces its special education funding .

leas vary in size , from large urban districts like new york city public schools and los angeles unified school district to individual charter schools that operate as their own leas .

small leas , which lack the benefits economies of scale provide to large school districts , may find their special education budgets varying considerably from one year to the next due to changes in their staffing or student population .

the idea potentially allows any lea to reduce educational expenditures below the level of the preceding fiscal year if the reduction is attributable to the voluntary departure ( eg , by retirement ) or departure for just cause of special education personnel ; a decrease in enrollment of students with disabilities ; the termination of an obligation to provide an individual child with a disability an exceptionally costly program , either because the child moved out of the lea's jurisdiction , graduated , aged out of special education services , or no longer needs the program ; the termination of costly expenditures for long‐term purchases such as the acquisition of equipment or construction of school facilities ; the assumption of cost by the high‐cost fund / high - risk pool operated by the sea under the idea provisions for high - cost funds ; or an increase in the allocation of idea funds from the previous year that allows an lea to employ the "50%" rule .

ed has clarified in its policy letters that an lea's reduction in moe should only be for one of the reasons on this list .

when the minnesota department of education wanted to know if an lea's increased efficiency at providing services and its subsequent cost savings could justify a reduction in moe , providing the example of an lea that consolidated bus routes , ed's response was two - fold .

increased efficiency alone is not a suitable reason to allow an lea to reduce its moe according to ed .

however , if the lea could explain how the increased efficiency was attributable to one of the circumstances outlined in the statute ( listed as the six bullet points above ) , it could potentially justify the reduction in spending .

as previously mentioned , when congress enacted the predecessor legislation to idea in 1975 , the assumption was that education for children with disabilities was , on average , twice as costly as education for other children .

while on average it is possible that this estimate was accurate , it did not account for the exceptional expenses of providing special education and related services to high - need / high - cost children with disabilities .

the appe for children with high - cost special needs can range from 3 to over 13 times more than the appe for general education students .

to help leas with the extraordinary costs of paying for the most expensive special education services , many states set up risk pools or high - cost funds that leas may apply to for extra funding when they are required to provide special education services that meet state - determined criteria for "high need. .

the definition of a high - need child with a disability varies from state to state .

some states set a specific dollar amount above which a child's services are considered high cost / high need .

other states define a high - need child with a disability as a child for whom the lea's expenditures are a certain number of times higher than the appe for a general education student .

how states choose to provide additional funding to leas with high - need children with disabilities also varies .

the state may choose to pay for a percentage of the additional costs with or without a spending cap .

for example , a state could decide it will pay 50% of all expenses over $25,000 up to $100,000 , or 75% of all expenses over $50,000 with no upper limit .

a state may also base the amount given for each child on the total number of requests for funding from the risk pool received from all leas in the state in a given year .

in such a scenario , funding may be distributed to leas on a prorated basis depending on the total number of requests the state received .

amendments adopted in the 2004 reauthorization of the idea allow states to use 10% of their part b funds reserved for state - level activities to establish and make disbursements from a high - cost fund to leas .

though this was the first inclusion of risk pools or high - cost funds in the idea , many states used risk pools prior to 2004 .

states that had risk pool systems in place could use authorized part b funds to support their existing risk pools as long as their systems met federal requirements .

any state that wants to use part b funds to support a local risk pool needs to follow idea provisions for risk pools , including the following requirements: the sea , in consultation with the state's leas , will develop a definition of a "high - need child with a disability" that addresses the financial impact a high - need child has on the budget of the child's lea ; and defines a high - need child with a disability as a child for which the cost of providing special education and related services is greater than 3 times the appe in the state .

the sea will develop a state plan establishing eligibility criteria for leas to participate in the risk pool system that takes into account the number and percentage of high - need children with disabilities served by an lea .

leas will only be allowed to use disbursements from risk pools to provide direct services outlined in the individualized education programs ( ieps ) of high - cost children with disabilities .

states may operate a risk pool or high - cost fund that does not meet these requirements provided no part b funds are used to support their risk pool or high - cost fund .

appendix a .

idea , part b age ranges appendix b .

commonly used acronym .

