the mbta is a criminal environmental statute , enacted in 1918 to implement a 1916 treaty signed by the united states a nd great britain ( acting for canada ) aimed at protecting birds that migrate between the two countries .

since 1918 , the mbta has been used as a vehicle to implement bilateral migratory bird treaties between the united states and mexico ( 1936 ) , japan ( 1972 ) , and the union of soviet socialist republics ( now russia ) ( 1978 ) .

under the mbta , the department of the interior ( doi ) , through the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws or service ) , administers a program that currently covers 1,027 species of migratory birds that are found in the united states .

this report discusses two critical legal issues regarding the mbta and its prohibition on certain "takes" of migratory birds: the obligations of the federal government to comply with the mbta and the scope of its criminal penalties .

the major provisions of the mbta , summarized below , address taking of migratory birds , permitted takings , enforcement , and penalties for violations .

other statutory provisions concern unlawful transport or import of migratory birds ; arrests and search warrants ; state regulation ; authorization of appropriations ; breeding on farms and preserves ; regulations implementing the treaties and conventions ; and seasonal takings for needs of indigenous alaskans .

various government actions can be seen to take birds that are protected under the mbta .

for example , a federal agency could potentially implicate the mbta by intentionally eliminating migratory birds in an effort to control overpopulation or indirectly harm birds when their habitats are disturbed as part of managing federal lands and property .

whether these actions violate the mbta take prohibitions depends on whether federal agencies are subject to the mbta .

the courts have differing opinions on the applicability of the mbta to federal agencies .

federal courts of appeal for the eighth and eleventh circuits have held that the mbta can be enforced only through its section 707 penalty provisions , which courts have agreed do not apply to federal agencies .

however , where there is a separate enforcement authority that provides a civil remedy such as the apa , courts following the d.c .

circuit's precedent would require the federal government to comply with the mbta take prohibitions in section 703 .

as discussed above , section 703 ( a ) of the mbta makes it unlawful to "kill" or "take" a migratory bird ( or its nest or eggs ) , acts that are punishable under section 707 ( a ) as misdemeanor crimes .

courts have been faced with defining what constitutes a "taking" of migratory birds under the mbta .

as described above , although the statute itself does not define the term "take," the mbta regulations define the term "take" as "to pursue , hunt , shoot , wound , kill , trap , capture , or collect. .

in general , the courts have looked at three different types of actions or omissions that result in the taking of migratory birds: 1. direct and intentional acts or omissions ; 2. direct and unintentional acts or omissions ; and 3. indirect and unintentional acts or omissions ( incidental takes ) .

in examining these different types of takings of migratory birds , courts have reviewed the plain meaning , statutory construction , legislative history , and the constitutionality of the mbta to determine whether the actions or omissions violate the statute .

there is a wide range of federal district and appellate court cases that have addressed this issue .

below is a review of selected cases that provide examples of the major issues that courts have faced when determining the reach of the mbta .

the legislative history of the mbta supports differing interpretations of the nature and scope of takings prohibited and types of migratory birds protected by the mbta .

the courts that have limited the scope of the mbta prohibitions to direct and intentional actions have interpreted the legislative history to indicate that congress was primarily concerned with illegal hunting and poaching of migratory birds when it enacted the mbta .

other courts have interpreted the legislative history and statutory text to cover other types of activities that affect songbirds and insectivorous migratory birds that are not typically hunted .

other courts have focused on amendments to the mbta that added mens rea requirements for certain types of violations .

for example , the felony penalty provision in section 707 ( b ) regarding the prohibition of selling migratory birds was amended in 1986 to limit application to entities that knowingly take migratory birds to sell or barter them , or have intent to do so .

congress proposed this amendment to address a court decision in which the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit upheld the dismissal of a felony indictment on constitutional grounds .

specifically , the sixth circuit held that strict liability application of the mbta to the sale of migratory birds violates the fifth amendment's due process clause because without a mens rea requirement , "a person acting with a completely innocent state of mind could be subjected to a severe penalty and grave damage to his reputation. .

a senate report stated that "[n]othing in this amendment is intended to alter the 'strict liability' standard for misdemeanor prosecutions under 16 u.s.c .

707 ( a ) , a standard which has been upheld in many federal court decisions. .

similarly , in 1998 , congress eliminated strict liability for taking of migratory birds by baiting in section 704 ( b ) by requiring that a "person knows or reasonably should know that the area is a baited area. .

a senate report explained the following: this legislation modifies the standard of liability applicable to hunting with bait or over baited areas .

specifically , the standard is changed from one of strict liability to one requiring a degree of knowledge... .

the elimination of strict liability , however , applies only to hunting with bait or over baited areas , and is not intended in any way to reflect upon the general application of strict liability under the mbta [for misdemeanor offenses] .

since the mbta was enacted in 1918 , offenses under the statute have been strict liability crimes .

the only deviation from this standard was in 1986 , when congress required scienter for felonies under the act .

some courts have pointed to these amendments of the mbta to support their determination that mbta prohibitions on takings are strict liability offenses .

for example , in united states v. morgan , the fifth circuit upheld the conviction of a hunter who exceeded the daily bag limit of birds allowed under applicable hunting regulations , holding that misdemeanor offenses under the mbta are strict liability offenses .

in so doing , the court noted that congress has consistently referred to misdemeanor offenses under the mbta as strict liability offenses .

similar , the tenth circuit in apollo energies , inc .

cited the legislative history of these amendments as "further evidence the legislative scheme invokes a lesser mental state for misdemeanor violations. .

congress has attempted to limit the penalty provisions of the mbta .

in june 2015 , the house of representatives passed the fy2016 commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations bill , which included an amendment sponsored by representative jeff duncan that would prohibit the use of department of justice funds to prosecute or hold liable any person or corporation for a violation of the mbta .

the house appropriations bill was reported in the senate but was not brought to the floor for consideration .

to address some of the uncertainty regarding incidental takes and compliance with the mbta , in may 2015 , fws announced that it was considering developing an mbta permitting program to authorize incidental takes of migratory birds .

the notice stated that fws intended to prepare a draft environmental impact statement ( eis ) pursuant to nepa that would analyze alternatives for permitting incidental take under the mbta for certain industries , requesting public comment on regulatory options .

the notice indicated that the eis will review various approaches to regulating incidental takes of migratory birds , including general incidental take authorizations for some types of hazards to birds associated with particular industry sectors such as oil and gas disposal pits , methane burner pipes at oil production sites , communication towers , electric transmission lines , and wind energy generation ; individual permits authorizing incidental take from particular projects or activities not covered under general or conditional authorizations ; development of memoranda of understanding with federal agencies authorizing incidental take from those agencies' operations and activities ( which may also address authorizing take by third parties regulated by the agencies ) ; and / or development of voluntary guidance for industry sectors regarding operational techniques or technologies that can avoid or minimize incidental take .

fws received over 140 public comments on its notice of intent .

some industries favor incidental take permits as a way to provide regulatory certainty and reduce inconsistent enforcement discretion .

other commentators questioned fws's legal authority to regulate the indirect , incidental take of migratory birds resulting from lawful commercial activities .

fws is in the process of reviewing comments submitted and developing a draft eis in conjunction with proposed regulations that will be published for public comment .

fws hopes to issue the draft regulations this winter before the end of the obama administration .

if fws adopts incidental take regulations under the mbta , the final regulations are likely to be challenged in the fifth , eighth , and ninth circuits , where the courts have more narrowly construed fws authority and the scope of the mbta to regulate only direct and intentional takings of migratory birds and not the taking of migratory birds that occurs incidental to , and is not the purpose of , an otherwise lawful activity .

