in january 2016 , senator orrin hatch , chairman of the senate finance committee , announced plans for a tax reform that would explore corporate integration .

corporate integration involves the elimination or reduction of additional taxes on corporate equity investment that arise because corporate income is taxed twice .

the corporation pays corporate tax ( at 35% for large corporations ) on its taxable income .

individuals pay individual income taxes on dividends and capital gains ( which arise from corporate retained earnings ) when realized .

this system produces differential tax burdens , potentially discouraging the realization of gains on the sale of corporate stock and favoring noncorporate equity investment over corporate investment , debt finance over equity finance , and retained earnings over dividends .

one goal of corporate integration is to reduce or eliminate these distortions .

the focus on corporate tax integration differs from the approach in some recent tax reform plans that have proposed broadening the base of the corporate tax , reducing the corporate tax rate , and revising the tax treatment of foreign source income .

this report provides an overview of crs report r44638 , corporate tax integration and tax reform , by [author name scrubbed] , which contains a detailed analysis of corporate tax integration issues , data sources , and documentation .

corporate tax integration was the focus of a 1992 treasury study , which recommended approaches to integration that reduced or eliminated taxes at the shareholder level while retaining taxes at the corporate level , including an exclusion of dividends for shareholders .

over the years , taxes on shareholders have been reduced .

dividends and capital gains are typically taxed at rates of 15% or 20% ( whereas the top ordinary income tax rate is 39.6% ) , plus , for some high - income taxpayers , an additional 3.8% tax that applies to passive investment income in general .

several important factors in considering proposals have changed since 1992 , aside from the lower shareholder taxes .

one is the increased importance of a global economy and multinational firms with investments and activities in many countries .

these firms' choices about the location of investment and profits are affected by firm - level rather than shareholder - level taxes .

a second is that the fraction of shareholders who are not subject to u.s. shareholder taxes has increased .

currently only about a quarter of the corporate stock of u.s. firms is estimated to be owned by shareholders subject to u.s. individual tax ( compared with about half in 1992 ) .

inflation has declined , affecting tax rates .

tax - favored intangible assets , which are more important in the corporate sector , have also grown in importance .

a number of approaches to integration are possible .

these approaches can be divided into three basic types: ( 1 ) full integration ; ( 2 ) partial integration , which addresses only dividends ; and ( 3 ) proposals that also address the treatment of interest .

they also depend on many other features , including the pass - through of preferences , which are addressed in more detail in crs report r44638 , corporate tax integration and tax reform .

three basic issues that relate to corporate integration policy are the revenue impacts , the administrative concerns , and the economic efficiency effects .

revenue impacts are an important consideration in any tax reform proposal .

table 2 provides estimates for the proposals ( in the form of effective average tax rates ) , which show the cost as a percentage of current corporate tax revenues .

these estimates suggest that allowing refundable credits or mark to market do not appear feasible if revenue neutrality is an objective .

although the other proposals lose revenues , offsetting them with restrictions on debt or other base - broadening provisions would be possible .

mark to market could also be feasible if taxes are imposed directly on exempt or largely exempt firms .

some proposals face considerable administrative barriers , especially mark to market , which would require tax payment when income is not realized .

most proposals would add complications for shareholders , but mark to market would simplify at the corporate level .

providing tax credits to creditors if interest is subject to a withholding tax might be difficult because of the tracing of interest payments .

efficiency gains reflecting the traditional goals of integration are limited , with the exception of reducing the debt - equity distortion and potentially eliminating distortion across assets within the corporate sector under mark to market .

similarly , most proposals would not have significant effects on the international allocation of capital , repatriation , profit - shifting and inversions .

disallowing deductions for interest would eliminate some methods of profit shifting and make inversions less attractive .

mark to market would create a residence - based tax , which would provide efficiency gains in all areas: allocation of capital , repatriation , profit - shifting , and inversions .

