c ontroversies have arisen in several states over establishment of ambient water quality standards .

at issue is whether states are setting standards at levels that adequately protect public health from pollutants in waterways .

some groups argue that states are adopting overly stringent standards that are unattainable and unaffordable and are being pressured to do so by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

others contend that the states are failing to protect population groups that consume large amounts of fish , such as members of indian tribes that have treaty fishing rights .

the issue involves complex scientific and technical questions about cancer risk levels and fish consumption rates , among others .

states where these controversies have occurred recently include maine and several in the pacific northwest ( washington , oregon , and idaho ) .

similar issues could arise in other states that have large tribal populations or other populations that are exposed to toxic pollutants in streams , lakes , and other ambient waters .

in many respects , water quality standards are the fundamental building blocks of the clean water act ( cwa ; 33 u.s.c .

1253 et seq. ) .

established by states and approved by epa , they define a state's water quality goals , and they result in direct requirements for dischargers because states issue enforceable discharge permits based on criteria limits in the standards .

they also provide the benchmark against which states identify impaired waters and then develop plans that establish total maximum daily loads ( tmdls ) to attain the standards .

water quality standards consist of narrative and numeric limits on pollutants , designated uses or goals for protection of the waterbody ( such as fishing , swimming , or public water supply ) , and antidegradation policy to maintain and protect existing uses and high - quality waters .

in support of standard setting by states , epa develops risk - based water quality criteria that set a concentration for contaminants in water to ensure that public health and aquatic life will not be harmed .

for most pollutants , epa develops water quality criteria to protect aquatic life and separate water quality criteria to protect human health .

the latter are sometimes referred to as the potable water criteria , since they are intended to protect human health from water that is consumed directly or protect human health from exposure to contaminants that may occur as a result of consuming fish .

the most recent epa update of the human health water quality criteria was issued in 2015 .

it included revisions to 94 existing criteria ; epa now has recommended human health criteria for 122 pollutants .

the epa criteria are recommendations to states — they do not apply automatically , they are not binding on states , nor are they enforceable .

most states use the epa national criteria as the starting point for developing criteria as part of their water quality standards .

they usually are expressed as concentration limits for a pollutant .

the states' criteria must protect the designated use of a waterbody and be based on "sound scientific rationale. .

if a state adopts criteria that differ from epa's recommended criteria , the state must explain its rationale for doing so , as part of developing enforceable water quality standards that are reviewed and approved by epa .

following epa's approval of water quality standards , states establish discharge permit limits to ensure that industrial and municipal sources will not violate criteria in the standards .

if epa disapproves state criteria or determines that revised criteria are necessary , it can issue federal criteria for the state .

when that occurs , the federal criteria are the state's water quality standards until such time as epa approves the state's revised criteria .

epa then withdraws the federally promulgated water quality standards because they are no longer necessary .

epa has not often used its cwa authority to establish federal water quality standards — for example , it promulgated toxic pollutant standards in 14 states and territories in 1992 and toxics standards for waters of the great lakes system in 1995 — but doing so has been controversial .

in all cases , epa indicates that it prefers to work collaboratively with states and prefers that states take necessary actions to adopt or revise water quality standards to meet cwa requirements without federal intervention .

at the same time , epa argues that it has a duty under the cwa to ensure that water quality standards adequately protect designated uses of waters and are consistent with the law .

criticism of epa's actions regarding state water quality standards has increased recently .

critics include affected states and organizations representing major dischargers that are directly affected by adoption of stringent water quality criteria .

one such organization is the national association of clean water administrators ( nacwa ) , whose members include public wastewater treatment agencies .

in a december 2015 letter commenting on epa's proposed federal water criteria for washington state , nacwa criticized "epa's tactics of influence and intimidation," which the organization said "are inconsistent with the cwa's cooperative federalism foundation and history that provides the states the responsibility for developing and approving water quality standards. .

in a separate letter concerning idaho's development of revised water quality criteria , nacwa observed that epa's engagement with states before formal criteria are submitted is intended to influence the content of state proposals .

"whether due to a lack of resources or political will , states have often succumbed to this 'informal' pressure from epa and made revisions to their rules , even if the changes were counter to the state's policy and risk choice positions. .

other critics contend that epa's recommended national human health criteria are based on extreme and unrealistic assumptions , reflecting compounded conservatism , and that the agency has gone beyond the national criteria in its discussions with maine and the pacific northwest states .

critics say that compounded conservatism results because the inputs used by epa to derive human health water quality criteria assume that the concentration of a pollutant in all waters is always equal to the criteria and that everyone in the united states is of a standard weight ; drinks 2.4 liters of unfiltered and untreated water from rivers , lakes , and streams every day for a lifetime ; and eats 22 grams of locally caught fish every day for a lifetime , all of which are contaminated at the criteria level .

critics estimate that less than 1% of the population has these characteristics , while the compounded conservatism underlying such analysis leads to adoption of extreme values in states' criteria .

epa's recommended criteria in maine and the pacific northwest are even more conservative , they say .

other stakeholders , including environmental advocates and tribal organizations , have a different view .

rather than considering human health water quality criteria as overly conservative or overprotective ( i.e. , by overestimating risk ) , these groups are more likely to argue that water quality criteria and standards are underprotective ( i.e. , by underestimating risk ) , especially in terms of protecting the health of highly exposed populations .

in addition , these groups are more likely to fault epa for what they view as not intervening in a timely manner when states do not meet the substantive and procedural requirements of the cwa , sometimes bringing legal challenges to epa's actions .

for example , when epa failed to promulgate federal water quality standards for washington state within 90 days after the agency's september 2015 proposal ( as required by cwa section 303 ( c ) ( 3 ) ) , a coalition of environmental and fisherman associations sued epa , asking a federal court to set deadlines for epa to act .

on august 3 , 2016 , the court directed epa to promulgate revised water quality standards for washington state no later than september 15 , 2016 , or , if washington submits its own standards by september 15 , 2016 ( which the state did , on august 1 ) , to either approve the state's submission or promulgate federal standards by november 15 , 2016 .

because epa's mission is to protect public health and the environment , its practice is to seek to adequately protect public and environmental health by ensuring that risk is not likely to be underestimated , a position that prompts epa to take a more "protective" stance , given the underlying uncertainty and variability of the factors and inputs that are being assessed .

the agency believes that its approach to developing human health criteria is based on science and policies that have been thoroughly vetted publicly .

further , epa believes that its responsibility is to ensure that state water quality standards meet the cwa's requirement "to protect the public health or welfare , enhance the quality of water and serve the purposes of this act. .

in several of the recent controversies over water quality standards , epa also has referenced concern over criteria that are not sufficiently protective of tribal treaty fishing rights .

these issues arise because , when certain native american tribes negotiated treaties with the u.s. government to cede or give up their lands , they insisted on maintaining their fishing rights , on and off reservation .

historically , and even today , these activities were important to native american tribes as sources of food and trade , in addition to playing a central role in the spiritual and cultural framework of tribal life .

epa must consider tribal fishing rights because treaties between native american tribes and the government have the same legal force as federal statutes and are defined as part of the supreme law of the land under the u.s. constitution .

epa recognizes the importance of respecting tribal treaty rights and its obligation to do so when it takes actions such as approving water quality standards .

the agency commented on this issue in the 2015 proposal for federal water quality standards in washington state .

a majority of waters under washington's jurisdiction are covered by reserved rights , including tribal treaty - reserved rights... .

in order to effectuate and harmonize these reserved rights , including treaty rights , with the cwa , epa determined that such rights appropriately must be considered when determining which criteria are necessary to adequately protect washington's fish and shellfish harvesting designated uses.... epa proposes to consider the tribal population exercising their reserved fishing rights in washington as the target general population for the purposes of deriving protective criteria that allow the tribes to harvest and consume fish consistent with their reserved rights .

tribal organizations have been among the most active and vocal supporters urging epa to ensure that states develop water quality standards with stringent human health criteria .

one analyst estimated that at least 10 states have tribes with treaties similar to those at issue in washington state , and in total , 40 states are home to tribes with treaties , suggesting that similar water quality standards controversies could arise in other states , he said .

at issue in these recent and ongoing controversies is finding the right balance in developing cwa human health criteria .

one set of concerns about this balance has been expressed by industries and other regulated stakeholder groups , such as nacwa , who challenge what they view as epa overreach of its cwa authority to oversee state water quality standards and ignoring flexibility that is provided in the agency's rules and guidance .

for example , while epa's methodology for developing water quality criteria states that a cancer risk level of either 10 - 5 ( one in 100,000 ) or 10 - 6 ( one in 1 million ) is generally acceptable risk for the general population , the agency's strong recommendation is for states to use a 10 - 6 risk level both for the general population and highly exposed groups .

as described in this report , epa argues that it has a duty under the cwa to ensure that water quality standards adequately protect designated uses of waters — including tribal treaty rights — and are consistent with the law .

environmental advocates and native american organizations express a set of concerns that differ from those of regulated industries , favoring and encouraging more intervention by epa , rather than less , and advocating the need to ensure that standards are protective of highly exposed subpopulations .

states' interests reflect a range of concerns — desiring to ensure that public health of all populations is protected while providing flexibility for business and also preserving the appropriate role for states under the cwa .

state standards must , by law and regulation , reflect the best available science , but when states are developing standards , they seek to ensure that legitimate state policy decisions are acknowledged .

congress has so far not directly addressed the recent controversies discussed in this report , but many in congress have for some time been generally critical about perceived epa overreach in a number of regulatory and policy areas .

although legislation intended to limit epa's involvement in state development of water quality standards was introduced in the past ( h.r .

2018 , which the house passed , and s. 3558 in the 112 th congress ; and h.r .

1948 in the 113 th congress ) , similar bills have not been introduced in the 114 th congress .

