t his report is part of a suite of reports that discuss appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fy2017 .

it specifically discusses appropriations for the components of dhs included in the first title of the homeland security appropriations bill — the office of the secretary and executive management , the office of the under secretary for management , the dhs headquarters consolidation project , the office of the chief financial officer , the office of the chief information officer , analysis and operations , and the office of inspector general for the department .

collectively , congress has labeled these components in recent years as "departmental management and operations," although this year , the house appropriations committee chose to rename the title "departmental management , operations , intelligence , and oversight. .

the report provides an overview of the administration's fy2017 request for these components , the appropriations proposed by the appropriations committees in response , and those enacted in division f of the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) .

rather than limiting the scope of its review to the first titles of the bills , the report includes information on provisions throughout the bills and report that directly affect these components .

the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to dhs appropriations , with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the reports do not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor do they systematically follow other legislation related to the authorization or amending of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of specialized budgetary concepts .

the appendix to crs report r44621 , department of homeland security appropriations: fy2017 , explains several of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act ( p.l .

112-25 ) .

a more complete discussion of those terms and the appropriations process in general can be found in crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , and the government accountability office's a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process .

note on data and citations all amounts contained in the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations represent budget authority .

for precision in percentages and totals , all calculations were performed using unrounded data , which are presented in the report's tables .

however , amounts in narrative discussions are generally rounded to the nearest million , unless noted otherwise .

data used in this report for fy2016 and fy2017 amounts are derived from a single source .

normally , this report would rely on previous fiscal year enacted legislation and reports , as well as house and senate legislative efforts in response to the administration's budget request .

however , due to the implementation of the common appropriations structure for dhs ( see below ) , this report relies on the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

115-31 ) , division f of which is the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2017 , and the accompanying explanatory statement , which was printed in the may 3 , 2017 , congressional record .

the "common appropriations structure" section 563 of division f of p.l .

114-113 ( the fy2016 department of homeland security appropriations act ) provided authority for dhs to submit its fy2017 appropriations request under the new common appropriations structure ( cas ) , and implement it in fy2017 .

under the act , the new structure was to have four categories of appropriations: operations and support ; procurement , construction , and improvement ; research and development ; and federal assistance .

most of the fy2017 dhs appropriations request categorized its appropriations in this fashion .

the exception was the coast guard , which was in the process of migrating its financial information to a new system .

the house appropriations committee made its funding recommendation using the cas ( although it chose to implement it slightly differently than the administration had envisioned in title i ) , but the senate appropriations committee did not , instead drafting its annual dhs appropriations bill and report using the same structure as was used in fy2016 .

no authoritative crosswalk between the house appropriations committee proposal in the cas structure and senate appropriations committee proposal in the legacy structure is publicly available .

the explanatory statement for division f of the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 , included a "detail table," outlining the new structure of dhs appropriations , as well as programs , projects , and activities ( ppas ) — the next level of funding detail below the appropriation level .

the table showed the fy2016 enacted and fy2017 requested funding for dhs in the new structure as well , enabling the comparisons in this report .

generally , the homeland security appropriations bill includes all annual appropriations provided for dhs , allocating resources to every departmental component .

discretionary appropriations provide roughly two - thirds to three - fourths of the annual funding for dhs operations , depending on how one accounts for disaster relief spending and funding for overseas contingency operations .

the remainder of the budget is a mix of fee revenues , trust funds , and mandatory spending .

appropriations measures for dhs typically have been organized into five titles .

the first four are thematic groupings of components: departmental management and operations ; security , enforcement , and investigations ; protection , preparedness , response , and recovery ; and research and development , training , and services .

a fifth title contains general provisions , the impact of which may reach across the entire department , impact multiple components , or focus on a single activity .

for fy2017 , a sixth title responded to the trump administration's supplemental appropriations request submitted in march 2017 .

the following pie chart presents a visual comparison of the share of annual appropriations requested by the obama administration for the components funded in each of the first four titles , highlighting the components discussed in this report .

the departmental management accounts cover the general administrative expenses of dhs .

they include the office of the secretary and executive management ( osem ) , which is comprised of the immediate office of the secretary and 11 entities that report directly to the secretary ; the under secretary for management ( usm ) and its components — the offices of the chief readiness support officer ( formerly , the office of the chief administrative officer [ocao] ) , chief human capital officer ( ochco ) , chief procurement officer ( ocpo ) , and chief security officer ( ocso ) ; the office of the chief financial officer ( ocfo ) ; and the office of the chief information officer ( ocio ) .

some discussions of these accounts from other sources — including the administration's fy2017 budget request — include dhs analysis and operations as a management account .

for consistency , crs treats analysis and operations separately .

the analysis and operations ( a&o ) account includes resources for both the office of intelligence and analysis ( i&a ) and the office of operations coordination .

i&a is responsible for managing the dhs intelligence enterprise and for collecting , analyzing , and sharing intelligence information for and among all components of dhs , and with the state , local , tribal , and private sector homeland security partners .

because i&a is a member of the intelligence community , its budget comes in part from the classified national intelligence program .

the office of operations coordination develops and coordinates departmental and interagency operations plans .

it also manages the national operations center , the primary 24 / 7 national - level hub for domestic incident management , operations coordination , and situational awareness , fusing law enforcement , national intelligence , emergency response , and private sector information .

the dhs office of the inspector general ( oig ) is intended to be an independent , objective body that conducts audits and investigations of the department's activities to prevent waste , fraud , and abuse .

the oig keeps congress informed about problems within the department's programs and operations ; ensures dhs information technology is secure pursuant to the federal information security management act ; and reviews and makes recommendations regarding existing and proposed legislation and regulations related to the department .

the oig reports to congress and the secretary of dhs .

for fy2016 , the administration requested $157 million in discretionary budget authority for the oig .

this is $20 million ( 14.3% ) more than was provided in fy2016 .

the administration also requested a $24 million transfer from the disaster relief fund ( drf ) specifically for oversight of disaster relief activities .

transfers from the drf are a long - standing means of supporting the dhs oig's annual budget for oversight of disaster relief , first occurring in fy2004 , the first annual appropriations act for the department .

senate appropriations committee - reported s. 3001 included $155 million in discretionary budget authority for the oig .

this was $2 million ( 1.3% ) less than was requested by the administration , and $18 million ( 12.8% ) more than was provided in fy2016 .

the house appropriations committee - reported bill included the requested transfer from the drf for disaster relief oversight activities .

house appropriations committee - reported h.r .

5634 included $157 million in discretionary budget authority for the oig .

this was the funding level requested by the administration , and $20 million ( 14.3% ) more than was provided in fy2016 .

the house committee - reported funding level is $2 million ( 1.3% ) more than was proposed in the senate committee - reported bill .

like the house appropriations committee - reported bill , the senate appropriations committee - reported bill included the requested transfer from the drf for disaster relief oversight activities .

the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2017 , provided $175 million for the oig , $6 million ( 3.4% ) less than was requested and $14 million ( 8.4% ) more than was provided in fy2016 .

in a departure from previous practice , this budget authority was wholly appropriated to the oig — none of it was provided as a transfer from fema for disaster - related work .

the explanatory statement notes "the oig is directed to allocate not less than $20,856,000 to disaster - related investigations and audits. .

issues surrounding the dhs oig are generally issues that impact the broader oversight community , or are issues that are shared throughout the broader community of inspectors general .

although two such issues are briefly highlighted below , a much fuller analysis is available in the discussion of statutory offices of inspectors general in crs report rl30240 , congressional oversight manual , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

it is common practice for authorization and appropriations bills and reports to direct the oig to conduct specific work in addition to its ongoing audit and inspection activities .

these mandates are frequently placed on the oig without providing additional resources to fund the work required .

along with existing statutory requirements , the house and senate reports for fy2017 directed that the oig continue monitoring and assessing component oversight of the use of force by law enforcement personnel , and recommend how that oversight can help improve training ; keep the appropriations committees informed of the progress on their review of ice and cbp detention facilities ; provide a detailed spending plan for the office ; continue covert testing of aviation security capabilities ; review nppd's documentation and results of its pilot project exploring regionalization of support for its infrastructure protection personnel , and what authorities would be necessary to implement this concept ; and report to congress on event - related spending and conferences .

in recent years , questions about the objectivity and quality of the oversight provided by the dhs inspector general ( ig ) drew public attention .

john roth was confirmed as the dhs ig on march 13 , 2014 , after a three - year period during which dhs did not have a senate - confirmed inspector general .

one of the individuals who had served as acting inspector general and deputy inspector general during most of that period came under scrutiny on the basis of whistleblower allegations of misconduct .

these allegations were investigated separately by the integrity committee of the council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency , and the subcommittee on financial and contracting oversight of the senate homeland security and government affairs committee .

in discussing the proposed increase in funding above fy2016 , the senate appropriations committee noted in its report that "the dhs oig has made great strides under the current inspector general in restoring its credibility and capabilities... .

the committee expects to see continued progress and results from these investments. .

the house appropriations committee report did not specifically mention these reforms , and no further commentary was provided in the explanatory statement accompanying the fy2017 act .

