this report describes and analyzes annual appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) for fy2017 .

it compares the enacted fy2016 appropriations for dhs , the barack obama administration's fy2017 budget request , the donald j. trump administration's requests for additional funding , and the appropriations measures developed in response .

this report identifies additional informational resources , reports , and products on dhs appropriations that provide additional context for the discussion , and it provides a list of congressional research service ( crs ) policy experts whom clients may consult with inquiries on specific topics .

the suite of crs reports on homeland security appropriations tracks legislative action and congressional issues related to dhs appropriations , with particular attention paid to discretionary funding amounts .

the reports do not provide in - depth analysis of specific issues related to mandatory funding — such as retirement pay — nor do they systematically follow other legislation related to the authorization or amending of dhs programs , activities , or fee revenues .

discussion of appropriations legislation involves a variety of specialized budgetary concepts .

the appendix to this report explains several of these concepts , including budget authority , obligations , outlays , discretionary and mandatory spending , offsetting collections , allocations , and adjustments to the discretionary spending caps under the budget control act ( p.l .

112-25 ) .

a more complete discussion of those terms and the appropriations process in general can be found in crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , and the government accountability office's a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process .

generally , the homeland security appropriations bill includes all annual appropriations provided for dhs , allocating resources to every departmental component .

discretionary appropriations provide roughly two - thirds to three - fourths of the annual funding for dhs operations , depending on how one accounts for disaster relief spending and funding for overseas contingency operations .

the remainder of the budget is a mix of fee revenues , trust funds , and mandatory spending .

when dhs was established in 2003 , components of other agencies were brought together over a matter of months , in the midst of ongoing budget cycles .

rather than developing a new structure of appropriations for the entire department , congress and the administration continued to provide resources through existing account structures when possible .

in h.rept .

113-481 , accompanying the house version of the fy2015 department of homeland security appropriations act , the house appropriations committee wrote , "in order to provide the department and the committees increased visibility , comparability , and information on which to base resource allocation decisions , particularly in the current fiscal climate , the committee believes dhs would benefit from the implementation of a common appropriation structure across the department. .

it went on to direct the dhs office of the chief financial officer "to work with the components , the office of management and budget ( omb ) , and the committee to develop a common appropriation structure for the president's fiscal year 2017 budget request. .

in an interim report in 2015 , dhs noted that operating with "over 70 different appropriations and over 100 programs , projects , and activities ... has contributed to a lack of transparency , inhibited comparisons between programs , and complicated spending decisions and other managerial decision - making. .

section 563 of division f of p.l .

114-113 ( the fy2016 department of homeland security appropriations act ) provided authority for dhs to submit its fy2017 appropriations request under the new common appropriations structure ( or cas ) , and implement it in fy2017 .

under the act , the new structure was to have four categories of appropriations: operations and support ; procurement , construction and improvement ; research and development ; and federal assistance .

most of the fy2017 dhs appropriations request categorized its appropriations in this fashion .

the exception was the coast guard , which was in the process of migrating its financial information to a new system .

the senate appropriations committee did not use the new structure , instead drafting its annual dhs appropriations bill and report using the same structure as was used in fy2016 .

in explaining its actions , the committee wrote the following: as proposed , the new structure would reduce controls and congressional oversight to a degree that is unacceptable to this committee .

it is disappointing that the department failed to address the committee's concerns before transmitting the budget request in this structure .

at the same time , the committee continues to believe that the goal of following funds from planning through execution is critical to departmental oversight of the components as well as establishing a capability to make tradeoffs in resource allocation and budget development decisions .

as such , the committee is willing to undertake the effort necessary , working with the department and the house committee on appropriations , to transition from the current structure to a more common appropriations structure , specifically in common accounts , consistent with the guidance provided in fiscal year 2016 .

under the account level , a structure closer to the current ppas would maintain controls and transparency regarding congressional priorities and the offices and officials responsible for execution of funds .

the house appropriations committee used the new structure , and noted the following in its report: pursuant to p.l .

114-113 , the fiscal year 2017 budget was presented in a new structure that included four common appropriations accounts for every dhs component .

establishing and implementing this structure required significant time and effort by the entire financial management staff of dhs and its components , for which they are to be commended .

as the use of this new structure matures and becomes more disciplined , the committee believes the agency's leadership , as well as congressional stakeholders , will be better positioned to: 1 ) conduct more effective oversight of dhs components ; 2 ) better track the life cycle costs of dhs acquisition programs ; and , 3 ) recommend more informed trade - offs among programs when faced with limited resources .

no authoritative crosswalk between the house appropriations committee proposal in the cas structure and senate appropriations committee proposal in the legacy structure is publicly available .

section 130 of the continuing appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l .

114-223 ) included specific authority for dhs to obligate resources provided under the continuing resolution in a revised structure , reflected in a table provided to the appropriations committees by the dhs cfo prior to the end of the fiscal year .

the explanatory statement for the division f of the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 , included a "detail table," outlining the new structure of dhs appropriations , as well as programs , projects , and activities ( ppas ) — the next level of funding detail below the appropriation level .

the administration requested fy2018 funding for dhs in essentially the same structure .

if historical trends continue , it is likely that within this general structure , small changes at the ppa level will continue to occur from year to year .

a visual representation of this new structure follows in figure 1 , which illuminates the proportion of these funding categories for each component , as well as the department as a whole .

on the left are the five appropriations categories of the revised cas with a black bar representing the total fy2017 funding levels enacted for dhs for each .

a sixth catch - all category is included for budget authority associated with the legislation that does not fit the cas categories , and a seventh category is included for appropriations for the u.s. coast guard , which has not transitioned its accounting system to the cas format .

colored lines flow to the dhs components listed on the right , showing the amount of funding provided through each category to each component .

appropriations measures for dhs typically have been organized into five titles .

the first four are thematic groupings of components , while the fifth provides general direction to the department , and sometimes includes provisions providing additional budget authority .

the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2017 not only introduced a restructuring of appropriations , it also provided direction to the department and its components differently than in previous years .

in previous years , the legislative language of many appropriations included directions to components or specific conditions on how the budget priority it provided could be used .

similarly , general provisions provided directions or conditions to one or more components .

in the fy2017 act , a number of these provisions within appropriations and component - specific general provisions were grouped at the ends of the titles where their targeted components are funded , and identified as "administrative provisions. .

other general provisions , including those affecting multiple components , restrictions on uses of funds in the act , and rescissions of previously appropriated funds , remain in title v. as noted above , for fy2017 a sixth title provided additional appropriations for several components , in response to evolving situations .

it also addressed a march 16 , 2017 , amendment of the fy2017 budget request by the trump administration , seeking additional budget authority for various appropriations .

the following sections present textual and tabular comparisons of fy2016 enacted and fy2017 requested and enacted appropriations for the department .

the structure of the appropriations and programs , projects , and activities ( ppas ) reflects the organization outlined in the explanatory statement accompanying the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2017 .

as the house and senate appropriations committees did not release the recommendations for funding included in s. 3001 or h.r .

5634 realigned to this structure , authoritative comparisons below the component level of those bills is not possible .

the tables summarize the appropriations provided for each component , subtotaling the resources provided through the appropriations legislation and recommended in the accompanying explanatory statement .

the "fy2017 request" column reflects the fy2017 budget request by the obama administration for annual appropriations , and the trump administration's requests for supplemental fy2017 funding from its letters of march 16 , 2017 , and september 1 , 2017 .

where supplemental appropriations were requested or provided for a given component , those are displayed after discussion of annual appropriations , and separate totals are provided for each .

following the methodology used by the appropriations committees , totals of "appropriations" do not include resources provided by transfer or under adjustments to discretionary spending limits ( i.e. , for overseas contingency operations for the coast guard or the cost of major disasters under the stafford act for the federal emergency management agency ) .

those amounts are included in the budget authority totals .

a subtotal for each component of total estimated resources that would be available under the legislation and from other sources ( such as fees , mandatory spending , and trust funds ) for the given fiscal year is also provided .

at the bottom of each table , totals indicate the total for the title on its own , funding through general provisions and supplemental appropriations ( when such were requested or provided ) , the total for the title's components in the entire bill , and the projected total fy2017 funding for the title's components from all sources ( such as fees not governed by the bill , trust funds , etc .

 ) .

for additional perspectives on fy2017 dhs appropriations , see the following: crs report r44604 , trends in the timing and size of dhs appropriations: in brief ; crs report r44611 , comparing dhs component funding , fy2017: fact sheet ; crs report r44052 , dhs budget v. dhs appropriations: fact sheet ; crs report r44661 , dhs appropriations fy2017: departmental management and operations ; crs report r44666 , dhs appropriations fy2017: security , enforcement , and investigations ; crs report r44660 , dhs appropriations fy2017: protection , preparedness , response , and recovery ; and crs report r44658 , dhs appropriations fy2017: research and development , training , and services .

readers also may wish to consult crs's experts directly .

the following table lists names and contact information for the crs analysts and specialists who contribute to crs dhs appropriations reports .

budget authority , obligations , and outlays federal government spending involves a multistep process that begins with the enactment of budget authority by congress .

federal agencies then obligate funds from enacted budget authority to pay for their activities .

finally , payments are made to liquidate those obligations ; the actual payment amounts are reflected in the budget as outlays .

budget authority is established through appropriations acts or direct spending legislation and determines the amounts that are available for federal agencies to spend .

the antideficiency act prohibits federal agencies from obligating more funds than the budget authority enacted by congress .

budget authority also may be indefinite , as when congress enacts language providing "such sums as may be necessary" to complete a project or purpose .

budget authority may be available on a one - year , multiyear , or no - year basis .

one - year budget authority is available for obligation only during a specific fiscal year ; any unobligated funds at the end of that year are no longer available for spending .

multiyear budget authority specifies a range of time during which funds may be obligated for spending , and no - year budget authority is available for obligation for an indefinite period of time .

obligations are incurred when federal agencies employ personnel , enter into contracts , receive services , and engage in similar transactions in a given fiscal year .

outlays are the funds that are actually spent during the fiscal year .

because multiyear and no - year budget authorities may be obligated over a number of years , outlays do not always match the budget authority enacted in a given year .

additionally , budget authority may be obligated in one fiscal year but spent in a future fiscal year , especially with certain contracts .

in sum , budget authority allows federal agencies to incur obligations and authorizes payments , or outlays , to be made from the treasury .

discretionary funded agencies and programs , and appropriated entitlement programs , are funded each year in appropriations acts .

discretionary and mandatory spending gross budget authority , or the total funds available for spending by a federal agency , may be composed of discretionary and mandatory spending .

discretionary spending is not mandated by existing law and is thus appropriated yearly by congress through appropriations acts .

the budget enforcement act of 1990 defines discretionary appropriations as budget authority provided in annual appropriations acts and the outlays derived from that authority , but it excludes appropriations for entitlements .

mandatory spending , also known as direct spending , consists of budget authority and resulting outlays provided in laws other than appropriations acts and is typically not appropriated each year .

some mandatory entitlement programs , however , must be appropriated each year and are included in appropriations acts .

within dhs , coast guard retirement pay is an example of appropriated mandatory spending .

offsetting collections offsetting funds are collected by the federal government , either from government accounts or the public , as part of a business - type transaction such as collection of a fee .

these funds are not considered federal revenue .

instead , they are counted as negative outlays .

dhs net discretionary budget authority , or the total funds that are appropriated by congress each year , is composed of discretionary spending minus any fee or fund collections that offset discretionary spending .

some collections offset a portion of an agency's discretionary budget authority .

other collections offset an agency's mandatory spending .

these mandatory spending elements are typically entitlement programs under which individuals , businesses , or units of government that meet the requirements or qualifications established by law are entitled to receive certain payments if they establish eligibility .

the dhs budget features two mandatory entitlement programs: the secret service and the coast guard retired pay accounts ( pensions ) .

some entitlements are funded by permanent appropriations , and others are funded by annual appropriations .

secret service retirement pay is a permanent appropriation and , as such , is not annually appropriated .

in contrast , coast guard retirement pay is annually appropriated .

in addition to these entitlements , the dhs budget contains offsetting trust and public enterprise funds .

these funds are not appropriated by congress .

they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority .

302 ( a ) and 302 ( b ) allocations in general practice , the maximum budget authority for annual appropriations ( including dhs ) is determined through a two - stage congressional budget process .

in the first stage , congress sets overall spending totals in the annual concurrent resolution on the budget .

subsequently , these totals are allocated among the appropriations committees , usually through the statement of managers for the conference report on the budget resolution .

these amounts are known as the 302 ( a ) allocations .

they include discretionary totals available to the house and senate committees on appropriations for enactment in annual appropriations bills through the subcommittees responsible for the development of the bills .

in the second stage of the process , the appropriations committees allocate the 302 ( a ) discretionary funds among their subcommittees for each of the appropriations bills .

these amounts are known as the 302 ( b ) allocations .

these allocations must add up to no more than the 302 ( a ) discretionary allocation and form the basis for enforcing budget discipline , since any bill reported with a total above the ceiling is subject to a point of order .

the 302 ( b ) allocations may be adjusted during the year by the respective appropriations committee issuing a report delineating the revised suballocations as the various appropriations bills progress toward final enactment .

no subcommittee allocations are developed for conference reports or enacted appropriations bills .

table a - 1 shows comparable figures for the 302 ( b ) allocation for fy2016 , based on the adjusted net discretionary budget authority included in division f of p.l .

114-113 , the obama administration's request for fy2017 , and the house and senate subcommittee allocations for the homeland security appropriations bills for fy2017 .

the budget control act , discretionary spending caps , and adjustments the fy2012 appropriations bills were the first appropriations bills governed by the budget control act , which established discretionary security and non - security spending caps for fy2012 and fy2013 .

the bill also established overall caps that govern the actions of appropriations committees in both chambers .

subsequent legislation , including the bipartisan budget act of 2013 , amended those caps .

most of the budget for dhs is considered nondefense spending .

in addition , the budget control act allows for adjustments that would raise the statutory caps to cover funding for overseas contingency operations / global war on terror , emergency spending , and , to a limited extent , disaster relief and appropriations for continuing disability reviews and control of health care fraud and abuse .

three of the four justifications outlined in the budget control act for adjusting the caps on discretionary budget authority have played a role in dhs's appropriations process .

two of these — emergency spending and overseas contingency operations / global war on terror — are not limited .

the third justification — disaster relief — is limited .

under the budget control act , the allowable adjustment for disaster relief is determined by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , using the following formula: limit on disaster relief cap adjustment for the fiscal year = rolling average of the disaster relief spending over the last ten fiscal years ( throwing out the high and low years ) + the unused amount of the rolling average from the previous fiscal year .

the disaster relief allowable adjustment for fy2017 was $8.129 billion , and was used to provide $6.713 billion for fema's disaster relief fund and $1.416 billion for the department of housing and urban development's ( hud's ) community development fund .

with the disaster relief allowable adjustment exhausted for the fiscal year , the emergency designation was exercised in p.l .

115-56 to provide $7.4 billion for fema's disaster relief fund , $450 million for small business administration disaster loans , and $7.4 billion to hud's community development fund in the wake of hurricane harvey .

the adjustment for overseas contingency operations was exercised in p.l .

115-31 , division f , to provide $163 million to the u.s. coast guard .

