the established program to stimulate competitive research ( epscor ) — originally named the e xperimental program to stimulate competitive research ( epscor ) — is a set - aside funding program that began as an effort to avoid an "undue concentration" of federal research funds by providing competitive grant opportunities to states that historically received little federal research and development ( r&d ) funding .

the national science foundation's ( nsf's ) governing board first established the program in 1978 by resolution , and epscor was formally established in statute in 1988 .

the program was created to increase research and infrastructure capacity , thereby improving the ability of institutions in epscor states to compete for non - set - aside federal r&d funding .

epscor is distinct from other nsf programs in this geographically targeted approach .

since the first program began at nsf , epscor and epscor - like programs have been established at other federal agencies , with active programs at the department of energy ( doe ) , national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , and national institutes of health ( nih ) .

in 1992 , the epscor interagency coordinating committee ( eicc ) was established through a memorandum of understanding to improve coordination among the programs .

nsf serves as the chair and executive secretary of the eicc , which was formally authorized in statute by the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-358 ) .

epscor has long been a program of interest for congress .

stakeholders and researchers have noted that epscor — as established within nsf — was initially intended to be a limited - duration catalyst to support the development of research capacity and has evolved into a long - term program that also supports education , diversity , and economic development goals .

some members have expressed interest in supporting epscor as a long - term program , while others have expressed interest in discontinuing its funding .

this report provides an overview of the active epscor programs , including eligibility criteria , operations and funding information , findings and recommendations from program assessments , programmatic and policy issues , and recent congressional activity .

this report focuses on the epscor program at nsf , but also provides information about , and comparisons to and among , the epscor programs at other federal agencies .

epscor eligibility criteria and determinations vary by agency .

epscor programs at doe and nasa follow the nsf's eligibility determinations , while usda and nih have established their own criteria .

table 1 lists fy2016 eligible jurisdictions ( including eligible states , territories , and the district of columbia ) for agencies with active programs .

the following sections describe agency - specific operations and eligibility criteria in further detail .

total epscor funding across agencies began to grow significantly starting around fy1999 , largely due to increased funding for epscor programs at nih and nsf .

in fy2015 , total epscor program funding across agencies was $500.8 million , with nih and nsf programs together accounting for close to 88% of the funding: nearly 55% at nih ( $273.3 million ) and 33% at nsf ( $165.5 million ) .

table 2 shows the funding amounts for prior and current epscor programs across agencies from fy1997 through the fy2017 budget requests .

figure 2 illustrates funding trends for epscor programs by agency from fy1997 through the fy2017 budget requests .

in fy2015 , nsf epscor funding comprised about 2.3% of the agency's $7.3 billion overall budget .

nsf's epscor program is currently administered by the research and related activities ( rra ) account .

the rii component has historically accounted for the largest proportion of the program funding .

in fy2016 , estimated funding for the rii component is $128 million , which is 80% of the total nsf epscor funding ; the co - funding component accounts for 19% ( $30 million ) , and the outreach / workshop component accounts for about 1% ( $2 million ) .

in 1992 , with direction from the senate committee on appropriations , federal agencies with epscor or epscor - like programs formed the epscor interagency coordinating committee ( eicc ) "to integrate all epscor programs into a single unified effort to maximize taxpayer investment. .

member agencies initially worked together under the guidance of a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) .

statutory authority was subsequently provided to the eicc by the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 , which directed nsf to continue to carry out its epscor program , to coordinate federal epscor and epscor - like programs through the eicc , and to report to congress annually on activities , among other provisions .

current eicc membership includes nsf — serving as chair and executive secretary — doe , nasa , usda , and nih .

the eicc meets regularly to improve federal agency coordination and implementation of active epscor and epscor - like programs .

the committee's goals include the following: to coordinate federal epscor and epscor - like programs to maximize the impact of federal support while eliminating duplication in states receiving epscor support from more than one agency ; to coordinate agency objectives with state and institutional goals , to obtain continued nonfederal support of science and technology ( s&t ) research and training ; to coordinate the development of metrics to assess gains in academic research quality and competitiveness and in s&t human resource development ; and to exchange information on pending legislation , as appropriate , agency policies , and relevant programs related to s&t research and training , and to provide responses on issues of common concern .

as an example of its work , the eicc's fy2015 report to congress highlighted discussions from its two meetings .

topics included eicc and nsf responses to the national academy of sciences epscor assessment report ( discussed in the " program assessments " section ) ; nsf eligibility criteria and the "graduation" of iowa , tennessee , and utah from the nsf , nasa , and doe epscor programs ; and the role of , and need for , jurisdictional epscor steering committees .

as the epscor program has grown and developed , congress and others have expressed interest in determining how successfully it has achieved its mission of helping states with less developed r&d capacity to improve their ability to compete for federal r&d funding .

to this end , a number of institutions have conducted assessments of epscor .

many assessments have focused largely or solely on the nsf and nih programs , while some recent assessments have examined the programs across agencies .

in 1999 , nsf released the results of an external evaluation of the epscor program's initial years , from 1980 to 1994 .

the evaluation was intended to assess the program's influence on the geographical concentration of federal r&d funds and to identify successful strategies .

according to the report , the epscor states' share of federal r&d increased modestly from 0.25% to 0.4% ( $10.1 million to $50.5 million ) per state on average during that period , though the epscor program's impact on this change was not able to be quantified .

evaluators stated that a "plausible argument" could be made that epscor contributed to increased r&d competitiveness — citing program features that reportedly helped build research infrastructure , investigator capabilities , and intra - and inter - university collaborations — though the program's impacts on university - wide actions and policies were limited .

the report recommended periodic reassessments of eligibility criteria and continued support of research clusters to promote long - term , sustainable research efforts .

in 2008 , nih sponsored an external process evaluation of its cobre program , which was initiated in fy2000 .

the study included 19 centers and 107 junior investigators .

while there was considerable variation in baseline characteristics and program activity emphasis among centers , the report concluded that the program was effective in strengthening institutional research infrastructure and training investigators .

the report further stated that , as a group , the centers were successful in achieving program goals .

recommendations from evaluators included conducting rigorous assessments of research progress , placing a strong emphasis on mentorship of junior investigators , and increasing involvement from external assessment committees .

through the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 , congress directed the nsf to contract with the national academies of sciences ( nas ) to conduct a study of "all federal agencies that administer an [epscor program] or a program similar to [epscor]. .

the resulting study was released in 2013 .

therein , the nas committee reported that it could not adequately assess epscor effectiveness as charged , citing program goals that have broadened over time and vary by agency , and a "scarcity of rigorous data and scholarly assessment literature. .

focusing rather on understanding overall program structure and policies and evaluating core concerns , the committee findings and recommendations included the following: challenges .

per the report , epscor programs across agencies have competing objectives and policy directives , as well as inconsistent and incomplete evaluation metrics , making assessment difficult .

participating states reportedly have uneven commitments to improving research capacity , and the aggregate share of federal r&d funding to eligible states has not changed significantly over the course of the epscor program .

successes .

evaluators found that epscor programs have enhanced infrastructure , training , and human capital in participating states .

the study notes that nearly all states reported positive changes in cultural attitudes , programs , and policies regarding science , engineering , and research .

recommendations .

broadly , the committee recommended that the federal government continue promoting the development of research capacity in all states , asserting that "students in all parts of the country must have the chance to participate in high - quality research , and it is in the national interest that federal funding be provided to universities in every state to ensure that these research opportunities are available. .

to improve the focus and impact of the epscor program , recommendations included an enhancement of research and stem training capacity ; more rigorous proposal and project evaluation processes , including effective third - party evaluation ; a matching funds requirement for all research awards ; and , working through the eicc , development of a new framework for eligibility and graduation .

in 2014 , the institute for defense analyses ( ida ) science and technology policy institute ( stpi ) released a report commissioned by nsf in 2011 to conduct a life - of - program assessment of nsf - specific epscor activities , outputs , and outcomes .

the analyses focused on program goals and funding levels , competitiveness for research funding , s&t research base enhancements , eligibility indicators , and the concentration of nsf research funding .

the ida / stpi report found that nsf's epscor program has meaningfully contributed to increased competitiveness for nsf funding overall ; however , competitiveness increased for state cohorts entering the program prior to 2000 , but not for those entering after .

furthermore , evaluators stated that the geographic concentration of nsf r&d funding was shown to have decreased slightly since 1980 , though the decrease could not be attributed to epscor .

evaluators also noted that jurisdictions have developed their research bases , improved university policies promoting research , and sustained their epscor activities over the long term .

while the epscor statute states that the purpose of the program is to assist states that "historically have received relatively little federal research and development funding," it does not define "relatively little" with respect to determining program eligibility nor does it define the units to be considered ( eg , dollars , share of total federal research funding ) .

the report notes that the choice of such criteria can have important implications for determining eligibility .

to help ensure that epscor funding has the greatest impact , the ida / stpi report concluded that nsf should define "undue concentration" ; encourage jurisdictions to use experimental strategies to enhance their research capacity ; and improve eligibility calculations , program - level evaluations , and research competitiveness data analysis .

in 2015 , nsf provided an official response to the nas and stpi reports .

in the two - page response , the agency proposed strengthening program - level evaluations ; encouraging jurisdictions to experiment with flexible and competitive mechanisms to support research , faculty , and stem education ; and working with other agencies in the eicc to explore the use of specific indicators of "undue concentration" and to reexamine eligibility criteria .

in addition to the assessments , nsf has previously held two workshops with a variety of stakeholders from state and federal government , business , and epscor administrators and faculty to recommend long - term program goals and strategies — the epscor 2020 workshop in 2006 and the epscor 2030 workshop in 2012 .

broadly , the epscor 2030 workshop recommended effectively coordinating across federal agencies , maintaining a focus on increasing research capacity , using epscor institutions as test beds for new agency initiatives , and developing robust cyberinfrastructure at institutions to help them stay competitive .

further , as part of nsf's ongoing internal review processes , the nsf committee of visitors ( cov ) completed a detailed epscor program review in fy2015 .

the review included program processes and a sample of 74 proposals spanning the three epscor award components .

reviewers provided recommendations for improving proposal review and post - award data collection , expanding certain award components , and establishing a standing advisory committee for the program .

nsf's response document included plans to convene an advisory panel in fy2017 , building on the epscor 2020 and epscor 2030 workshops .

in summary , assessment activities over the years have included repeated recommendations in certain areas: reevaluating eligibility and graduation criteria , improving data collection and program evaluation processes , and focusing on flexible and sustainable program strategies .

an overarching challenge for the epscor program since its inception has been crafting a balance between supporting sustainable research capacity development equitably across states while also supporting high - quality science through the merit review process .

as epscor has grown among agencies , with variations in policy and program structures , a number of issues have emerged .

on several occasions , the 114 th congress addressed aspects of the epscor program .

the american innovation and competitiveness act ( aica , p.l .

114-329 ) , enacted on january 6 , 2017 , revises program requirements and renames epscor as the established program to stimulate competitive research , among other provisions .

the act directs agencies with epscor programs to consider modifications to award structures and evaluations , including an emphasis on harmonization of epscor metrics across agencies , long - term investments , and support for innovative and experimental research and funding models .

further , the aica requires the eicc to brief the appropriate committees of congress on any such modifications one year after enactment .

in 2015 , h.amdt .

317 would have amended h.r .

2578 , the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 , to prohibit the use of funds for any epscor program funded by the bill ; this would have included epscor programs at nsf and nasa .

the amendment failed on a floor vote of 195-232 .

during floor debate , some members expressed concerns with the program , asserting that many epscor states have small populations and receive more in federal spending than they pay in taxes ; program monies are determined on a per state basis , rather than a per capita basis ; and what was originally intended as temporary assistance funding to develop research infrastructure has grown into a permanent program .

opposition to the amendment asserted that epscor has supported areas of strategic importance and helped to stabilize an imbalance in funding — cited as 28 epscor jurisdictions accounting for about 10% of nsf funding but 20% of the u.s. population — and should continue to do so .

in 2016 , h.amdt .

1122 , a similarly focused amendment to h.amdt .

317 , would have amended h.r .

5055 , the energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2017 , to prohibit the use of funds for doe's epscor program .

the amendment failed on a floor vote of 206-213 .

during house floor debate , many of the same objections to the program were raised as for h.amdt .

317 with additional concerns that the program at doe is based on nsf's epscor program eligibility and research grant expenditures , rather than doe research expenditures .

supporters of the amendment asserted that "a rational program would ... collect all research funding in all areas and base the set - asides on that [and] would do it on a per capita basis. .

opponents of the amendment stated a willingness to debate program details — such as potential modifications to program formulas — and emphasized that eliminating the program would be a mistake .

the introduced version of the 2015 senate labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations bill ( s. 1695 ) would have revised eligibility criteria for the idea program , including allowing nsf epscor - eligible entities to apply for inclusion in nih inbre awards .

that program revision was not included in the fy2016 omnibus , but the accompanying explanatory statement included recognition of the idea program's success and requests to update and incorporate epscor eligible states into idea program eligibility criteria .

the epscor program funding and objectives have expanded and evolved since its establishment more than three decades ago .

assessments and workshops involving a wide range of stakeholders have helped to inform these changes , as has some academic research .

as the program has grown , some stakeholders have also raised program - specific concerns due to epscor's geographically targeted structure and variations among agency approaches .

further , some of the questions raised about the program are similar to questions raised about the broader role of the nsf , such as: what is the federal government's role in scientific research ? .

how do congress and agencies balance supporting innovative , independent scientific research while remaining accountable for the use of public funds ? .

going forward , congress may consider whether or not to provide additional direction and oversight regarding epscor's longevity and focus , and the development of new eligibility and graduation criteria .

should graduation remain a desired goal for epscor programs , congress may further explore how new eligibility criteria — such as setting eligibility at a median funding level — would affect the potential for jurisdictions to "graduate" from a program .

congress may also consider whether or not to require additional data collection and comparative program evaluations across agencies to inform future program direction and congressional action .

